Governor Kevin Warsh At the Shadow Open Market Committee, New York, New York Thank you for welcoming me to a meeting of the Shadow Open Market Committee.1 The overall profitability and balance sheet strength of large U.S. enterprises is impressive at this stage of recovery. Equity prices and credit terms in liquid markets corroborate these improved fundamentals. And for these firms, financial market conditions appear quite supportive of economic growth. Still, significant economic challenges persist. While recent trends in personal consumption and business investment trends are positive, the underlying strength of the economy over the medium term is less clear. Unemployment remains high, and stubbornly so. Small and medium-sized enterprises, which have tended to lead recoveries, are still hesitant to expand--revenue growth is tepid, costs are uncertain, and credit conditions remain more difficult than for large firms. Increases in government expenditures around the world--ostensibly instituted as a bulwark against further economic weakness--are raising fiscal deficits significantly. Unsustainable, projected fiscal debt loads--including large and growing implicit guarantees bestowed upon large financial firms by governments--are raising concerns in sovereign debt markets. Taking account of the broad range of economic and financial conditions, there is no wonder that the electorate--in the United States and abroad--is unnerved. The uncomfortable juxtaposition of financial and economic realities has caused some fundamental precepts of the so-called Anglo-American economic model to be attacked. Allow me to join your discussion on an increasingly questioned foundation of our economic system, the independent status of central banks. Institutional Credibility at StakeMonetary accommodation from the world's largest central banks remains extraordinary. Policy decisions made in response to the global financial crisis resulted in dramatic changes in the size and composition of central bank balance sheets. The Federal Reserve's balance sheet has nearly tripled, including about $1.2 trillion of new mortgage-related securities, matched by a rise in excess reserve balances. Yet, the Federal Reserve's most significant asset, like many other central banks, is not on its swollen balance sheet. Neither can it be found in the lengthy footnotes of its audited financial statements. Nor is it tucked away in the recesses of the Federal Reserve Act, like the long-dormant, now renowned, section 13(3). The Fed's greatest asset is its institutional credibility. This institutional credibility is rooted in its inflation-fighting credibility, but it is broader still.2It is tied up in the full range of Fed actions and balance sheet commitments. This credibility is essential. It increases the heft of our communications. It gives weight to our economic assessments. It amplifies the effect of announced changes in the short-term policy rate on longer-term rates. It is, in some sense, the real money multiplier in the conduct of policy. Given its immense value, we should not forget that the Federal Reserve's hard-earned credibility is no birthright. It is as much nurture as nature. It was earned by our predecessors in the conduct of their duties, making considered judgments consistent with the statutory mandate of price stability and maximum employment. Fortunately, for the asset to be burnished and bestowed upon the current crop of central bankers, it did not demand perfect clairvoyance or infallible judgments. But it did require fierce independence from the whims of Washington and the wants of Wall Street, and from a pernicious short-termism that can undermine the proper conduct of policy. This fierce independence is needed, perhaps now more than ever. Central bank independence is precious. It can be taken for granted in benign times, but it is tested when times get tough. And we still have tough times ahead of us. My colleagues and I must demonstrate that Fed independence has not been relegated, and the Fed's long-term objectives not compromised. Ensuring Fed independence--as the cornerstone of institutional credibility--is our charge to keep. It is central to what the Federal Reserve represents, and to how policy is conducted. The mantra of Fed independence is not some throw-away line that seeks to absolve the central bank of accountability. To the contrary, institutional credibility demands transparency so that the Fed's performance of its responsibilities can be judged on the merits. But, the call for central bank independence can be misunderstood, its defense misconstrued, its threats dismissed, and the consequences of its breach underestimated. In the balance of my remarks, I will discuss these issues. Central Bank Actions at the Water's EdgeThe Congress is currently immersed in a significant policy debate on the role of the central bank, as part of legislation described by its authors as comprehensive, fundamental regulatory reform.3And it is worth remembering that the Federal Reserve is the nation's third significant experiment with a central bank.4As the Federal Reserve nears its centennial, the Fed's longevity should not allow our memories to fail us on its origin and the scope of its remit. Let me explain. The grant of authority to the central bank is a considered judgment of the nation's elected representatives. Central bankers are entrusted with a revocable privilege. So, declarations of independence by Fed policymakers are heartening. But independence is ours to demonstrate, not principally to declare. And central bankers err if they presume that independence is some inalienable right, some entitlement. A misconception on the nature of the central bank's authority gives succor to Fed critics. The Fed is not independent from government. It is independent within government. And elected representatives have every right to redraw the central bank's authority, even if a fuller reading of economic history considers it unwise. The Federal Reserve's defenders also err if they seek to extend the Fed's vaunted independence to the full range of its activities. My reading has it that the Congress granted the Fed independence in the conduct of monetary policy. In my view, no particular deference is owed--no promise of non-intervention due--in the conduct of regulatory policy, consumer protection, or other responsibilities granted to the Federal Reserve. This sharp distinction should be sustained as the Congress considers revisions to the Federal Reserve's charter. So, delineating that which constitutes the conduct of monetary policy--as distinct from these other activities--is critical. In normal times, there is less confusion. The Fed establishes short-term, risk-free interest rates across the economy. And it does its level best to signal the appropriate path of policy to ensure low and stable prices and maximum employment over the horizon. The Fed's lender of last resort authority manifests itself--usually only sparingly--in the operation of the discount window, lending against good collateral at a penalty rate. In times of more significant economic and financial distress, the pace of monetary accommodation often increases. And when liquidity becomes scarce--as was the case during the Panic of 2008--the Fed finds itself charged with more novel and significant challenges in providing liquidity to institutions and markets.5 History teaches us that fiscal and monetary policies tend to blur in these times of crisis. Capital and liquidity issues become difficult to disentangle at troubled institutions.6Capital offsets losses. Liquidity bridges gaps in funding. And well-intentioned policymakers are compelled to make tough judgments amid significant time constraints. What constitutes an emergency liquidity provision backed by good collateral at a penalty price? And what is more aptly characterized as a fiscal provision to bolster capital? The Federal Reserve must do its utmost to stay foursquare within its role as liquidity provider. The Fed's financial stability responsibilities, which may well be elevated in pending legislation, should not give license to central bankers to be emergency capital providers. Capital allocations should reside, if anywhere, with the fiscal authority and its fiscal agent, the Department of Treasury. The Fed, as first-responder, must strongly resist the temptation to be the ultimate rescuer. No matter the congressional calendar or the pleadings of the elected, the Fed is not a repair shop for broken statutes or broken financial ecosystems.7And it should not be an appeals court to those seeking relief from congressional appropriators or the fiscal agents at the Treasury. The Fed's credibility is severely undermined if it is perceived to wander from its mission into areas more appropriately handled by other parts of government. The Panic of 2008 is now prologue. The Fed's actions going forward--especially when economic conditions still appear unsatisfactory--should go a long way to demonstrating its allegiance to mission. There will no doubt be added pressures for policy makers to aid and comfort the aggrieved. That help should be forthcoming does not address the question as to whether it is the institutional prerogative of the Fed to provide it. Even if the central bankcandoes not mean the central bankshould. Other Threats to Independence and CredibilityThere is no such thing as being a little bit independent or a little bit credible. So, central bankers must be constantly vigilant, especially during times of fiscal expansion. Net global debt issuance in 2010 may be three to four times the average of the prior decade.8Ratios of government debt to gross domestic product are growing rapidly among advanced economies. As I just discussed, the Fed should steer clear of fiscal policy. But, the threats to independence do not stop there. In this environment, let me briefly comment on two other pressure points. And note that not all of the threats to central bank independence come from outside the walls of the Federal Reserve. Some pressures, however well-intentioned, like in the clichéd scary movie, may come from inside the house. First, governments may be tempted to influence the central bank to keep monetary policy looser longer to finance the debt and stimulate activity. In the more static short-run, the real burdens of nominal debt could be reduced by higher inflation. The consequences just over the horizon, however, would be most unwelcome. Higher expected inflation would lead to higher nominal interest rates, increasing the financing needs of the government yet further. Moreover, higher expected inflation could lead to more variable inflation outcomes and reduced living standards, especially for those least able to protect themselves from unexpected price movements.9 Central banks must take their own counsel when deciding upon the timing and force in removing monetary policy accommodation. I am confident that any attempt to influence inappropriately the conduct of Fed policy would yield a strong and forceful rebuke by Fed officials and market participants alike. The only popularity central bankers should seek, if at all, is in the history books. The second threat, in this case to central bank credibility, may be better intentioned, but it is no less risky. Some suggest that central bankers themselves should choose to modify their definitions of price stability. If inflation persisted at higher levels during normal times, the theory goes, central bankers could cut rates more substantially in response to economic weakness. The theory, in my view, fails the real test of experience. Central banks that desire just a little more inflation may well end up with a lot more. Some point to a strategy to accept a little more inflation for less unemployment as a primary basis for the great inflation of the 1970s in the United States.10By definition, an increase in an implicit inflation target would lead to an upward shift in inflation expectations. And how would a central bank make credible its promise that such a shift would be only a one-time event? We do not understand sufficiently the determinants of inflation expectations to be confident that a regime change can be controlled. Central banks, here and abroad, have worked for decades to get inflation down to levels consistent with price stability. We should not risk these hard-won gains. In changing the goal posts at this time of consequence, substantial harm would be done to a central bank's institutional credibility, and perhaps lead to an unmooring of inflation expectations. Such damage could lead investors to seek alternative currencies, with prices of commodities and other hard assets likely to increase. ConclusionIndependence in the conduct of monetary policy is at the core of advanced modern economies. And it can be too easily forgotten by those who have only known its benefits. If the Federal Reserve lost its independence, its hard-earned credibility would quickly dissipate. The costs to the economy would be incalculable: Higher inflation, lower standards of living, and a currency that risks losing its reserve status. Now more than ever, market participants are watching the relationship between central banks and their governments. They are keenly gauging whether changes in conditions, policies, or practices pierce the veil of central bank independence. Central bankers the world over must demonstrate that we are worthy of this moment, and will be steadfast protectors of our institutions' credibility. That means respecting our important but circumscribed role in the conduct of policy, and performing our mission with competence and consistency. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. Nellie Liang and Dan Covitz of the Board's staff contributed to these remarks.Return to text 2.In the economics literature, central bank credibility generally refers to its reputation for being more averse to inflation than the fiscal authority. The broad consensus is that credibility along this dimension allows better economic outcomes. Credibility anchors inflation expectations, which in turn allows the central bank to keep actual inflation in check. See Ben S. Bernanke (2005), "What Have We Learned since October 1979? (203 KB PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review, vol. 87 (March-April), part 2, pp. 277-82.Return to text 3.See Kevin Warsh (2010), "Regulation and Its Discontents," speech delivered at the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, February 3.Return to text 4.The first Bank of the United States was founded in 1791, and its charter expired in 1811. The second Bank of the United States was founded in 1816 and lost its public charter in 1836.Return to text 5.Kevin Warsh (2009), "The Panic of 2008," speech delivered at the Council of Institutional Investors 2009 Spring Meeting, Washington, April 6.Return to text 6.The Fed's role as liquidity provider in the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) exemplifies the challenge in drawing clear lines. The TALF made loans to investors for the purchase of highly rated assets. The assets, in turn, served as collateral for the loans. First losses were borne by the investors, as the loan was never for the full value of the assets. The Department of Treasury took the second-loss position behind investors, thereby acting as a fiscal agent providing credit and taking some risk. The Federal Reserve was in a third-loss position, and thus aimed to serve the role of liquidity provider.Return to text 7.Mortgage finance deserves careful review. Quasi-governmental entities, like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, are increasingly being deployed as fiscal agents. The Federal Reserve's actions should not slow the impetus to implement fundamental reform in housing finance.Return to text 8.See, for example, International Monetary Fund,World Economic Outlook.Return to text 9.See Thomas J. Sargent and Neil Wallace (1981), "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic (1.1 MB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.Quarterly Review, vol. 5 (Fall), pp. 1-17.Return to text 10.See, for example, Robert J. Samuelson (2008),The Great Inflation and Its Aftermath: The Past and Future of American Affluence(New York: Random House).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the applications and notice under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by First Niagara Financial Group, Inc., Buffalo, New York, to: (i) become a bank holding company by acquiring Harleysville National Corporation ("Harleysville"), and thereby acquiring indirectly Harleysville's subsidiary bank, Harleysville National Bank, both of Harleysville, Pennsylvania; (ii) operate First Niagara Bank, Buffalo, New York, as a subsidiary savings association until it becomes a subsidiary bank upon its conversion to a national bank; and (iii) hold First Niagara Commercial Bank, Lockport, New York, a limited purpose New York chartered commercial bank, as a subsidiary of First Niagara Bank until First Niagara Bank converts to a national bank and First Niagara Commercial Bank is merged into First Niagara Bank, N.A. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board announced Wednesday that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, March 25. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace Level, in the Board's Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is open to the public. For security purposes, anyone planning to attend the meeting should register no later than Tuesday, March 23, by completing the form found online at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/cacregistration.cfm. Attendees must present photo identification to enter the building and should allow sufficient time for security processing. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Reports by committees and other matters initiated by Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Committee on Financial Services, Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Gutierrez, Ranking Member Hensarling, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to address credit scoring and the role of the Federal Reserve Board (FRB) in ensuring that lenders use credit scoring systems appropriately to evaluate consumers' credit risk. In my testimony, I will (1) discuss our examination processes for credit scoring systems, both for fair lending and safety and soundness; (2) outline the findings of the Board's 2007 report on credit scoring and its effects on the availability and affordability of credit, particularly for protected and historically underserved populations; and (3) describe the new rules for creditors that engage in risk-based pricing based on credit report information, which will likely result in many more consumers receiving their credit scores and related information without charge. The Board has three roles in connection with credit scoring systems. First, as a rule writer, the Board has issued Regulation B, which implements the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA). Regulation B prohibits discrimination against credit applicants on any prohibited basis, such as race, national origin, age, or sex. Regulation B also addresses the use of prohibited bases in credit scoring systems. In addition, the Board has shared rulemaking authority with other regulatory agencies under the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 (FACT Act), which amended the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). The Board, acting jointly with the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), issued new rules under the FCRA regarding risk-based pricing in January 2010. Greater disclosure of credit scores to consumers is a likely outgrowth of those rules. Second, as a supervisor of financial institutions, the Board conducts fair lending examinations to ensure that financial institutions are using credit scoring models that comply with ECOA and other applicable fair lending laws, and takes enforcement action if it finds violations. The Board also conducts safety and soundness examinations to ensure that financial institutions use credit scoring models in a safe and sound manner. Third, as research institutions, the Board and Reserve Banks study significant trends in credit markets, such as the use of credit scores and credit scoring models; publish their research; and encourage research by other parties as well. Background on Credit Scoring Systems and the Equal Credit Opportunity ActCredit Scoring SystemsCredit scoring is a statistical methodology that quantifies the credit risk--the likelihood of nonpayment or default--posed by a prospective or current borrower. The prevalence of credit scoring systems has increased significantly over the past two decades. Today, credit scoring is widely used to underwrite and price many types of consumer credit, including mortgage loans, auto loans, and credit cards. When used appropriately, credit scoring can increase the objectivity and consistency of the credit evaluation process. Credit scoring also has increased access to credit for consumers, enhanced competition, and improved market efficiency. At the same time, the growing use of credit scoring has been accompanied by concerns about its potential negative effect on fair access to credit, especially for women and minorities. Therefore, the Congress directed the Board to study how credit scoring has affected the availability and affordability of credit to determine the relationship between credit scores and subsequent loan repayment performance and to determine how these relationships vary for the population groups protected under ECOA. The Congress also directed the Board to study the extent to which consideration of certain factors in credit scoring systems could have a negative effect on protected populations, as well as the extent to which alternative factors could achieve comparable results with less negative effect on protected populations.1 Equal Credit Opportunity ActECOA generally prohibits creditors from discriminating against a credit applicant on a prohibited basis (such as race, national origin, age, or sex) in a credit transaction. ECOA is implemented by the Board's Regulation B. Under ECOA and Regulation B, lenders are prohibited from using credit scoring systems that take into account any prohibited basis, except for age. Lenders are not permitted to use a credit scoring system that considers race, color, religion, national origin, or sex to evaluate an applicant's creditworthiness. ECOA and Regulation B allow lenders to consider age as a predictive factor in an empirically derived, demonstrably and statistically sound, credit scoring system (validated system).2 A credit scoring system is a validated system if it is (1) based on empirical data that compares sample groups or actual populations of creditworthy and noncreditworthy applicants within a reasonable time period; (2) developed to calculate the credit risk of applicants for legitimate business purposes, such as minimizing bad debt losses; (3) developed and validated using accepted statistical methods; and (4) periodically revalidated using the same standards. Any system that does not qualify as a validated system is classified as a judgmental system under Regulation B. In judgmental systems, lenders are limited to considering age only for the purpose of determining a "pertinent element of creditworthiness."3For example, age may not be considered directly, but it can be used if it relates to other information used to evaluate creditworthiness, such as to assess the significance of length of employment (for instance, in the case of a young credit applicant that recently entered the job market). Lenders must revalidate these systems frequently enough to continue to meet recognized professional statistical standards for statistical soundness. For example, periodic review of a system's performance could include analyzing shifts in a lender's customer base to detect deviations from the population of applicants used to validate the system. Lenders may also use validated systems that are developed by third parties. However, lenders retain responsibility for ensuring that these systems comply with Regulation B. Examiners and lenders look to the Regulation B standard as a useful benchmark for fair lending compliance and for safety and soundness when evaluating a credit scoring system, even when age is not used as a predictive variable. When a credit scoring system is a validated system, there is a greater degree of confidence that the system is predictive of risk and does not have a disparate impact on a protected population or otherwise pose substantial fair lending compliance risks.4 Properly constructed credit scoring systems instill objectivity into the credit evaluation process. Well-constructed systems apply the same criteria to all credit applicants without consideration of prohibited bases, such as race, sex, and, to a limited extent, age. Credit scoring systems may help lenders facilitate consistency and limit lender discretion in the credit evaluation process, and thus promote fair lending. Examination of Credit Scoring SystemsFair Lending Examinations of Credit Scoring SystemsAs a supervisor of financial institutions, the Board has a long-standing commitment to ensure that every institution it supervises complies fully with the federal fair lending laws (ECOA and the Fair Housing Act). The Board has a dedicated Fair Lending Enforcement Section, which provides legal and statistical support to examiners and ensures that fair lending laws are enforced rigorously. And fair lending is an integral part of every consumer compliance examination. Following the Interagency Fair Lending Examination Procedures, each fair lending examination includes an assessment of the bank's fair lending risk across its business lines, such as mortgage, consumer, and auto lending.5Based on this risk assessment, examiners identify the specific business lines on which to focus, and in each examination they evaluate in detail at least one product or class of products. As appropriate, examiners evaluate an institution's credit scoring system, as well as how credit scores are used in the credit evaluation process. When evaluating an institution's proprietary credit scoring system developed for the institution's own use, examiners review all of the factors considered within the system. First, examiners ensure that prohibited bases, with the exception of age, are not used in the scoring system. If a credit scoring system considers age, examiners ensure that it meets the appropriate standards for a validated system pursuant to Regulation B. As a practical matter, we find that few lenders consider age in credit scoring systems. Second, examiners consider whether any factors used in the credit scoring system may serve as proxies for a prohibited basis or may have a disparate impact on a prohibited basis. If examiners have questions about the appropriateness of a factor, they engage in further review to assess its legitimacy. This additional review may include an evaluation of the factor's predictive power and whether other factors might be used instead. Finally, examiners review how the credit scoring system is used by the institution, focusing on whether the system is applied consistently to all consumers and whether it is used in a manner that may have an illegal disparate impact. The Board also supervises many institutions that do have their own proprietary credit scoring systems, but rely on third-party credit scoring systems. The review process for third-party systems is similar to the review of an institution's proprietary system. If examiners have questions about the factors utilized in the system, the institution is directed to obtain the appropriate information from the third-party developer. In the current economic environment, the Board is paying special attention to scoring systems that are used within the loss mitigation process. For example, institutions may develop credit scoring models that provide input into loss mitigation decisions, such as decisions to modify mortgages. Safety and Soundness Examinations of Credit Scoring SystemsAs a supervisor of financial institutions, the Board has a long-standing commitment to ensure that every institution it supervises conducts its business in a safe and sound manner. The Board recognizes the importance of ensuring that internal credit scoring models used by financial institutions produce results that assist them in assessing repayment risk and help them to meet the credit needs of creditworthy borrowers. For internal credit scoring models used at Board-supervised institutions, the Board's Commercial Bank Examination Manual provides guidance to examiners for reviewing key elements of validated systems.6Examiners review the items or customer attributes that are included as factors in a financial institution's credit scoring system. Examiners also evaluate whether the model's risk measurement is based on historical data, measures the risk of default, and produces consistent results across time for a wide range of borrowers. Finally, examiners assess certain third-party vendor models for appropriateness and ensure that financial institutions understand the limitations of such models. Credit Scoring and Its Effects on the Availability and Affordability of CreditAs a research institution, the Board conducts and publishes analyses of significant trends in the credit markets. In recent decades, consumer credit markets have become national in scope, and credit has been made available to a broader spectrum of consumers. The development and use of credit scores has greatly facilitated these trends. Credit scores rank-order individuals by their credit risk; those with poorer scores are predicted to perform, on average, worse on their credit obligations than those with better scores. Credit scoring is widely used to evaluate applications for credit, identify prospective borrowers, and manage and price new and existing credit accounts. It is also used to facilitate decisionmaking in other areas including insurance, housing, and employment. The large savings in cost and time that have accompanied the use of credit scoring are believed to have increased access to credit, promoted competition, and improved market efficiency. As directed by the Congress in the FACT Act, the Board prepared a report in 2007 on a number of matters regarding credit scoring, including how it has affected the availability and affordability of credit, the relationship between credit scores and other factors, and whether the use of credit scoring systems has fair lending implications under ECOA.7 Background on the ReportThere is a lack of data linking credit scores to relevant demographic information. With the exception of dates of birth, the credit records maintained by the consumer reporting agencies, which serve as the basis for most credit scoring systems, do not include any personal demographic information. As a result, little research has been conducted on credit scoring and its potential effects on minorities and other protected demographic segments of the population. For this reason, the findings of the Board's report, which are based on the research conducted by the Board staff specifically for this study, are significant. In addition to reviewing public comments, previous research, studies, and surveys, the Board staff conducted unique research specifically to develop information needed to prepare its report. The Board staff created a database that, for the first time, combines information on personal demographics collected by the Social Security Administration with a large, nationally representative sample of the credit records of individuals. The sample comprised the full credit records of more than 300,000 anonymous individuals drawn in June 2003 and updated in December 2004 by TransUnion LLC.8Because the data set consisted of the credit records of the same individuals for both these dates, the Board staff was able to construct measures of loan repayment performance, credit availability, and credit affordability and to create its own credit scoring model (the FRB base model) and credit scores (FRB scores).9 The design of the FRB base model followed general industry practice to the extent possible. This unique combination of credit and demographic information in the data set created for this purpose allowed the Board to address the questions posed by the Congress. Findings of the ReportThe report's findings focus on: (1) the effects of credit scoring on access to credit; (2) differences in credit scores, loan performance, and credit availability and affordability across different populations; and (3) the extent to which individual credit characteristics included in credit scoring systems may have a negative or differential effect on specific demographic populations. Access to credit.The evidence from public comments received for this study, a review of previous research, and an assessment of data from the Board's Survey of Consumer Finances indicate that credit scoring has increased the availability and affordability of credit. Credit scoring allows creditors to quickly and inexpensively evaluate credit risk and to solicit the business of their competitors' customers more readily regardless of location. Credit scoring increases the consistency and objectivity of credit evaluation and thus, has reduced some of the discretion that could lead to discrimination against certain segments of the population.Credit scores and loan performance, availability, and affordability across populations.The data assembled for the study were used to investigate the variation in credit scores across populations, as well as the relationship between credit scores and subsequent loan performance, availability, and affordability across populations. Credit score variation.Credit scores differ among subpopulations: Available evidence shows that blacks, Hispanics, single people, those younger than 30, and people residing in low-income or predominately minority census tracts have lower credit scores, on average, than people in other subpopulations defined by race or ethnicity, age, or location. Because individuals with identical items in their credit records receive the same credit score, population differences in scores must stem from average differences in information in their credit records, such as differences in the incidence of serious delinquencies.Groups with lower average scores tend to have had a higher incidence of payment problems on credit obligations, collection actions, and public record items such as garnishment and bankruptcy. Other factors, such as utilization of available credit and the length of credit history, also affect credit scores. The Board's study found that differences across groups in average credit scores are narrowed, but not always eliminated, when differences in other personal demographic characteristics, such as marital status, residential location, or a census-tract-based estimate of an individual's income, are taken into account. Loan performance.The study analyzed whether loan repayment performance differed across population groups after controlling for credit scores. For every performance measure evaluated, such as delinquencies on new loans, and for every population group considered, the study found that credit scores consistently rank-order the credit risk of individuals. In other words, the higher (better) the credit score, the lower the observed incidence of future default. This finding was true for the population as a whole and within all major demographic groups. Thus, a key finding of the Board's study is that those with worse credit scores consistently perform more poorly on loans than those with higher scores; this relationship holds for each racial or ethnic group, and regardless of age or sex. Credit availability and affordability.The study also analyzed the extent to which credit scoring affects the availability and affordability of credit by geography, income, race, color, national origin, age, sex, or marital status. The study found that credit scores consistently relate to estimates of loan denial and loan pricing. For all populations, interest rates and average estimated denial rates consistently decline as credit scores increase. Some differences were observed across population groups after controlling for credit score. Most notably, younger people appear to experience somewhat higher estimated denial rates than older people; blacks appear to incur somewhat higher interest rates on automobile and installment loans than do non-Hispanic whites; and Asians incur interest rates that, on average, are typically lower than, or about equal to, those paid by non-Hispanic whites for every category of loans for which interest rates could be estimated. Data limitations prevent a full assessment of the reasons for the remaining differences in credit outcomes. Most importantly, credit records do not include information on many factors lenders consider in underwriting and pricing credit, such as a credit applicant's income and assets, down payments, employment experiences, or wealth. Individual credit characteristics and their effects across populations.The study reviewed the extent to which the consideration of certain factors, or lack thereof, by credit scoring systems could result in a negative or positive differential effect for different populations. By law, credit scoring systems must exclude from consideration an individual's personal characteristics, such as race or ethnicity, national origin, sex, and, to a limited extent, age. Despite this prohibition, a factor could be impermissibly included in a credit scoring model as a substitute, or proxy, for a prohibited demographic characteristic, such as race, ethnicity, or sex. Analysis of the data used for the study found that few credit characteristics (for example, number of credit inquiries, rate of credit utilization, and months since recent delinquency) included in credit scoring models generally, and in the FRB base model, correlated with prohibited demographic characteristics. Therefore, the study found that such credit characteristics are unlikely to serve as proxies for demographic characteristics. An exception to this finding is that some credit characteristics correlate highly with an individual's age. To determine whether the credit characteristics in the FRB base model served, at least in part, as proxies for race, ethnicity, sex, or age, the FRB base model was reestimated in race-neutral, ethnicity-neutral, age-neutral, and sex-neutral environments. The models were estimated with samples limited to a single population for each model. In those models, any credit characteristics serving solely as a proxy for race, ethnicity, age, or sex should have little weight in the reestimated model. Credit characteristics that have both an independent effect on loan repayment performance and a correlation with race, ethnicity, age, or sex would be expected to have significantly different weights (either larger or smaller) in the reestimated models. Reestimating the FRB base model in a race-, ethnicity-, or sex-neutral environment had virtually no effect on average group credit scores. This finding suggests that the credit characteristics included in the FRB base model to predict loan performance do not serve as proxies for race, ethnicity, or sex. However, when the model is reestimated in an age-neutral environment, credit scores did change slightly. Scores for recent immigrants and younger individuals fell, and scores for older individuals rose. The study traced this result to the inclusion of a specific credit characteristic--the length of an individual's credit history. Further analysis showed that this credit characteristic served, in part, as a proxy for age. However, the length of credit history showed significant predictive power in an age-neutral environment. Thus, excluding the length of credit history would not only reduce the overall predictive power of the model, but would also have a significant age-related effect by lowering the scores of older individuals and raising the scores of younger individuals. The study shows that recent immigrants have slightly lower credit scores than would be implied by their loan performance. Credit history profiles of recent immigrants resemble those of younger people, whose credit performance is poor relative to the rest of the population. To address this concern, the length of credit history could be excluded from models, but that would create other problems including loss of predictive power for the credit scoring model. Another approach would be to expand the information supplied to credit reporting agencies to gain a broader picture of the credit experiences of recent immigrants, among others. Such information could include rent, utility, and other recurring bill payments. Risk-Based Pricing Final Rules and Access to Credit ScoresIn January 2010, the Board and the FTC (collectively, the Agencies) jointly issued final rules to implement the risk-based pricing provisions of the FACT Act.10Risk-based pricing is the practice of setting or adjusting the price of credit offered or extended to a consumer to reflect the risk of nonpayment by that consumer. Information from credit reports is often used in evaluating this risk. Creditors that engage in risk-based pricing generally offer more-favorable terms to consumers with good credit histories and less-favorable terms to consumers with imperfect credit histories. In the past, consumers with imperfect credit histories were denied credit. Under the FCRA, when a consumer is denied credit based on information in a credit report, the consumer must be given an adverse action notice and the right to obtain a free copy of his or her credit report. This enables the consumer to check the report for accuracy. The development of risk-based pricing made it possible for creditors to grant credit to consumers who in the past would have been denied credit, but at a higher price than the creditors would charge to consumers with better credit histories. Such consumers, however, do not receive adverse action notices. The risk-based pricing provisions were designed to give consumers who were granted credit on less-favorable terms protections similar to those afforded to consumers who are denied credit. Under the risk-based pricing rules, a creditor that engages in risk-based pricing generally must provide a risk-based pricing notice to a consumer when the creditor uses a credit report to extend credit to a consumer on terms that are not as favorable as the terms it has provided to other consumers. The statute requires creditors to provide a risk-based pricing notice when a consumer applies for, or is granted, credit "on material terms that are materially less favorable than the most favorable terms available to a substantial proportion of consumers" from the creditor, based on a credit report.11Essentially, this requires a direct comparison between the material terms granted to a consumer and the material terms granted to some reference group of other consumers by the same creditor. Practical Challenges in Implementing the StatuteThe Agencies found significant practical problems with requiring creditors to make a direct comparison of the terms offered to different consumers. To make such comparisons, each creditor would have to identify, for each type of credit product it offers, a group of consumers who received credit on its "most favorable" material terms that can serve as the appropriate benchmark against which to compare the terms offered to other consumers. It could be exceptionally difficult to identify appropriate benchmarks for two reasons. First, for many types of credit, there is no single set of "most favorable" terms, because consumers can make tradeoffs between different credit terms. For example, some consumers may make a larger down payment or take a loan with a shorter duration in order to get a lower annual percentage rate, while other consumers may pay a higher annual percentage rate in order to make a smaller down payment or have a longer period of time to repay the loan. Second, the substantial numbers of product variations that are available for certain types of credit make it difficult to establish appropriate benchmarks for making comparisons. For example, mortgages include, among other variations, fixed- and adjustable-rate options; repayment periods of 10, 15, 20, and 30 years; a variety of down payment options; and options to pay points in exchange for a lower rate. Similarly, the number and variety of credit products make it difficult to specify when terms are "materially less favorable" than other terms. For example, an annual percentage rate that is 1/2 percentage point higher than the lowest available rate may be materially less favorable for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage, but not for a credit card. In addition, a creditor must have a sufficient number of similar transactions that it can use to establish appropriate benchmarks and make comparisons. Small banks and other creditors that make a relatively small number of certain types of loans may not have a sufficient number of similar transactions to enable them to establish benchmarks and make comparisons. Finally, any comparisons would have to take into consideration changes in market conditions, underwriting standards, and product offerings that occur over time. Objectives for the Risk-Based Pricing RulesThe Board and FTC staff conducted extensive outreach to interested parties in developing the risk-based pricing rules. Based on this outreach, the Agencies concluded that the best way to implement the statute was to develop a number of alternative approaches that creditors could use to comply with the rules in addition to directly comparing the material terms offered to different consumers. The Agencies concluded that no single approach would be practical for all of the types of creditors to which the rules apply or for all of the types of credit products for which risk-based pricing is used. In developing these alternatives, three objectives were paramount. The first objective was to provide consumers with meaningful, personalized notices, rather than generic notices that they would likely disregard. The second objective was to provide notices at a time when the information would be helpful to consumers. The third objective was to ensure that all creditors had a practical means of complying with the rules. To satisfy the first and second objectives, the final rules generally require risk-based pricing notices to be providedafterthe terms of credit have been set, butbeforethe consumer becomes contractually obligated on the credit transaction. The third objective is addressed by providing creditors with alternative methods for complying with the rules. Alternatives for Complying with the Risk-Based Pricing RuleThe final rules provide creditors with four alternative methods for complying with the risk-based pricing rules: (1) the direct comparison method, (2) the credit score proxy method, (3)the tiered pricing method, or (4) the method of providing a credit score disclosure instead of a risk-based pricing notice. Under the first three methods, some consumers will receive a risk-based pricing notice and can contact the credit bureau to obtain a free copy of their credit report. Under the fourth method regarding the credit score disclosure alternative, consumers who apply for credit receive a free credit score and information about their score in the notice. Each method is discussed briefly below. Direct comparison method.The direct comparison method, set forth in the statute, allows creditors to directly compare the material terms offered to different consumers to determine which consumers must receive risk-based pricing notices. In the final rules, the Agencies tried to make this method feasible, for example, by defining "material terms" as the annual percentage rate for most types of credit. Still, most creditors are not likely to use this method. Credit score proxy method.The credit score proxy method permits a creditor that uses credit scores to determine a "cutoff score." The cutoff score generally represents the point at which approximately 60 percent of the creditor's consumers have lower credit scores and 40percent of the creditor's consumers have higher scores. Creditors then must provide a risk-based pricing notice to each consumer who has a credit score lower than the cutoff score. This method targets the notice to consumers likely to receive less favorable terms because consumers with lower credit scores generally receive less favorable terms than those with higher credit scores. A creditor must recalculate its cutoff score every two years. Tiered pricing method.The tiered pricing method permits a creditor that assigns each consumer to one of a discrete number of pricing tiers, based on a credit report, to provide a risk-based pricing notice to each consumer who is not assigned to the top pricing tier or tiers. Generally, a notice must be provided to each consumer who is not assigned to the top 30 to 40percent of the pricing tiers. For example, if a creditor has three pricing tiers, the notice must be provided to those consumers placed in the bottom two tiers; if a creditor has five pricing tiers, the notice must be provided to those consumers placed in the bottom three tiers. Credit score disclosure method.Creditors may provide consumers with a free credit score and a credit score disclosure as an alternative to providing risk-based pricing notices. To use this alternative, creditors generally must provide a credit score disclosure to all consumers who apply for credit, unlike the risk-based pricing notice which is only provided to those consumers who likely will receive less favorable credit terms. The credit score disclosure must be provided as soon as reasonably practicable after the credit score is obtained, but before the consumer is obligated for the credit transaction. The credit score disclosure must include the consumer's credit score, the source of the score, the date the score was created, and the range of possible scores. In addition, the credit score disclosure must tell the consumer how his or her credit score compares to the scores of other consumers using a short narrative statement or a bar graph. The credit score disclosure also informs the consumer of the right to request a free annual credit report from each of the three nationwide credit bureaus, along with contact information. The credit score disclosed to the consumer generally must be a score used by the creditor. For example, if a creditor obtains three credit scores, but uses the middle score in its credit evaluation, the credit must disclose the middle score. Creditors that use their own proprietary scores, however, are not required to disclose those scores because those scores often take into consideration information not contained in a credit report and disclosing those scores could be confusing for consumers. The credit score disclosure alternative was created using the Agencies' authority to create exceptions to the risk-based pricing notice requirement in circumstances where they determined that notice would not significantly benefit consumers. The Agencies determined that the information in a credit score disclosure would be of equal or greater value to consumers than the more generic information contained in the risk-based pricing notice. Today, consumers must pay to obtain a credit score, unless they are applying for a mortgage loan. Under this alternative, the consumer will obtain this important, personalized credit score information automatically, for free, and without having to request a credit report or credit score from a consumer reporting agency. I expect that many creditors will rely on the credit score disclosure exceptions to satisfy the requirements of the risk-based pricing rules. If that happens, consumers will gain greater access to their credit scores and more information about them. ConclusionThis concludes my testimony regarding the Board's multifaceted role with regard to credit scoring as a rule writer, bank supervisor, and research institution. 1.In section 215 of the FACT Act, the Congress directed both the Board and the FTC to study the effect of credit scoring on the availability and affordability of financial products and then report on their findings. The Board focused on studying the effects of credit scoring on credit markets, reporting its findings in August 2007 (see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007),Report to the Congress on Credit Scoring and Its Effects on the Availability and Affordability of Credit(Washington: Board of Governors, August). The FTC focused on the effects of credit scoring in the area of insurance and issued a separate report on automobile insurance in July 2007 (see Federal Trade Commission (2007),Credit-Based Insurance Scores: Impacts on Consumers of Automobile Insurance(Washington: FTC, July), www.ftc.gov/os/2007/07/P044804FACTA_Report_Credit-Based_Insurance_Scores.pdf. The FTC is preparing a separate report on homeowner's insurance.Return to text 2.Under ECOA and Regulation B, a lender can consider age to ensure the applicant has the capacity to enter into a contract or when age is used to favor a credit applicant who is age 62 or older. For example, if a lender assigns "points" to applicants in its credit scoring system, a credit applicant who is age 62 or older must receive the same or a greater number of points than a younger applicant when calculating the credit score.Return to text 3.See Regulation B § 202.6(b)(2)(iii).Return to text 4.Generally, federal fair lending laws recognize two types of lending discrimination: disparate treatment and disparate impact. Disparate treatment occurs when there is overt discrimination or when a lender treats similarly situated applicants differently based on one of the prohibited factors under ECOA or the Fair Housing Act, even if unintentionally. Disparate impact occurs when a practice is neutral on its face because it applies equally to all applicants, but has a disproportionately negative impact on a protected group, unless the practice meets a legitimate business need that cannot be met as well by other means with lesser effect.Return to text 5.The Interagency Fair Lending Examination Procedures are included in theConsumer Compliance Handbook (195 KB PDF).Return to text 6.The Commercial Bank Examination Manual is available atwww.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/supmanual/cbem/200910/0910cbem.pdf (6.4 MB PDF).Return to text 7.See Board of Governors,Report to the Congress on Credit Scoring,in note 1.Return to text 8.Personally identifiable information of the individuals in the sample, such as names and Social Security numbers, was not made available to the Board.Return to text 9.The study focused on credit history scores--that is, scores calculated exclusively on the basis of individuals' credit records as assembled by the three national consumer reporting agencies. Other kinds of credit scores were not studied. For details about the FRB model, see Board of Governors,Report to the Congress on Credit Scoring, in note 1.Return to text 10.The mandatory compliance date for the risk-based pricing rules is January 1, 2011.Return to text 11.See 15 U.S.C. § 1681m(h)(1).Return to text
The federal banking agencies,1in conjunction with the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), released a policy statement today on their expectations for sound funding and liquidity risk management practices. This policy statement, adopted by each of the agencies, summarizes the principles of sound liquidity risk management issued previously and, when appropriate, supplements them with the "Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision" issued in September 2008 by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Given the recent market turmoil, the agencies are reiterating the importance of effective liquidity risk management for the safety and soundness of financial institutions. This policy statement emphasizes the importance of cash flow projections, diversified funding sources, stress testing, a cushion of liquid assets, and a formal, well-developed contingency funding plan as primary tools for measuring and managing liquidity risk. The agencies expect each financial institution to manage funding and liquidity risk using processes and systems that are commensurate with the institution's complexity, risk profile, and scope of operations.Federal Registernotice:HTML|91 KB PDF 1.The federal banking agencies are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced final rules to restrict the fees and expiration dates that may apply to gift cards. The rules protect consumers from certain unexpected costs and require that gift card terms and conditions be clearly stated. The final rules prohibit dormancy, inactivity, and service fees on gift cards unless: (1) the consumer has not used the certificate or card for at least one year; (2) no more than one such fee is charged per month; and (3) the consumer is given clear and conspicuous disclosures about the fees. Expiration dates for funds underlying gift cards must be at least five years after the date of issuance, or five years after the date when funds were last loaded. The Board's rules generally cover retail gift cards, which can be used to buy goods or services at a single merchant or affiliated group of merchants, and network-branded gift cards, which are redeemable at any merchant that accepts the card brand. The final rules are issued under Regulation E to implement the gift card provisions in the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009. The notice that will be published in the Federal Register is attached. The final rules are effective August 22, 2010. Federal Registernotice:HTML|270 KB PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday proposed a rule amending Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) to protect credit card users from unreasonable late payment and other penalty fees and to require credit card issuers to reconsider increases in interest rates. "This proposal addresses two key costs of using a credit card--fees and interest rates," said Federal Reserve Governor Elizabeth A. Duke. "The rule would prevent credit card issuers from charging large penalty fees for small missteps by consumers and would require issuers to reevaluate rate increases imposed since the beginning of last year." Among other things, the proposed rule would: The proposed rule represents the third stage of the Federal Reserve's implementation of the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 (Credit Card Act), which was enacted in May 2009. The provisions of the Credit Card Act addressed in this proposal will go into effect on August 22, 2010. In July 2009, the Board issued a rule implementing the provisions of the Credit Card Act that went into effect on August 20, 2009. In January 2010, the Board issued a rule to implement the provisions of the Credit Card Act that went into effect on February 22, 2010. The notice that will be published in the Federal Register is attached. Comments on the proposal must be submitted within 30 days after publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Registernotice:HTML|1.43 MB PDF
On March 8, 2010, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $25 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will settle on March 11, 2010, and will mature on April 8, 2010. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EST on March 9, 2010. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on March 9, 2010, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
Financial Services Policy Committee Jim SavageFSPC Spokesman(216) 579-3079[email protected] [email protected] Cleveland, OH The Federal Reserve Banks announced today that they have completed the reduction in paper check processing infrastructure that was begun in late 2003. With the discontinuation of paper check processing at the Atlanta office on Friday, Feb. 26, 2010, all paper check processing is now handled at the Cleveland office. The Atlanta office serves as the Reserve Banks' processing location for electronic check processing. "The movement to a single paper check processing site is recognition of the industry's success in moving to more efficient electronic solutions for clearing checks," said Patrick K. Barron, first vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and Retail Payments Office director. "The changes we have implemented to our paper check infrastructure position us well to continue to meet the needs of the nation's payments system. At the same time, they have been difficult for our organization as we have been required to reduce our staff." Since late 2003, the Reserve Banks have reduced the number of locations where paper checks are processed from 45 offices to a single site in Cleveland. These changes were made in response to the significant rate of adoption of Check 21-enabled services as well as the shift away from the use of paper checks and toward the much greater use of electronic payments. The implementation of the Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act in October, 2004, significantly reduced the number of check items collected in paper form throughout the industry. At the time Check 21 went into effect, 100 percent of the items processed by the Reserve Banks were in paper form. Today, almost 99 percent are processed as images. As one of the nation's largest inter-bank processors of electronic check transactions, the Federal Reserve will continue to play an important role in the evolution of the nation's payments system. * * * The Financial Services Policy Committee (FSPC) is responsible for the overall direction of financial services and related support functions for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as for providing Federal Reserve leadership in dealing with the evolving U.S. payments system. The FSPC is composed of three Reserve Bank presidents and two Reserve Bank first vice presidents.
On March 8, 2010, the Federal Reserve will offer $25 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). As the Federal Reserve previously announced, today's auction is the final TAF auction, and the minimum bid rate has been increased by 1/4 percentage point to 1/2 percent, in line with the recent increase in the primary credit rate. Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EST on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairmen Frank and Watt, Ranking Members Bachus and Paul, and other members of the Committee and Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's strategy for exiting from the extraordinary lending and monetary policies that it implemented to combat the financial crisis and support economic activity. As you know, I previously submitted prepared testimony for a hearing on this topic that was canceled because of weather conditions. I request that that testimony be included in the record of this hearing. This morning, in lieu of repeating my previous prepared statement, I would like to summarize some key points from the earlier testimony and update the Committee on recent developments. Broadly speaking, the Federal Reserve's response to the crisis and the recession can be divided into two parts. First, our financial system during the past 2-1/2 years experienced periods of intense panic and dysfunction, during which private short-term funding became difficult or impossible to obtain for many borrowers. The pulling back of private liquidity at times threatened the stability of financial institutions and markets and severely disrupted normal channels of credit. In its role as liquidity provider of last resort, the Federal Reserve developed a number of programs to provide well-secured, mostly short-term credit to the financial system. These programs, which imposed no cost on taxpayers, were a critical part of the government's efforts to stabilize the financial system and restart the flow of credit to American families and businesses. Besides ensuring that a range of financial institutions--including depository institutions, primary dealers, and money market mutual funds--had access to adequate liquidity in an extremely stressed environment, the Federal Reserve's lending helped to restore normal functioning and support credit extension in a number of key financial markets, including the interbank lending market, the commercial paper market, and the market for asset-backed securities. As financial conditions have improved, the Federal Reserve has substantially phased out these lending programs. Some facilities were closed over the course of 2009, and most others expired on February 1.1The Term Auction Facility, under which fixed amounts of discount window credit were auctioned to depository institutions, was discontinued in the past few weeks. As of today, the only facility still in operation that offers credit to multiple institutions, other than the regular discount window, is the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), which has supported the market for asset-backed securities, such as those backed by auto loans, credit card loans, small business loans, and student loans. Reflecting notably better conditions in many markets for asset-backed securities, the TALF is scheduled to close on March 31 for loans backed by all types of collateral except newly issued commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) and on June 30 for loans backed by newly issued CMBS.2 In addition, the Federal Reserve has been normalizing the terms of regular discount window loans. We have reduced the maximum maturity of discount window loans from 90 days to overnight for nearly all loans, restoring the pre-crisis practice. In mid-February the Federal Reserve also increased the spread between the discount rate and the upper limit of our target range for the federal funds rate from 25 basis points to 50 basis points. We have emphasized that both the closure of our emergency lending facilities and the adjustments to the terms of discount window loans are responses to the improving conditions in financial markets. They are not expected to lead to tighter financial conditions for households and businesses and hence do not constitute a tightening of monetary policy, nor should they be interpreted as signaling any change in the outlook for monetary policy. The second part of the Federal Reserve's response to the crisis and recession, besides the provision of liquidity to the financial system, involves both standard and less conventional forms of monetary policy. After reducing short-term interest rates nearly to zero, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) provided additional monetary policy stimulus through large-scale purchases of Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and agency debt. All told, the Federal Reserve purchased $300 billion of Treasury securities and will conclude purchases of $1.25 trillion of agency MBS and about $175 billion of agency debt at the end of this month. The Federal Reserve's purchases have had the effect of leaving the banking system highly liquid, with U.S. banks now holding more than $1.1 trillion of reserves with Federal Reserve Banks. A range of evidence suggests that these purchases and the associated creation of bank reserves have helped improve conditions in mortgage markets and other private credit markets and put downward pressure on longer-term private borrowing rates and spreads. At its meeting last week, the FOMC maintained its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and indicated that it continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. In due course, however, as the expansion matures, the Federal Reserve will need to begin to tighten monetary conditions to prevent the development of inflationary pressures. The Federal Reserve has a number of tools that will enable it to firm the stance of policy at the appropriate time. Most importantly, in October 2008 the Congress gave the Federal Reserve statutory authority to pay interest on balances that banks hold at the Federal Reserve Banks. By increasing the interest rate on banks' reserves, the Federal Reserve will be able to put significant upward pressure on all short-term interest rates, as banks will not supply short-term funds to the money markets at rates significantly below what they can earn by holding reserves at the Federal Reserve Banks. Actual and prospective increases in short-term interest rates will be reflected in turn in higher longer-term interest rates and in tighter financial conditions more generally. The Federal Reserve has also been developing a number of additional tools it will be able to use to reduce the large quantity of reserves currently held by the banking system. Reducing the quantity of reserves will lower the net supply of funds to the money markets, which will improve the Federal Reserve's control of financial conditions by leading to a tighter relationship between the interest rate paid on reserves and other short-term interest rates. Notably, to build the capability to drain large quantities of reserves, the Federal Reserve has been working to expand its range of counterparties for reverse repurchase operations beyond the primary dealers and to develop the infrastructure necessary to use agency MBS as collateral in such transactions.3In this regard, the Federal Reserve recently announced the criteria that it will apply in determining the eligibility of money market mutual funds to serve as counterparties in reverse repurchase agreements. As an additional means of draining reserves, the Federal Reserve is also developing plans to offer to depository institutions term deposits, which are roughly analogous to certificates of deposit that the institutions offer to their customers. A proposal describing a term deposit facility was recently published in theFederal Register, and the Federal Reserve is finalizing a revised proposal in light of the public comments that have been received. After a revised proposal is reviewed by the Board, we expect to be able to conduct test transactions this spring and to have the facility available if necessary thereafter. The use of reverse repos and the deposit facility would together allow the Federal Reserve to drain hundreds of billions of dollars of reserves from the banking system quite quickly, should it choose to do so. When these tools are used to drain reserves from the banking system, they do so by replacing bank reserves with other liabilities; the asset side and the overall size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet remain unchanged. If necessary, as a means of applying monetary restraint, the Federal Reserve also has the option of redeeming or selling securities. The redemption or sale of securities would have the effect of reducing the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet as well as further reducing the quantity of reserves in the banking system. Restoring the size and composition of the balance sheet to a more normal configuration is a longer-term objective of our policies. In any case, the sequencing of steps and the combination of tools that the Federal Reserve uses as it exits from its currently very accommodative policy stance will depend on economic and financial developments and on our best judgments about how to meet the Federal Reserve's dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. In sum, in response to severe threats to our economy, the Federal Reserve created a series of special lending facilities to stabilize the financial system and encourage the resumption of private credit flows to American families and businesses. As market conditions and the economic outlook have improved, these programs have been terminated or are being phased out. The Federal Reserve also promoted economic recovery through sharp reductions in its target for the federal funds rate and through large-scale purchases of securities. The economy continues to require the support of accommodative monetary policies. However, we have been working to ensure that we have the tools to reverse, at the appropriate time, the currently very high degree of monetary stimulus. We have full confidence that, when the time comes, we will be ready to do so. 1.The exit from these programs is substantially complete: Total credit outstanding under all programs, including the regular discount window, has fallen sharply from a peak of $1-1/2 trillion around year-end 2008 to about $71 billion last week.Return to text 2.The TALF extends three- and five-year loans, which will remain outstanding after the facility closes for new loans. The later scheduled closing of the CMBS portion of the facility reflects the Board's assessment that conditions in that sector remain highly stressed, as well as the fact that CMBS securitizations are more complex and take longer to arrange than other types.Return to text 3.Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the issuance of a Final Decision and Order of Prohibition against Adam L. Benarroch, a former employee of Midwest Bank and Trust of Elmwood Park, Illinois ("Midwest"). This Order is the result of an action brought by the Board alleging that Mr. Benarroch fabricated documents, forged signatures, and altered loan agreements in his former position as Assistant Vice President and commercial lender at Midwest. As a result of the Order of Prohibition, Mr. Benarroch will be prohibited from participating in the conduct of the affairs of any financial institution or holding company. Attached are the Board's Final Decision and Order relating to this action.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January suggests that economic activity has continued to strengthen and that the labor market is stabilizing. Household spending is expanding at a moderate rate but remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software has risen significantly. However, investment in nonresidential structures is declining, housing starts have been flat at a depressed level, and employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. While bank lending continues to contract, financial market conditions remain supportive of economic growth. Although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a time, the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability. With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. To provide support to mortgage lending and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets, the Federal Reserve has been purchasing $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities and about $175 billion of agency debt; those purchases are nearing completion, and the remaining transactions will be executed by the end of this month. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic recovery and price stability. In light of improved functioning of financial markets, the Federal Reserve has been closing the special liquidity facilities that it created to support markets during the crisis. The only remaining such program, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, is scheduled to close on June 30 for loans backed by new-issue commercial mortgage-backed securities and on March 31 for loans backed by all other types of collateral. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; James Bullard; Elizabeth A. Duke; Donald L. Kohn; Sandra Pianalto; Eric S. Rosengren; Daniel K. Tarullo; and Kevin M. Warsh. Voting against the policy action was Thomas M. Hoenig, who believed that continuing to express the expectation of exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period was no longer warranted because it could lead to the buildup of financial imbalances and increase risks to longer-run macroeconomic and financial stability.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Cornelson Distinguished Lecture at Davidson College, Davidson, North Carolina The events of the past few years have raised many questions for central bankers. Although prompt and innovative actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks helped prevent a severe economic downturn from turning into something even worse, our experience also highlighted a number of areas we need to study further to see whether we can improve the conduct of monetary policy. I've titled my presentation "Homework Assignments" because I don't think the answers are clear, though I will venture some tentative thoughts. I have four assignments on my list; I could easily have more. And others would have yet a different list. I recognize that the complexity of these questions could keep us profitably engaged for a whole semester, but let's see if I can outline some of the challenges and possible responses in an evening. The first two assignments concern the policy actions the Federal Reserve and other central banks took during the financial crisis. A key part of the Federal Reserve's response was to fulfill its traditional role of providing backup liquidity to sound institutions during times of financial turmoil. In a break with tradition, we had to provide that liquidity to nonbank financial institutions as well as to banks. One assignment is to evaluate the implications of the changing character of financial markets for the design of the liquidity tools the Federal Reserve has at its disposal when panic-driven runs on banks and other key financial intermediaries and markets threaten financial stability and the economy. In addition to providing liquidity on an unprecedented scale, we reduced our policy interest rate (the target for the rate on overnight loans between banks) effectively to zero, and then we continued to ease financial conditions and cushion the effect of the financial shock on the economy by making large-scale purchases of several types of securities. My second assignment involves improving our understanding of the effects of those purchases and the associated massive increase in bank reserves. The third and fourth assignments relate to whether changes to the conduct of monetary policy in normal times could make financial instability and its wrenching and costly economic consequences less likely. Number three involves considering whether central banks should use their conventional monetary policy tool--adjusting the level of a short-term interest rate--to try to rein in asset prices that seem to be moving well away from sustainable values, in addition to seeking to achieve the macroeconomic objectives of full employment and price stability. The fourth and final assignment concerns whether central banks should adjust their inflation targets to reduce the odds of getting into a situation again where the policy interest rate reaches zero.1 Changes in Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve's Liquidity ToolsFinancial markets have evolved substantially in recent decades. The task of intermediating between investors and borrowers has shifted over time from banks, which take deposits and make loans, to securities markets, where borrowers and savers meet more directly, albeit with the assistance of investment banks that help borrowers issue securities and then make markets in those securities. An aspect of the shift has been the growth of securitization, in which loans that might have been on the books of banks are converted into securities and sold in markets. Serious deficiencies with these securitizations, the associated derivative instruments, and the structures that evolved to hold securitized debt were at the heart of the financial crisis. Among other things, the structures exposed the banking system to risks that neither participants in financial markets nor regulators fully appreciated. The implications of these changes are far reaching, but I want to concentrate on those that bear on the tools we use to supply liquidity to the financial system. Every central bank had to adapt its liquidity facilities to some degree, but the Federal Reserve had to adapt more than most. Before the crisis, the Federal Reserve adjusted the liquidity it provided to the financial system through daily operations with a relatively small set of broker-dealers against a very narrow set of collateral--Treasury debt, agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities. Those transactions had the effect of changing the quantity of reserve balances that banks hold at Federal Reserve Banks, and that liquidity was distributed by interbank funding markets through the banking system in the United States and around the world. In addition, the Federal Reserve stood ready to lend directly to commercial banks and other depository institutions at the "discount window." At their discretion, banks could borrow overnight at an above-market rate against a broad range of collateral when they had a need for very short-term funding. But this structure proved inadequate in the crisis. Interbank markets stopped functioning as effective means to distribute liquidity, increasing the importance of direct lending through the discount window. At the same time, however, banks became extremely reluctant to borrow from the Federal Reserve for fear that the borrowing would become known and thus cast doubt on their liquidity condition. Importantly, the crisis also involved major disruptions of important funding markets for other institutions. Commercial paper markets no longer served as sources of funds to lenders or to nonfinancial businesses; investment banks could not borrow for even a short term on a secured basis when lenders began to have doubts about some of the underlying collateral; banks overseas could not reliably exchange their currency in swap markets to fund their dollar assets beyond the very shortest terms; and investors pulled out from money market mutual funds. These disruptions posed the same threats to the availability of credit to households and businesses as did runs on banks in a more bank-centric financial system. Intermediaries unable to fund themselves were forced to sell assets, driving down prices and exacerbating the crisis; they were unwilling to make markets necessary to allow households and businesses to borrow; and households and businesses unable to borrow were unable to spend, deepening the recession. The Federal Reserve responded by providing funding when it became unavailable to banks and other intermediaries. We reduced the spread of the discount rate over the target interbank rate, lengthened the maximum maturity of loans to banks from overnight to 90 days, and also provided discount window credit through regular auctions to overcome the reluctance to borrow. In addition, we created emergency liquidity facilities to meet the funding needs of key market participants, including primary securities dealers, money market mutual funds, and other users of short-term funding markets.2We did so while generally adhering to time-honored central banking principles for countering a financial panic: Lend freely to solvent institutions at a penalty and against good collateral. We also lent dollars to other central banks so that they could help banks in their jurisdictions meet their dollar funding needs, thus easing pressures on U.S. money markets. Now that the financial markets are functioning much better, we have closed the emergency facilities that we created to lend to nonbanks. The homework assignment is to think about the design of liquidity facilities going forward. I've tentatively concluded that the recent crisis has demonstrated that in a financial system so dependent on securities markets and not just banks, we need to retain the ability to lend against good collateral to certain groups of sound, regulated, nonbank financial firms. I'm not suggesting that we establish permanent contingency liquidity facilities, just that the Federal Reserve retain the authority to create the tools necessary to meet liquidity needs of groups of nonbank institutions should a panic impair the ability of securities markets, as well as banks, to function and the Board of Governors find that the absence of such functioning would threaten the economy.3The collateral would have to be of good quality and the institutions sound to minimize any credit risk to the Federal Reserve. Holding open this possibility is not without cost. With credit potentially available from the Federal Reserve, institutions would have insufficient incentives to manage their liquidity to protect against unusual market events. Hence, the emergency credit would generally be provided only to groups of institutions that were regulated and supervised to limit such moral hazard. If the Federal Reserve did not directly supervise the institutions that would potentially receive emergency discount window credit, we would need an ongoing and collaborative relationship with the supervisor. The supervisor should ensure that any institution with implicit access to emergency discount window credit nevertheless maintained conservative liquidity policies. The supervisor would also provide critical insight into the financial condition of the borrower and the quality of the available collateral and more generally whether lending was necessary and appropriate. Large-Scale Asset Purchases and the Buildup of the Reserve BaseThe Federal Reserve and other central banks reacted to the deepening crisis in the fall of 2008 not only by opening new liquidity facilities, but also by reducing policy interest rates to close to zero. Such rapid and aggressive responses were expected to cushion the effects of the shock on the economy by reducing the cost of borrowing for households and businesses, thereby encouraging them to keep spending. In addition, the Federal Reserve and a number of other central banks have provided more guidance than usual about the likely future path of interest rates to help financial markets form more accurate expectations about policy in a highly uncertain economic and financial environment. In particular, we were concerned that market participants would not fully appreciate for how long we anticipated keeping interest rates low. If they hadn't, intermediate- and longer-term rates would have declined by less, reducing the stimulative effect of the very low policy rates. Given the severity of the downturn, it became clear that lowering short-term policy rates alone would not be sufficient. We needed to go further to ease financial conditions and encourage spending. Thus, to reduce longer-term interest rates, like those on mortgages, we purchased large quantities of longer-term securities, specifically Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities, and agency debt. Central banks have lots of experience guiding the economy by adjusting short-term policy rates and influencing expectations about future policy rates, and the underlying theory and practice behind those actions are well understood. However, the economic effects of purchasing large volumes of longer-term assets, and the accompanying expansion of the reserve base in the banking system, are much less well understood. So my second homework assignment for monetary policymakers and other interested economists is to study the effects of such balance sheet expansion; better understanding will help our successors if, unfortunately, they should find themselves in a similar position, and it will help us as we unwind the unusual actions we took. One question involves the direct effects of the large-scale asset purchases themselves. The theory behind the Federal Reserve's actions was fairly clear: Arbitrage between short- and long-term markets is not perfect even when markets are functioning smoothly; and arbitrage is especially impaired during panics when investors are putting an unusually large premium on the liquidity and safety of short-term instruments. In these circumstances, reducing the supply of long-term debt pushes up the prices of the securities, lowering their yields. But by how much? Uncertainty about the likely effect complicated our calibration of the purchases, and the symmetrical uncertainty about the effects of unwinding the actions--of reducing our portfolio--will be a factor in our decisions about the timing and sequencing of steps to return the portfolio to a more normal level and composition. Good studies of these sorts of actions are sparse. Currently, we are relying in large part on studies that examine how much interest rates dropped when purchases were announced in the United States or abroad. But such event studies may not be an ideal means to predict the consequences of reducing our portfolio, in part because the economic and financial environment will be very different, and also because event studies do not measure effects that develop or reverse over time. We are also uncertain about how, exactly, the purchases put downward pressure on interest rates. My presumption has been that the effect comes mainly from the total amount we purchase relative to the total stock of debt outstanding. However, others have argued that the market effect derives importantly from the flow of our purchases relative to the amount of new issuance in the market. Some evidence for the primacy of the stock channel has accumulated recently, as the prices of mortgage-backed securities appear to have changed little as the flow of our purchases has trended down. A second issue involves the effect of the large volume of reserves created as we buy assets. The Federal Reserve has funded its purchases by crediting the accounts that banks hold with us. Those deposits are called "reserve balances" and are part of bank reserves. In our explanations of our actions, we have concentrated, as I have just done, on the effects on the prices of the assets we have been purchasing and the spillover to the prices of related assets. The huge quantity of bank reserves that were created has been seen largely as a byproduct of the purchases that would be unlikely to have a significant independent effect on financial markets and the economy. This view is not consistent with the simple models in many textbooks or the monetarist tradition in monetary policy, which emphasizes a line of causation from reserves to the money supply to economic activity and inflation. Other central banks and some of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) have emphasized this channel in their discussions of the effect of policy at the zero lower bound. According to these types of theories, extra reserves should induce banks to diversify into additional lending and purchases of securities, reducing the cost of borrowing for households and businesses, and so should spark an increase in the money supply and spending. To date, that channel does not seem to have been effective; interest rates on bank loans relative to the usual benchmarks have continued to rise, the quantity of bank loans is still falling rapidly, and money supply growth has been subdued. Banks' behavior appears more consistent with the standard Keynesian model of the liquidity trap, in which demand for reserves becomes perfectly elastic when short-term interest rates approach zero. But portfolio behavior of banks will shift as the economy and confidence recover, and we will need to watch and study this channel carefully. Another uncertainty deserving of additional examination involves the effect of large-scale purchases of longer-term assets on expectations about monetary policy. The more we buy, the more reserves we will ultimately need to absorb and the more assets we will ultimately need to dispose of before the conduct of monetary policy, the behavior of interbank markets, and the Federal Reserve's balance sheet can return completely to normal. As a consequence, these types of purchases can increase inflation expectations among some observers who may see a risk that we will not reduce reserves and raise interest rates in a timely fashion. In fact, longer-term inflation expectations generally have been quite well anchored over the past few years of unusual Federal Reserve actions. And we are developing and testing the tools we need to remove accommodative monetary policy when appropriate. I am confident the Federal Reserve can and will tighten policy well in advance of any threat to price stability, and successful execution of this exit will demonstrate that these emergency steps need not lead to higher inflation. Monetary Policy and Financial ImbalancesThe past few years have illustrated two lessons about the relationship between macroeconomic stability and financial stability. First, macroeconomic stability doesn't guarantee financial stability; indeed, in some circumstances, macroeconomic stability may foster financial instability by lulling people into complacency about risks. And second, some shocks to the financial system are so substantial, especially when they weaken a large number of intermediaries, that decreases in aggregate demand can be large, long lasting, and not quickly or easily remedied by conventional monetary policy. Given the heavy costs of the financial crisis, the question naturally arises as to how it could have been avoided. My third assignment is to reexamine whether conventional monetary policy should be used to lean against financial imbalances as well as aim for the traditional medium-term macroeconomic goals of maximum employment and price stability. One key question is whether we are likely to know enough about asset price misalignments and the effects of policy adjustments on those misalignments to give us the confidence to deliberately tack away for a time from exclusive pursuit of our macroeconomic objectives. Obviously, reducing the odds of financial crises would be very beneficial, but we need to balance that important objective against the potential costs and uncertainties associated with using monetary policy for that purpose. One type of cost arises because monetary policy is a blunt instrument. Increases in interest rates damp activity across a wide variety of sectors, many of which may not be experiencing speculative activity. Moreover, small policy adjustments may not be very effective in reining in speculative excesses. Our experience in 1999 and 2005 was that even substantial increases in interest rates did not seem to have an effect on dot-com stock speculation in the first episode or on house price increases in the second. And larger adjustments would incur greater incremental costs. As a consequence, using monetary policy to damp asset price movements could lead to more variability in output and inflation around their objectives, at least in the medium term. Among other things, greater variability in inflation could lead inflation expectations to become less well anchored, diminishing the ability of the central bank to counter economic fluctuations. We simply do not have good theories or empirical evidence to guide policymakers in using short-term interest rates to limit financial speculation. Given our current state of knowledge, my preference at this time would be to use regulation and supervision to strengthen the financial system and lean against developing problems. Monetary policy would be used only if imbalances were building and regulatory policies either were unavailable or had proven ineffective. The homework assignment is to improve our ability to identify incipient financial imbalances and understand their interactions with changes in policy interest rates. A related issue, which I'll assign for extra credit, is critical for the conduct of policy in the future. Some observers have attributed the bubbles observed in some asset prices in recent years to a decades-long downward trend in real interest rates. In this view, the decline in interest rates has caused investors to reach for yield by purchasing riskier assets with higher returns, driving the prices on riskier assets above fundamental values. Many critics of central banks ascribe the drop in real rates to monetary policy decisions that kept rates unusually low, on average, over the business cycle From my perspective, the decisions the central banks were making about their policy rates were shaped by the underlying determinants of the balance of saving and investment, including, in the past decade or so, the high saving propensities of the newly emerging Asian economies and the sluggish rebound in investment globally after the recession early last decade. Nonetheless, it is important that we understand the reasons for the decline in average real rates and whether low rates are likely to persist--andthatvery tough problem is the extra credit assignment. For one thing, as the economic expansion gains traction and central banks back off the current highly accommodative stance of policy, policymakers will need to understand how the longer-term trend in real rates has influenced the point at which the policy rate becomes restrictive. For another, if rates are going to continue to be low by historical standards, regulators will need to be especially alert to any signs that a reach for yield by investors is contributing to excessive risk-taking. Inflation ObjectivesThe final homework assignment concerns the inflation objectives of central banks. Central banks have widely chosen to target inflation rates near 2 percent. The Federal Reserve is required by law to conduct monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and stable prices. We haven't announced an explicit inflation rate target consistent with that dual mandate, but the Federal Reserve governors and Reserve Bank presidents publish our individual forecasts for inflation over the longer run, conditional on our individual views of appropriate monetary policy. Those forecasts indicate that most of the FOMC participants believe that inflation should converge to 1-3/4 to 2 percent over time. Recently, some prominent economists have called for central banks to raise their inflation targets to about 4 percent. Shifting inflation targets up would tend to raise the average level of nominal interest rates and thus give central banks more room to lower interest rates in response to a bad shock to the economy before running against the zero bound. Although I agree that hitting the zero bound presents challenges to monetary policy, I do not believe central banks should raise their inflation targets. Central banks around the world have been working for 30 years to get inflation down to levels where it can largely be ignored by businesses and households when making decisions about the future. Moreover, inflation expectations are well anchored at those low levels. Increasing our inflation targets could result in more-variable inflation and worse economic outcomes over time. First of all, inflation expectations would necessarily have to become unanchored as inflation moved up. I doubt households and businesses would immediately adjust their expectations up to the new targets and that expectations would then be well anchored at the new higher levels. Instead, I fear there could be a long learning process, just as there was as inflation trended down over recent decades. Second, 4 percent inflation may be higher than can be ignored, and businesses and households may take inflation more into account when writing contracts and making investments, increasing the odds that otherwise transitory inflation would become more persistent. For both these reasons, raising the longer-term objective for inflation could make expectations more sensitive to recent realized inflation, to central bank actions, and to other economic conditions. That greater sensitivity would reduce the ability of central banks to buffer the economy from bad shocks. It could also lead to more-volatile inflation over the longer run and therefore higher inflation risk premiums in nominal interest rates. It is notable that while the economic arguments for raising inflation targets are well understood, no major central bank has raised its target in response to the recent financial crisis. Another approach to this problem is for central banks to target a gradually rising price level rather than a constant inflation rate. Imagine a plot of the consumer price index (CPI) from today onward increasing 2 percent each year. Central banks would commit to adjusting policy to keep the CPI near that line. The advantage of this approach, in theory at least, is that when a negative shock drives prices below the target level, people will automatically expect the central bank to increase inflation for a while to get back to trend. In principle, that expectation would lower real interest rates without the central bank changing its inflation commitment, even if nominal interest rates were pinned at zero. It could also make it easier for people to make long-term economic decisions because they could anticipate that inflation misses would be reversed over time, reducing uncertainty about the future price level. While I appreciate the elegance of this price-level-targeting idea, I have serious doubts that it would work in practice. Central to the idea is that the Federal Reserve would be committing to hit a price level that was growing at a constant rate from a fixed point in the past. The specific inflation rate that could be expected in the future would change over time, depending on the inflation that had been realized up to that point. You could know what inflation rate to expect only if you knew both the current consumer price index and the Fed's target for the index in the future. In addition, the inflation rate that you could expect would be different for different horizons. Moreover, central banks are able to control inflation only with a considerable lag and even then only imprecisely, so the process of hitting a target would likely involve frequent overshooting and correction and consequently frequently shifting inflation objectives. Contrast this approach with the communications required of central banks when targeting a specific inflation rate. For example, central banks targeting a 2 percent inflation rate typically put that target prominently on their webpage. If those banks were instead targeting a price level growing at 2 percent, their webpages would have to provide a table of inflation rate targets for a variety of horizons, and the targets would change each month. I fear that rather than anchoring people's expectations about prices, it could leave them perplexed. As you can tell, I see compelling reasons why central banks should stick to their current inflation objectives. Those reasons relate most importantly to the effect of a central bank's communications and behavior on its credibility and on the public's expectations. More study leading to a better understanding of the linkage between central bank actions and expectation formation should improve the ability of central banks to achieve society's inflation and output objectives more effectively under a variety of circumstances, including in a severe negative shock of the type we recently experienced. ConclusionMany central bankers and economists, myself included, were a little complacent coming into the crisis. We thought we knew enough about the basic structure of the markets and the economy to achieve economic and price stability with relatively minor perturbations. And we thought we had the tools necessary to deal with liquidity shortages and maldistributions. The reality is that we didn't understand the economy as well as we thought we did. Central bankers, along with other policymakers, professional economists and the private sector failed to foresee or prevent a financial crisis that resulted in very serious unemployment and loss of wealth around the world. We must learn from our experience. The questions I've posed are tough, but addressing these issues successfully should enable central banks to reduce the odds of future crises and respond more effectively to any bouts of instability that still might arise. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.William Nelsonof the Board's staff contributed to these remarks.Return to text 2.Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Return to text 3.I am not referring here to the loans we extended to individual troubled institutions like American International Group, whose disorderly failure would have had catastrophic consequences for the economy. That sort of lending is more appropriately done by the fiscal authorities and conducted only in association with the exercise of new authority to regulate and resolve systemically important institutions.Return to text
Jon D. Greenlee, Associate Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance, and Government Sponsored Enterprises, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Kanjorski, Ranking Member Garrett, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the invitation to today's hearing to discuss the supervision and oversight of insurance companies. In the United States, primary supervisory and regulatory authority for insurance companies is vested with the states. The Federal Reserve does, however, serve as consolidated supervisor for bank holding companies (BHCs), including financial holding companies (FHCs) established under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act), some of which are affiliated with insurance companies. In addition, the Federal Reserve serves as the primary federal supervisor for state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System (state member banks), many of which engage in insurance sales activities. In my statement I will first describe the scope of the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory authority for BHCs, FHCs, and state member banks and provide an overview of the types of insurance activities that may be conducted by banking organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve. I will then discuss the Federal Reserve's approach to supervising BHCs, FHCs, and state member banks both generally and with respect to any insurance activities that may be conducted by these organizations. BackgroundThe Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority for BHCs; state member banks; U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations that have a branch, agency, or commercial lending subsidiary in the United States; and certain other financial institutions and activities. As of year-end 2009, a total of 5,635 top-tier U.S. BHCs were in operation. These institutions controlled 5,710 insured commercial banks and held approximately 88.5 percent of all insured commercial bank assets in the United States. Also as of year-end 2009, 844 state-chartered banks (excluding nondepository trust companies and private banks) were members of the Federal Reserve System. We work with other federal and state supervisory authorities to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, foster stability of the financial system, and provide for the fair and equitable treatment of consumers in financial transactions. While banking organizations have been widely involved in insurance sales activities for many years, the ability of banking organizations to broadly underwrite insurance is both more limited and more recent. For example, state banks--including state member banks--generally are permitted to act as an agent in the sale of insurance to the extent permitted by state law, and most states authorize this activity. Federal law, however, generally prohibits national or state-chartered insured banks from underwriting insurance, with certain exceptions.1Prior to the GLB Act, the ability of BHCs to affiliate with a company engaged in insurance sales or underwriting activity also was quite limited. Since 2000, the GLB Act permits those BHCs that qualify to be, and then elect to become, an FHC to engage in, or affiliate with a company engaged in, the sale or underwriting of any type of insurance. To qualify as an FHC, all of a BHC's depository institution subsidiaries must be well capitalized and well managed, and all of the company's insured depository institutions (other than certain newly acquired institutions) must have a satisfactory or better record of performance under the Community Reinvestment Act. Approximately 548 financial services organizations with total assets of $16.1 trillion (or 86 percent of all assets controlled by BHCs) operate in the United States as FHCs. Of these companies, 507 are domestic FHCs and 41 are foreign-owned FHCs. As of September 30, 2009, a total of 33 FHCs reported engaging in insurance underwriting activities pursuant to the expanded authorities provided by the GLB Act, of which 22 were domestic companies and 11 were foreign-owned organizations. These 33 organizations reported an aggregate of $551 billion of insurance-related underwriting activities, which represents 3.4 percent of total FHC assets of $16.1 trillion. Additionally, some 194 FHCs reported conducting insurance sales activities. Because insurance sales activities are conducted as agent (and not as a principal, as with insurance underwriting), insurance sales activities typically do not account for a significant percentage of the assets of banking organizations. Federal Reserve Supervisory Standards and ApproachThe Federal Reserve is involved in both regulation, which is establishing the rules within which banking organizations must operate, and supervision, which is ensuring that banking organizations abide by those rules and remain safe and sound. The Federal Reserve's regulations impose consolidated capital requirements on BHCs (including FHCs) and state member banks, restrict intercompany transactions between an insured depository institution and its affiliates, and implement the activity restrictions that the Congress has established for banking organizations to help protect the federal safety net and prevent the mixing of banking and commerce. Because rules and regulations in many cases cannot reasonably prescribe the exact practices each organization should use in managing the risks it faces, supervisors provide policies and guidance that expand upon requirements set forth in rules and regulations and that establish expectations for the range of acceptable practices. Supervisors rely extensively on these policies and guidance as they conduct examinations or inspections and assign supervisory ratings. The Federal Reserve supervisory staff regularly conduct on-site examinations and off-site monitoring to ensure the safety and soundness of supervised state member banks. As consolidated supervisor, the Federal Reserve also conducts regular inspections of all BHCs, including FHCs. The primary purpose of these inspections is to ensure that the holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries do not pose a threat to the BHC's insured depository institution subsidiaries. In conducting our supervisory and inspection activities, we work closely with the primary supervisor of a BHC's subsidiary depository institutions, as well as with the functional regulator of any securities broker-dealer or insurance company owned by the BHC. Indeed, the GLB Act requires that the Federal Reserve rely, to the fullest extent possible, on the reports of examinations prepared by the relevant state insurance authority of any insurance company subsidiary of a BHC. Our supervision of BHCs and FHCs is focused on the consolidated risk exposures, financial strength, capital adequacy, and liquidity of these firms. In short, our approach is risk-focused, and encompasses all of the risks of the firm. Inspections are built around a rating system introduced in 2005 that reflects the shift in supervisory practices away from a historical analysis of financial conditions toward a more dynamic, forward-looking assessment of risk-management practices and financial factors. Under the system, known as RFI, but more fully termed RFI/C(D), holding companies are assigned a composite rating (C) that is based on assessments of three components: risk management (R), financial condition (F), and the potential impact (I) of the parent company and its nondepository subsidiaries on the subsidiary depository institution. The fourth component, depository institution (D), is intended to mirror the primary supervisor's rating of the subsidiary depository institution. In October 2008, the Federal Reserve finalized comprehensive supervisory guidance, initiated prior to the onset of the financial crisis, to enhance and clarify our role as consolidated supervisor of BHCs, including FHCs. For example, it improves the consistency of the Federal Reserve's supervisory practices and assessments across institutions with similar activities and risks, and directs examiners to pay special attention to areas that are critical to managing firmwide risks, such as primary governance functions and risk controls, material business lines and nonbank operations, funding and liquidity management, consumer compliance, and other key activities and risks. The enhanced consolidated supervisory approach also emphasizes several elements designed to foster financial stability and deter or manage financial crises, including an increased focus on clearing and settlement activities in critical financial markets. The guidance also reiterates the need as required by statute to rely, to the fullest extent possible, on information from the appropriate primary or functional regulators of the bank, securities, and insurance subsidiaries of an organization in order to make an informed assessment about the nature of the risks posed to the insured depository institution affiliate and the consolidated organization. Importantly, it also describes how the Federal Reserve will coordinate its activities and share information with the functional regulators of a BHC's subsidiaries. In the spring of 2009, the Federal Reserve led the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, popularly known as the bank "stress test," which helped restore confidence in the banking system and represented a turning point in the financial crisis. An important lesson of that program was that combining on-site examinations and inspections with a suite of quantitative and analytical tools can greatly improve comparability of the results and better identify potential risks or outlier situations. In that spirit, the Federal Reserve is developing an enhanced quantitative surveillance program for large BHCs. Supervisory information will be combined with firm-level, market-based indicators and aggregate economic data to provide a more complete picture of the risks facing these institutions and the broader financial system. Making use of the Federal Reserve's unparalleled breadth of expertise, this program will apply a multidisciplinary approach that involves economists, specialists in particular financial markets, payments systems experts, and other professionals, including bank supervisors. Appropriate enhancements of both prudential and consolidated supervision will only increase the need for supervisors to be able to draw on a broad array of economic and financial knowledge and experience. The insights gained from the macroeconomic analyses associated with the formulation of monetary policy, and from the familiarity with financial markets derived from our open market operations and payments systems responsibilities, have the potential to add enormous value to holding company supervision. The current financial crisis has clearly demonstrated that risks to the financial system can arise not only in the banking sector, but also from the activities of other financial firms--such as investment banks or insurance companies--that traditionally have not been subject to the type of regulation and consolidated supervision applicable to bank holding companies. To close this important gap in our regulatory structure, legislative action is needed that would subjectallsystemically important financial institutions to the same framework for consolidated prudential supervision that currently applies to BHCs and FHCs. Such action would prevent financial firms that do not own a bank, but nonetheless pose risks to the overall financial system because of the size, risks, or interconnectedness of their financial activities, from avoiding comprehensive supervisory oversight. Federal Reserve Supervision of Insurance ActivitiesIn supervising banking organizations that are engaged in insurance activities, the Federal Reserve is guided by the same principles that govern our supervision of banking organizations generally. For BHCs and FHCs conducting insurance activities, we focus on assessing and, if necessary, addressing the potential risk that those activities may pose to the depository affiliates and the consolidated financial condition of the BHC or FHC. In the case of state member banks engaged in insurance activities, we focus primarily on assessing and limiting the risk of those activities to the relevant institution and ensuring compliance with the consumer protections for bank sales of insurance products established by the GLB Act. While our general approach is the same, we also adjust our supervisory methods and analysis to account for the unique risks and nature of insurance products. For example, although most risks--including credit, market, operational, liquidity, reputational, and legal risks--are not unique to BHCs with insurance underwriting activities, our supervisory approach recognizes that these risks may arise in new or different ways at such firms engaged in insurance activities. Our supervisory approach also recognizes the additional risks arising from the underwriting of life insurance policies and property and casualty insurance policies. We incorporate these risks in our assessments of the overall financial strength of a BHC's or FHC's consolidated risk-management processes, as well as any potential effect on affiliated depository institutions. Federal Reserve oversight of insurance activities of state member banks varies based on the nature and scope of the institution's insurance activities. We have supervisory tools for assessing the robustness of the risk-management processes for corporate programs for insurable risks, including purchased insurance on the lives of bank employees (bank-owned life insurance). Additionally, we have supervisory tools for assessing the management of the risks associated with retail sales of insurance on bank premises or on behalf of a bank and the Consumer Protection in Sales of Insurance provisions of the Board's Regulation H. In performing our assessments of the financial strength and consolidated risk management of BHCs or FHCs, the Federal Reserve focuses on corporate-level internal policies and procedures, as well as consolidated risk reports of the firms. In addition, we actively engage management in discussions of the firms' overall strategy, lines of businesses, financial condition, and internal risk and capital adequacy processes. The Federal Reserve may conduct off-site monitoring and engage management in further discussions or conduct targeted reviews to enhance our understanding of a BHC's or FHC's insurance activities. In carrying out its supervisory activities, the Federal Reserve routinely communicates with the primary or functional regulatory authorities, including those responsible for licensing and regulating the insurance subsidiaries of the BHC or FHC. This communication is an important part of our approach to the consolidated supervisory processes for two reasons. First, functional regulators provide information about the legal and regulatory framework in which insurance activities are conducted at the subsidiary that they license and regulate. Similarly, the functional regulators' assessments of risk and risk management at the insurance subsidiary help inform our assessments of any potential effect that these activities may have on affiliate depository institutions and the consolidated organization's financial condition or risk-management practices. To facilitate this information sharing, over the past decade, the Federal Reserve Board has executed memoranda of understanding with the insurance regulatory authorities of all 50states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. The Federal Reserve Board and the other federal banking agencies also coordinate with the appropriate state insurance authorities when a BHC, FHC, or insured depository institution plans to acquire or affiliate with a company engaged in insurance activities. In addition, in carrying out our BHC supervisory responsibilities, we communicate with international insurance supervisors if appropriate depending on the size, nature, and extent of a BHC's or FHC's insurance businesses. To assist its staff in understanding the risks arising from insurance activities, the Federal Reserve has designed and implemented training programs and developed examiner tools. Additionally, in conjunction with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) and state insurance regulatory authorities, the Federal Reserve drafted materials comparing various aspects of the regulatory paradigms for banking organizations and insurance companies that are routinely made available to supervision staff. For example, the Federal Reserve and the NAIC have collaborated on three published reports that were intended to facilitate better communication and understanding on banking and insurance regulation, risks, and capital requirements. In May 2002, the Federal Reserve and the NAIC issued the first report, titled "Report of the NAIC and the Federal Reserve System Joint Subgroup on Risk-Based Capital and Regulatory Arbitrage." It compares banking and insurance company risk-based capital formulas, and identifies potential opportunities for regulatory capital arbitrage between insurance and bank subsidiaries. The report acknowledges that the two regulatory capital frameworks differ fundamentally in the risks they are designed to assess, and that capital requirements for assets, liabilities, and various risks are treated differently. The second report, titled "Report of the NAIC and the Federal Reserve System Joint Subgroup on Financial Issues," was issued in June 2003. It discusses the components of risk arising from insurance activities and relevant insurance regulatory tools that might assist the Federal Reserve in supervising FHCs conducting insurance activities. The report includes a mapping of insurance industry risks into the Federal Reserve's defined banking risks. The third report, titled "Report of the NAIC and the Federal Reserve System Joint Troubled Company Subgroup: A Comparison of the Insurance and Banking Regulatory Frameworks for Identifying and Supervising Companies in Weakened Financial Condition," was issued in April 2005. This report outlines the different approaches used by banking and insurance regulators for identifying and intervening in troubled company and troubled holding company situations, including regulatory authorities, on- and off-site company financial condition monitoring tools, time frames for intervention, and types of actions taken. ConclusionWhile the Federal Reserve is not the primary supervisor of insurance companies, certain organizations we supervise do engage in, or have subsidiaries that engage in, insurance activities. The Federal Reserve's role as the supervisor of a BHC or FHC is to review and assess the consolidated organization's operations, risk-management systems, and capital adequacy to ensure that the holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries do not threaten the viability of the company's insured depository institutions. In this role, the Federal Reserve serves as the "umbrella supervisor" of the con­solidated organization. In fulfilling this role, the Federal Reserve relies to the fullest extent possible on information and analysis provided by the appropriate supervisory authority of the company's bank, securities, or insurance subsidiaries. Recent experience shows the need for the Federal Reserve's approach to consolidated supervision of the holding company in addition to, and distinct from, bank supervision. Large organizations increasingly operate and manage their businesses on an integrated basis with little regard for the corporate boundaries that typically define the jurisdictions of individual functional supervisors. Indeed, the crisis has highlighted the financial, managerial, operational, and reputational linkages among the bank, securities, commodity, insurance, and other units of financial firms. The customary focus on protecting the bank within the holding company, while necessary, is clearly not sufficient now, when systemic risk can arise wholly outside of insured depository institutions. Similarly, the premise of functional regulation--that risks within a diversified organization can be evaluated and managed properly through supervision focused on individual subsidiaries within the firm--has been undermined further; the need for greater attention to the potential for damage to the bank, the organization within which it operates, and, in some cases, the financial system generally, requires a comprehensive and integrated assessment of activities throughout the holding company. This concludes my prepared remarks, and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 1.See 12 U.S.C. § 1831a; 15 U.S.C. § 6712.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Federal Reserve Board International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C. Effective responses to dire situations often require bold actions that would be unthinkable in calmer times. So it was in the financial crisis, when central banks undertook extraordinary monetary policy measures and governments made major financial firms wards of the state. Yet sometimes a crisis also accelerates adoption of policies and practices that might beneficially have been implemented beforehand and then are sensibly continued after the crisis has passed. This evening I will examine an instance of this latter phenomenon, as defined by the Federal Reserve's experience with comprehensive stress testing of major financial institutions during the crisis. The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) was fashioned in early 2009 as a key element of a crucial plan to stabilize the U.S. financial system. The stress tests, as they have been popularly called, required development on the fly, and under enormous pressure, of ideas that academics and supervisors had been considering for some time. After describing the concept, design, and implementation of last year's tests, I will explain how our experience has helped prompt major changes in Federal Reserve supervision of the nation's largest financial institutions. Then I will discuss how this experience has stimulated debate over the merits of publicly releasing supervisory information.1 Origins and Execution of the Supervisory Capital Assessment ProgramBy February 2009, many steps had already been taken to restore the health of, and confidence in, U.S. banks. The U.S. Treasury had injected capital into banks under the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation had expanded guarantees for bank liabilities under its Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program. And the Federal Reserve had established a number of lending programs to provide liquidity to financial institutions in addition to its aggressive monetary policy actions. Despite these actions, a great deal of uncertainty remained about future bank losses and solvency, which was only increased by the rapidly deteriorating macroeconomic conditions in early 2009. The Treasury determined that confidence could best be restored by making additional capital available to banks that were unable to raise from private sources the amounts necessary for them to continue to function as effective financial intermediaries even if economic conditions worsened appreciably. To evaluate how much capital individual institutions might require, U.S. bank supervisors, led by the Federal Reserve, undertook a stringent, forward-looking assessment of prospective losses and revenues--a stress test--for the 19 largest U.S. banks. Using TARP funds, the Treasury established the Capital Assistance Program (CAP) to provide any needed capital. Let me summarize the mechanics of the stress tests. First, in February 2009, each of the SCAP banks was asked to perform a capital-adequacy stress test under two economic scenarios--baseline and more adverse--using specified assumptions for gross domestic product (GDP) growth, unemployment, and house prices. The baseline scenario reflected the consensus expectation among professional forecasters on the depth and duration of the recession. The more adverse scenario was designed to be severe but plausible, with a probability of roughly 10 to 15 percent that each of the macroeconomic variables could be worse than specified. The banks were asked to provide projections of losses and revenues under the two scenarios. Losses were to be projected over a two-year horizon for at least 12 separate categories of loans and a few other asset classes, using year-end 2008 financial statement data as a starting point. To guide the banks, supervisors provided indicative loss-rate ranges for the system as a whole, derived from both analysis of historical loss experience at large banks and quantitative models relating loan performance to macroeconomic variables. Banks were informed that loss estimates below the indicative range would be closely scrutinized. Second, the supervisory teams evaluated the banks' estimates to identify methodological weaknesses, missing information, overly optimistic assumptions, and other problems. Examiners had detailed conversations with bank managers, which led to numerous modifications of the banks' submissions. Supervisors then made judgmental adjustments to the banks' loss and revenue estimates based on sensitivity analyses performed by the firms, comparative analysis across the firms, and the supervisors' own judgments. Third, the supervisors supplemented these judgmental assessments with objective, model-based estimates for losses and revenues that could be applied on a consistent basis across firms. Each participating institution was asked to supply, in a standardized format, detailed information that supervisors could use to estimate losses and revenues, such as details about loan characteristics. These data allowed supervisors to make consistent estimates using independently constructed models. Finally, supervisors systematically incorporated all of these inputs into loss, revenue, and reserve estimates for each institution. These estimates were combined with information on existing reserves and capital to project capital buffers that the banks would need under the two scenarios. As you know, unlike other countries that conducted stress exercises, we took the highly unusual step of publicly reporting the findings of the SCAP, including the capital needs and loss estimates for each of the 19 banks.2This departure from the standard practice of keeping examination information confidential was based on the belief that greater transparency of the process and findings would help restore confidence in U.S. banks at a time of great uncertainty. Supervisors released the methodology and assumptions underlying the stress test first and then, two weeks later, the results for individual institutions. The results showed that under the more adverse scenario, 10 of the 19 SCAP banks would need to raise a total of $75 billion in capital in order to have the capital buffers that were targeted under the SCAP--Tier 1 capital in excess of 6 percent of risk-weighted assets and Tier 1 Common capital in excess of 4 percent of risk-weighted assets at the end of the two-year horizon. The merits of publicly releasing firm-specific SCAP results were much debated within the Federal Reserve. In particular, some feared that weaker banks might be significantly harmed by the disclosures. In the end, though, market participants vindicated our decision. They appeared to be reassured for three reasons. First, the results were deemed credible by most market participants, owing in part to the release of details about our assumptions and methods, as well as the variation in assessment of the banks. Second, the results were released at a time when uncertainty about bank conditions was very high, and some market participants feared the worst. That is, perceptions of tail risk were very high, and the SCAP results helped reassure market participants that under a severe but plausible scenario, the capital needs of the largest U.S. banks were manageable. Third, the Treasury stood ready to make capital available to any SCAP bank with capital needs through the CAP if they were unable to raise private capital. In retrospect, it is clear that the public release of the SCAP results played an important role in stabilizing the financial system, as has our supervisory follow-up on improving capital levels. By November 2009, the 10 banks that required additional capital had increased their Tier 1 Common equity by more than $77 billion, primarily by issuing new common equity, converting existing preferred equity to common equity, and selling businesses or portfolios of assets. None of the SCAP banks received CAP funds.3 Many observers initially criticized the stress tests as overly optimistic. On the one hand, they noted that GDP growth was weaker and unemployment higher in 2009 than projected in the more adverse scenario. On the other hand, house prices did not fall as much as assumed under the more adverse scenario. As of the end of 2009, actual losses at the 19 banks were less than one-half of the two-year loss estimates under the more adverse SCAP scenario, and actual revenues were more than one-half of the two-year revenue estimates. Nevertheless, there is wide variation across the firms, and it is too soon to tell whether firms will perform better over the full two years than the SCAP estimates. The Lessons of the SCAPAs I suggested at the outset of my remarks, I doubt that anything as ambitious as the SCAP would have been tried--at least as soon as it was--but for the exigencies of the financial crisis. Yet the approach we took in the SCAP was informed by discussions that had been taking place among supervisors and academics for some time. Not surprisingly, against the backdrop of the crisis, the SCAP experience elaborated and confirmed principles that had been advocated internally by some supervisors, but that had not been broadly incorporated into the practice of regulatory agencies. First, whether conducted by banks or supervisors, stress tests must consider severe but plausible scenarios, including low probability events with potentially highly adverse effects. In the period leading up to the crisis--characterized by strong profits, excess liquidity, and low credit losses--too many banks and regulators were skeptical of the possibility of a rapid and severe deterioration such as ultimately occurred in the U.S. housing, mortgage, and short-term funding markets. If the crisis taught us anything, it is that we must test to the tail, not to the mode. A related point is that a stress test will be most useful if applied to the full range of credit and trading exposures. Second, good management-information systems are critical to the ability of firms to manage their risks. Assessing risk exposures across an entire organization is essential to understanding the potential effect of correlated risk exposures that may reside in distinct business lines as well as different legal entities and regulatory jurisdictions. Yet during the SCAP, many of the banks were unable to quickly and consistently consolidate risk exposures across products, business lines, legal entities, and geographies. It does little good to run a stress test, even one using a sophisticated quantitative model, if it does not effectively capture all relevant exposures because the bank's information systems are poorly managed or integrated. Third, the SCAP highlighted the importance of having multiple inputs into the risk-assessment process. It was critical to have, and use, the best available data. But it was equally important not to become a slave to any one model or method of estimating losses. It was precisely the combination of rigorous, data-driven analyses and considered judgment that made the stress test successful. The interactive and iterative nature of the process helped refine each method of assessment. Fourth, the SCAP underscored the importance of both horizontal and macroprudential perspectives in supervising banking organizations. During the SCAP, simultaneous, consistent, and comparative cross-firm assessments allowed a broader analysis of risks, easier identification of outliers, and better evaluation of individual firm estimates. Because SCAP banks held the majority of U.S. banking assets, it also allowed for a better understanding of interrelationships and systemic risks. Turning now to how the SCAP experience has informed our supervisory policies, I think its effects are best understood in the overall context of the reforms motivated by the financial crisis. Like regulators around the world, we are developing and implementing improvements in capital and other prudential rules. The Congress is considering legislative proposals to enhance market discipline through such means as a special resolution mechanism for large financial firms and to affect the structure of the financial services industry through such measures as the Volcker rule and limitations on acquisitions by systemically important firms. These three modes of reform--rules, market discipline, and structural measures--must be complemented by more-effective supervisory oversight, particularly of the largest, most complex financial institutions. To this end, the Federal Reserve is now implementing a more closely coordinated supervisory system in which a cross-firm, horizontal perspective is an organizing supervisory principle. We will concentrate on all activities within the holding companies that can create risk to the firm and the financial system, not just those that increase risk for insured depository institutions. An essential component of this new system will be a quantitative surveillance mechanism for large, complex financial organizations that will combine a more macroprudential, multidisciplinary approach with the horizontal perspective. Quantitative surveillance will use supervisory information, firm-specific data analysis, and market-based indicators to identify developing strains and imbalances that may affect multiple institutions, as well as emerging risks to specific firms. Periodic forward-looking scenario analyses will enhance our understanding of the potential effects of adverse changes in the operating environment on individual firms and on the system as a whole. In fact, I believe that the most useful steps toward creating a practical, macroprudential supervisory perspective will be those that connect the firm-specific information and insight gained from traditional microprudential supervision to analysis of systemwide developments and emerging stresses. Here, precisely, is where our SCAP experience has helped lead the way. The Question of TransparencyOne important element of the SCAP that has not yet been incorporated into our ongoing supervisory plans is the public disclosure of stress test information. I think this issue deserves consideration. As I recently testified, access to higher-quality and more-timely information about financial products, firms, and markets is necessary for effective supervision.4Making data public--to the degree consistent with protecting firm-specific proprietary information--would have additional benefits. In the specific context of greater transparency in supervisory stress tests, I see at least two. First, the release of details about assumptions, methods, and conclusions would expose the supervisory approach to greater outside scrutiny and discussion. Sometimes those discussions will help us improve our assumptions or methodology. At other times disclosure might reassure investors about the quality of the tests. Either way, the public's reaction to our assumptions and methods would be useful. Second, because loan portfolios are inherently difficult to value without a great deal of detailed information, increased transparency could be an important addition to the information available to investors and counterparties of the largest institutions. If, as I believe, progress on the too-big-to-fail problem is integral to an effective reform of financial regulation, we must enhance market discipline. The market discipline made possible by such means as special resolution mechanisms and contingent capital will be most effective if market participants have adequate information with which to make informed judgments about the banks. There are, to be sure, countervailing concerns. In more normal economic times, when market participants are not fearing the worst and when banks do not have access to government capital injections as a backstop, the revelation that some major banks may have capital needs under a stress scenario might be unnecessarily destabilizing. This possibility would be increased if market participants attached undue weight to specific capital or loss numbers released by the government. In practical terms, there are several ways we might increase transparency. One, of course, would be to follow the SCAP precedent, with periodic release of detailed information about the assumptions, methods, and results of a cross-firm, horizontal, forward-looking exercise, including firm-specific outcomes. This approach would probably maximize both the potential benefits and potential risks. Note, however, that the possibility of a destabilizing market reaction may be lower if such information is released frequently, as major unpleasant surprises would be less likely with frequent, detailed disclosures. Of course, significant changes in the economic environment might still lead to unpleasant surprises when the results are released.5 A second option would be to provide details about the assumptions and methods supervisors employed in the stress tests but withhold public release of results for individual banks. This practice could be coupled with a requirement for more systematic, timely, and consistent disclosure by the largest banks of information on material firmwide risk positions and exposures, funding and liquidity profiles, operating performance, and other measures. Like the first approach, this option would have the benefit of opening supervisors' methods to discussion. By increasing the disclosure of banks' risk exposures, this approach would also enhance market discipline, as market participants could make their own forward-looking assessments of banks' conditions. However, some benefit would be lost, since the information from individual banks would not have been standardized or verified by regulators. Concomitantly, while the risk of an overreaction to the release of information would still exist, there would be no single number on which market participants could focus. A third possibility would be to have supervisors release aggregate results of their horizontal, forward-looking assessments, along with details about their assumptions and methods, without requiring additional disclosure by firms. This approach could still confer considerable benefits by providing information to the public about the overall condition of the banking system as well as about supervisory methods. It has, in fact, been applied by Japan's Financial Services Agency (FSA), which conducted a special bank inspection in 2002 and 2003, when Japanese banks were still recovering from a crisis. The FSA publicly released aggregate results showing the differences between the banks' and the FSA's assessments of loan quality, which showed that the FSA's assessments were more stringent than the banks'. Many of the major banks subsequently increased their loan loss reserves, and the inspections appeared to increase confidence in the banking system. Of course, the informational benefit to market participants could be substantially diluted if they are unable to distinguish the conditions of individual firms as reflected in the aggregate numbers. ConclusionTo conclude, you should now have a sense of the degree to which our experience with SCAP has informed changes in our supervision of large institutions as part of the broader enterprise of regulatory reform. As to the issue of stress test transparency, I look forward to hearing how others assess the merits of the alternative approaches I have described and, of course, any new ideas. 1.The views expressed in these remarks are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors.Return to text 2.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC Release Results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program," press release, May 7.Return to text 3.GMAC did receive a capital injection from the Treasury through the TARP's Automotive Industry Financing Program.Return to text 4.Daniel K. Tarullo (2010), "Equipping Financial Regulators with the Tools Necessary to Monitor Systemic Risk," statement before the Subcommittee on Security and International Trade and Finance, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 12.Return to text 5.In addition, it would be important to assure that the routine release of selected supervisory information did not undermine our ability to maintain the confidentiality of other supervisory information.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Independent Community Bankers of America National Convention, Orlando, Florida I'm glad once again to be able to meet with and speak to the Independent Community Bankers of America. I greatly value the chance to hear directly from you about the challenges you are facing today. As everyone in this audience knows, those challenges are daunting indeed, and they go far beyond parochial concerns. Communities all over America are trying to cope with the economic consequences of the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression--high unemployment, lost incomes and wealth, home foreclosures, strained fiscal budgets, and uncertainty about the future. Because community banks are integral to local economies, you have been on the front line, so to speak, deeply engaged in confronting those problems and uncertainties. Your commitment to your communities, including your willingness to provide credit and services supporting small businesses, home purchases, and commercial development, is reason to be optimistic about our nation's ability to meet the current challenges and return to economic health. One of America's economic strengths is its relatively greater reliance on bottom-up rather than top-down growth and development, in which individual creativity, local knowledge, and the trust born of longstanding relationships help foster economic creativity and progress. Of course, it is precisely the ability to foster bottom-up growth, building on local knowledge and relationships, that sets community banks apart from other financial institutions. It is important for our economic health to maintain a diverse and resilient financial system in which community banks play an important role. As the crisis has shown, one of the greatest threats to the diversity and efficiency of our financial system is the pernicious problem of financial institutions that are deemed "too big to fail." I will spend some time today discussing the efforts the Federal Reserve and other policymakers are making to put an end to the too-big-to-fail problem and thus help foster effective competition in financial services. I also want to speak today about the links between your institutions and mine. The Federal Reserve has always had a special relationship with community banks. As we turn from crisis management to supporting the economic recovery, that relationship will become more important than ever. Toward a More Competitive, Efficient, and Innovative Financial SystemThe United States has a financial system that is remarkably multifaceted and diverse. Some countries rely heavily on a few large banks to provide credit and financial services; our system, in contrast, includes financial institutions of all sizes, with a wide range of charters and missions. We also rely more than any other country on an array of specialized financial markets to allocate credit and help diversify risks. Our system is complex, but I think that for the most part its variety is an important strength. We have many, many ways to connect borrowers and savers in the United States, and directing saving to the most productive channels is an essential prerequisite to a successful economy. That said, for the financial system to do its job well, it must be an impartial and efficient arbiter of credit flows. In a market economy, that result is best achieved through open competition on a level playing field, a framework that provides choices to consumers and borrowers and gives the most innovative and efficient firms the chance to succeed and grow. Unfortunately, our financial system today falls substantially short of that competitive ideal. Among the most serious and most insidious barriers to competition in financial services is the too-big-to-fail problem. Like all of you, I remember well the frightening weeks in the fall of 2008, when the failure or near-failure of several large, complex, and interconnected firms shook the financial markets and our economy to their foundations. Extraordinary efforts by the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and other agencies, together with similar actions by our counterparts in other countries, narrowly averted a global financial collapse. Even with those extraordinary actions, the economic costs of the crisis have been very severe; but I have little doubt that, had the global financial system disintegrated, the effects on asset values, credit availability, and confidence would have resulted in a far deeper and longer-lasting economic contraction. It is unconscionable that the fate of the world economy should be so closely tied to the fortunes of a relatively small number of giant financial firms. If we achieve nothing else in the wake of the crisis, we must ensure that we never again face such a situation. The costs to all of us of having firms deemed too big to fail were stunningly evident during the days in which the financial system teetered near collapse. But the existence of too-big-to-fail firms also imposes heavy costs on our financial system even in more placid times. Perhaps most important, if a firm is publicly perceived as too big, or interconnected, or systemically critical for the authorities to permit its failure, its creditors and counterparties have less incentive to evaluate the quality of the firm's business model, its management, and its risk-taking behavior. As a result, such firms face limited market discipline, allowing them to obtain funding on better terms than the quality or riskiness of their business would merit and giving them incentives to take on excessive risks. Having institutions that are too big to fail also creates competitive inequities that may prevent our most productive and innovative firms from prospering. In an environment of fair competition, smaller firms should have a chance to outperform larger companies. By the same token, firms that do not make the grade should exit, freeing up resources for other uses. Our economy is not static, and our banking system should not be static either. In short, to have a competitive, vital, and innovative financial system in which market discipline encourages efficiency and controls risk, including risks to the system as a whole, we have to end the too-big-to-fail problem once and for all. But how can that be done? Some proposals have been made to limit the scope and activities of financial institutions, and I think a number of those ideas are worth careful consideration. Certainly, supervisors should be empowered to limit the involvement of firms in inappropriately risky activities. But even if such proposals are implemented, our technologically sophisticated and globalized economy will still need large, complex, and internationally active financial firms to meet the needs of multinational firms, to facilitate international flows of goods and capital, and to take advantage of economies of scale and scope. The unavoidable challenge is to make sure that size, complexity, and interconnectedness do not insulate such firms from market discipline, potentially making them ticking time bombs inside our financial system. To address the too-big-to-fail problem, the Federal Reserve favors a three-part approach. First, we and our colleagues at other supervisory agencies must continue to develop and implement significantly tougher rules and oversight that serve to reduce the risks that large, complex firms present to the financial system. Events of the past several years clearly demonstrate that all large, complex financial institutions, not just bank holding companies, must be subject to strong regulation and consolidated supervision. Moreover, the crisis has shown that supervisors must take account of potential risks to the financial system as a whole, and not just those to individual firms in isolation. Implementing supervision in a way that seeks to identify systemic risks as well as risks to individual institutions is a difficult challenge, but the fact is that the traditional approach of focusing narrowly on individual firms did not succeed in preventing this crisis and likely would not succeed in the future. Consequently, we at the Federal Reserve have been working with international colleagues to require that the most systemically critical firms increase their holdings of capital and liquidity and improve their risk management; and we are overhauling our supervisory framework for the largest institutions, both to improve the effectiveness of consolidated supervision and to incorporate in our oversight a more comprehensive, systemic perspective. The second component of the strategy to end too-big-to-fail is to increase the resilience of the financial system itself, to reduce the potential damage from a systemic event like the failure of a major firm. For example, the Federal Reserve has been leading collaborative efforts to improve the clearing and settlement of credit default swaps and other derivatives and to enhance the stability of markets for repurchase agreements. Limiting the fallout from the failure of a major firm is not only directly beneficial in a crisis, it also helps to reduce the too-big-to-fail problem, because the government has much less reason to intervene if it believes that the financial system is resilient enough to handle a significant failure without excessive disruption. Third, because government oversight alone will never be sufficient to anticipate all risks, increasing market discipline is an essential piece of any strategy for combating too-big-to-fail. To create real market discipline for the largest firms, market participants must be convinced that if one of these firms is unable to meet its obligations, its shareholders, creditors, and counterparties will not be protected from losses by government action. To make such a threat credible, we need a new legal framework that will allow the government to wind down a failing, systemically critical firm without doing serious damage to the broader financial system. In other words, we need an alternative for resolving failing firms that is neither a disorderly bankruptcy nor a bailout. A prototype for such a framework already exists--namely, the rules set forth in the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 for dealing with a failing bank. As the FDIC is now able to do with a failing bank, the government should, under appropriate circumstances and with appropriate safeguards, be able to seize and wind down a failing, systemically critical firm. Institutions should not be permitted to receive assistance while open, but authorities must be empowered to sell, merge, or break up an institution as necessary to avoid a disorderly unraveling that threatens the financial system as a whole. The resolution agency should not be allowed to protect shareholders and other capital providers and it should have clear authority to impose losses on debt holders, override contracts, and replace managers and directors as appropriate. If, in the end, funds must be injected to resolve a systemically critical institution safely, the ultimate cost must not fall on taxpayers or small financial institutions, but on those institutions that are the source of the too-big-to-fail problem. I don't want to understate the difficulties of creating an effective resolution framework for large, interconnected firms. Such firms can be extraordinarily complex, both in terms of their legal structure and in the range and sophistication of their activities. The resolution of large institutions whose operations span many countries poses particular challenges, as legal frameworks vary across countries, and the authorities in each country naturally seek to protect the interests of depositors and creditors in their own jurisdictions. We must also recognize that such resolutions might well take place in the context of a broader crisis, in which the government might be forced to address problems at multiple firms simultaneously. Careful planning is therefore essential. An idea worth exploring is to require firms to develop and maintain a so-called living will, which will help firms and regulators identify ways to simplify and untangle the firm before a crisis occurs.1The Federal Reserve and Community BanksThe Federal Reserve and community banks have much in common beyond our mutual concerns about the too-big-to-fail problem. Our interest in community banks has its roots in the founding of the Federal Reserve in 1913, nearly a century ago. President Woodrow Wilson and the other founders of the Fed, taking note of two previous failed attempts to establish a U.S. central bank, intentionally avoided creating a single, monolithic institution located in Washington or New York. Instead, they established a system of 12 Reserve Banks located in major cities around the country. (It was a federal system--hence the term, "Federal Reserve.") Why was America's central bank given this unique structure? The reason was to provide legitimacy and a broad geographic presence across the nation for an institution that often has to make difficult decisions. Over time, this structure has provided the Federal Reserve with grassroots connections, local insights, and diverse perspectives that few other federal institutions enjoy. We are always looking for opportunities to interact with and learn from community bankers. Events like this one are an important venue for exchanging ideas, as I've mentioned, but there are many others. For example, community bankers sit on our Federal Advisory Council, which meets with the Board of Governors for three mornings each year to discuss developments in the economy and in the banking industry. We meet on a similar schedule with a second official council, the Thrift Institutions Advisory Council, which brings together thrifts, saving banks, and a variety of other depository institutions, most of them smaller, from around the country. In addition, community bankers sit on the boards and the advisory councils of the Fed's 12 regional Reserve Banks and 24 Reserve Bank branches. Both the Board and the Reserve Banks organize regular meetings involving community banks and a range of other participants. For example, the Reserve Banks are meeting with community bankers, community development organizations, and other stakeholders to discuss barriers to and opportunities for extending credit to small businesses. Of course, many of our regular interactions with community banks arise from our oversight of bank holding companies and state-chartered banks that choose to join the Federal Reserve System. This supervision is guided by the Board, but conducted day-to-day by the Reserve Banks and their examiners, many of whom have lived and worked within the Districts they serve for many years. We believe this approach ensures that Federal Reserve supervision of community banks is consistent and disciplined but also reflects a local perspective that can take account of differences in regional economic conditions. For example, in the Midwest, where many community banks specialize in agricultural lending, Federal Reserve examiners maintain a special expertise in the agricultural economy and the associated lending practices. They also draw frequently on the expertise of regional and agricultural economists in the Districts to maintain an up-to-date understanding of local conditions. So while many bankers tell us that Federal Reserve examiners are analytical and tough, few tell us that they are unfair or uninformed about what's going on in the local economy. We believe that this kind of response speaks to the effectiveness of our supervisory program for community banks, and we take pride in the professionalism and quality of our community bank examiners. One particularly valuable aspect of our federal structure is that, over the years, it has provided policymakers in Washington with a way to keep in close touch with the continent-spanning, highly varied economy of the United States. When I attend board of directors meetings at regional Reserve Banks, which I do regularly, one of the most interesting portions is the go-round, during which each director provides his or her perspective on local economic developments. Quite often, the directors who are community bankers provide some of the most valuable contributions. That fact should not be surprising. By their nature, community banks interact with many parts of the area economy--consumers, small businesses, large businesses, real estate developers, even local governments. This breadth of vision, together with a good sense of the underlying economic forces at work in each locality, gives community bankers a unique perspective on the developments in their part of the country. When the Fed analyzes economic developments, of necessity we rely on official economic data to identify broad national trends. However, the official data often mask the diversity of the U.S. economy; moreover, the data are inherently backward-looking, telling us what happened in the past quarter or year. In contrast, the grass-roots information that we obtain from community bankers and the other community and business leaders who serve as Reserve Bank directors provides a forward-looking perspective on economic developments and concerns, as well as a level of detail and qualitative insight that is often lost in the aggregate numbers. Our contacts with community bankers also provide critical insights into the state of our nation's banks. Because of the remarkable diversity of the U.S. financial system, a supervisory agency that focused only on the largest banking institutions, without knowledge of community banks, would get a limited and potentially distorted picture of what was happening in our banking system as a whole. Close connections with community bankers enable the Federal Reserve to better understand the full range of financial concerns and risks facing the country, such as the current difficult problems in commercial real estate lending and the impediments to small business lending. For example, recent patterns in commercial loan growth are very different at large and small banks, and our links to community bankers help us to better understand these trends. The community banking perspective is also critical as we try to assess the burden and effectiveness of financial regulation. As a group, community banks are also important to the nation's financial stability, a particular focus and responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Although it was not the case in the current crisis, instability can be generated by small institutions as well as by large ones--as occurred in the Great Depression or in the thrift crisis, to cite two particularly dramatic examples. Additionally, as a lender through our discount window to community banks and other depository institutions, we rely on information and expertise obtained from our supervisory responsibilities to lend safely, particularly in times of stress. For all these reasons, our supervisory relationships with the state-chartered banks that have joined the Federal Reserve System are immensely valuable, as is the range of contacts we have with community banks. ConclusionI know that community banks, with their special strengths, can flourish in a system that provides fair competition; indeed, many of you have stepped up during a difficult time to provide credit to support the economic recovery. To create a more competitive system, as well as a safer one, we need to end the too-big-to-fail problem once and for all. We will continue to focus on this issue, and we welcome constructive ideas from all quarters. We at the Federal Reserve look forward to maintaining our long-standing relationships with community bankers. You bring us insights into the banking industry and the economy that we can obtain nowhere else. And as the recovery progresses, we expect that you will continue to aid the nation's return to prosperity by making good loans to creditworthy borrowers in your communities. We want to continue to work with you to help you play this important role. In doing so, together we will help ensure a bright future both for our economy and for community banking. 1.See Daniel K. Tarullo (2009), "Supervising and Resolving Large Financial Institutions," speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers Conference on Cross-Border Insolvency Issues, New York, N.Y., November 10.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive against Horizon Bank, Bradenton, Florida, a state chartered member bank. A copy of the Directive is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive against Midwest Bank and Trust Company, Elmwood Park, Illinois, a state chartered member bank. A copy of the Directive is attached.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Fifty-third Annual Western Independent Bankers Conference, Scottsdale, Arizona Good Morning. I am pleased to be here today to address the Western Independent Bankers Annual Conference. As many of you know, I spent most of my career as a community banker. What you may not know is that I first became CEO of a community bank under an unusual set of circumstances. I found myself in the CEO's seat unexpectedly, after the sudden death of my mentor, the man who had taught me banking and with whom I had started and built that bank carefully over the years. In addition, it was August 1991, which I'm sure you will recognize as the peak of the last credit crisis. It was a typical community bank. We loaned inside our market to customers who had been with us for many years. As the economy weakened in the early 1990s, those customers struggled and the value of their collateral dropped. Neither we nor our customers had caused the crisis, but we still had to face it and deal with it. Throughout those challenging years, we had some successful workouts and some that were not so successful. Sound familiar? So, I have experienced banking crises from different perspectives throughout my career. Having dealt with the last banking crisis as a banker, I understand the stress many of you and many of your customers feel today. I also know firsthand the importance of recognizing problems early and tackling them head on. Having experienced the more recent crisis at the Fed, I can assure you that this environment is every bit as stressful for your regulators. Even in the best of times, lending involves judgment. So does bank supervision. During times of stress, the judgment calls get more difficult and more critical. An economy and its financial system are inextricably intertwined and bank supervisors are charged with maintaining the safety and soundness of the system without impeding the flow of loans to creditworthy borrowers. The linkages that connect community banks, the communities they serve, and their bank supervisors, are especially interwoven and essential. Now I am happy to report that our bank and, for the most part, our customers pulled through that crisis in the early 1990s. And I continued to lend to many of those same customers for another 15 years. I am pleased to see that you have chosen as the theme for this conference "Solutions for the Changing Environment" as it indicates confidence that you too will continue to thrive and support your communities. For it is critical that you do so: Our economy needs strong community banks that are able to meet the financial needs of their communities and their customers. In my remarks today, I intend to focus on your role as lenders. First, I will discuss commercial real estate, the loan category that for most community banks is causing the most stress and receiving the most attention. Then I would like to talk about credit availability for small businesses, a key customer segment for community banks. Finally, I will offer some thoughts about the role of supervisors in encouraging the flow of loans to creditworthy borrowers. Throughout the discussion, I will focus on recent loan guidance issued by the Federal Reserve along with our fellow banking regulators and the steps we at the Fed are taking to ensure that the policies we set in Washington make it into the field to the examiners you see in your banks. Before I begin, I would like to make one point of clarification: When I reference community bank statistics, I will refer to the segment of banks with less than $10 billion in total assets. Banking and Financial ConditionsWhile conditions in some financial markets have improved markedly in recent months, conditions in the banking sector continue to be weak. The largest banks were modestly profitable during 2009, but community banks as a group reported a loss of $4.1 billion and showed a negative return on assets of 0.17 percent. Community bank losses were driven primarily by large loan loss provision expenses, as well as a decline in net interest margins related in part to a substantial increase in nonperforming assets. There are signs that these problems might be reaching a plateau in some loan categories, but delinquencies and charge-off rates grew steadily last year and the nonperforming assets ratio for community banks is now approaching five percent, a level considerably higher than the previous highs reached in the late 1980s and early 1990s. In addition, although capital ratios at many banks have improved substantially since the start of the crisis, other institutions continue to face serious questions about capital adequacy due to weak loan quality, subpar earnings, and uncertainty about future conditions. Together, these developments have led to an increase in the number of problem banks to the highest level since the early 1990s. The rate of bank failures has accelerated and appears likely to remain elevated for some time. While most banks remain sound, appropriately capitalized, and profitable, this can be difficult to remember in the midst of strained banking conditions and weekly bank failures. The coordinated efforts and initiatives of the Federal Reserve, the U.S. Treasury Department, and other government agencies have contributed to the progress we have achieved in stabilizing the financial markets and the banking system. I think it is important to note that most of these efforts were directed at the system as a whole and were made available to banks of all sizes. For example, in September 2008, when a prominent money market fund "broke the buck" (that is, its net asset value fell below one dollar), the Treasury Department initiated a temporary guarantee program to avert a run on other money market mutual funds. Then, in response to bankers' concerns about the adverse impact that unlimited guarantees for money market funds would have on bank deposits, the Treasury adjusted the guarantee to cover only balances in place on the date the guarantee was issued. That is, funds that were already in the money market mutual fund accounts were guaranteed so they would not run out, but no guarantee was offered for new investments that might cause runs out of depository institutions and into the funds. A few weeks later, the deposit insurance limit was temporarily increased to $250,000, an increase that had long been sought by community banks. In addition, under the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program (TLGP), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) made available unlimited insurance for demand deposits. Later the program was modified to also cover Interest on Lawyers Trust Accounts (IOLTAs) and low-interest Negotiable Order of Withdrawal (NOW) accounts. These initiatives proved tremendously beneficial to community banks and their small business customers during the crisis and have been instrumental in returning some measure of stability to deposit markets. Other efforts to calm markets were also designed to directly assist banks of all sizes. For example, more than three-fourths of the companies that received funds from the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) capital purchase program were, in fact, community banks. In addition, the Debt Guarantee Program put in place by the FDIC under the TLGP has also been available to community banks, helping to support market confidence. And the Federal Reserve's discount window lending as well as the Term Auction Facility, which offered discount window funding through auctions, were available to banks regardless of size and benefited community as well as larger banking organizations. Looking back over the past two years, I have reached the conclusion that these programs, taken as a whole and combined with other steps taken by policymakers and bankers themselves, have had a dramatically positive effect on financial conditions and have brought us far beyond the near panic that we experienced in the latter half of 2008. Importantly, these initiatives were in many cases tailored to ensure that they were available to, and supportive of, community banks. So although I understand that there will be significant additional challenges ahead to improve the condition and performance of community banks, you can take some comfort in knowing that policymakers are aware of the importance of your institutions and are sensitive to the unique challenges that you face. Improving Lending ConditionsAll of these measures have helped foster stability in the financial system. However, banks still have significant delinquencies in their loan portfolios and some small businesses and consumers still report trouble obtaining credit. In addition, although loan balances at the smallest banks--those with total assets of $1 billion or less--in the aggregate fell only modestly during 2009, loans outstanding for all other banks dropped more sharply. Some observers attribute this decline in loans outstanding to overzealous bank examiners, but I believe the causes are numerous and more complicated. Regardless of the cause, the decline is of great concern and we must work together to reverse the trend. As the financial crisis unfolded, the Federal Reserve, in collaboration with the other banking regulators, issued lending guidance on three occasions, stressing the need for balance in the approaches used by bankers to approve loans and by bank examiners in reviewing loans: Commercial Real Estate Loans and WorkoutsThe ongoing deterioration in commercial real estate loans is perhaps of greatest concern for community bankers. These loans make up more than 30 percent of community bank assets and have deteriorated sharply as fundamentals in property markets have weakened. Performance problems have been most striking in construction and development loans, especially for those that finance residential development, but have been significant in other loan segments as well. Altogether, CRE loans seriously delinquent, on nonaccrual status, or held as other real estate owned (OREO)--including all construction loans, loans secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties, and loans secured by multifamily properties--represented nearly eight percent of commercial real estate loans and related OREO at year-end 2009, and almost one-quarter of the total risk-based capital at community banks. Given the risks associated with CRE lending, banking agencies have for the past several years focused on assessing community bank exposures to commercial real estate and pushing institutions to enhance their risk-management processes for this segment of their portfolios. As problems surfaced we recognized that loan restructurings are often in the best interest of both the bank and the borrower and encouraged banks to explore opportunities to work with their borrowers to appropriately restructure problem loans. My recent conversations with bankers have been heavily focused on concerns about loan classification standards. Some of you have told me that you feel that examiners are not always taking a balanced approach to the assessment of commercial real estate loan restructurings. On the other side of the table, I hear from examiners that they feel some banks have been slow to acknowledge declines in commercial real estate project cash flows and collateral values. The new guidance is intended to bridge this apparent gap in perceptions and to promote both prudent commercial real estate loan workouts by banks and balanced and consistent reviews of these loans by the supervisory agencies. The October 2009 CRE guidance includes a number of examples drawn from common loan situations and specifies classification treatment for alternate scenarios that depend on actions taken by the bank and the borrower. As we were finalizing the guidance, I sat down with our supervision staff and went through each of the examples as if we were in a loan closing conference. Based on what was discussed during those conversations and my close reading of the guidance, I think the best way to bridge the gap in perception is through well-documented facts. For example, to support the value of a construction project, the bank would need current information on the project status, including an estimate of the cost to complete. It would also need documentation of the method of realizing value for the completed project. For instance, if the borrower has a take-out permanent loan commitment, the file should include an update on the status of the commitment including any conditions to closing. If the property is under a sales contract, the bank should document the buyers' continued willingness and ability to close. If the bank is relying on other resources of borrowers or guarantors for repayment, it should have global cash flow information to be able to assess their ability to continue to carry the loan until conditions improve. The fact that the loan has a good payment history and is performing is important, but not sufficient to make the case that resources are available to keep it current in the future. Finally, the bank should have either a current appraisal or sufficient current market information to credibly update the assumptions in the most recent appraisal. If market conditions are changing rapidly, "current information" may need to be more up-to-date than is usually the case. Examiners generally are not expected to challenge the underlying valuation assumptions, including discount rates and capitalization rates, used in appraisals or evaluations when these assumptions differ only in a limited way from norms that would generally be associated with the collateral under review. Loans will be classified and valued on the basis of cash flow first, and collateral value second. Assessments of cash flow and valuation will be much more reliable if based on solid documentation. In the absence of documentation, examiners will have to make assumptions. Most loans should fall into one of three categories: This guidance is designed to address workouts and restructurings of problem credit, but the clarification of loan classification standards should also give bankers some confidence in evaluating new loans for both credit risk and risk of classification. Overall, the guidance urges both lenders and examiners to take a balanced approach in assessing borrowers' debt servicing capacity and to make realistic assessments of collateral valuations. Importantly, at the Federal Reserve we have complemented these issuances with training programs for examiners and outreach to the banking industry to underscore the importance of sound lending practices. In January, Federal Reserve staff instituted a System-wide examiner training initiative that will reach Federal Reserve and state examiners all across the United States. Additionally, an interagency training program has been developed specifically for examiners reviewing CRE loans as part of the interagency Shared National Credit Program, which includes the largest commercial real estate loans in the nation. We are working hard to track the progress and effectiveness of this guidance. Before issuing the guidance, Federal Reserve staff surveyed examiners to gain a better understanding of the banks' workout practices. Going forward, the information that we collected will serve as a baseline for assessing the impact of the supervisory guidance. We also are asking examiners to capture, where possible, information on troubled debt restructurings and other types of loan workouts and dispositions as part of the ongoing examination process. In addition, we are exploring the feasibility of more formal statistical approaches for measuring and evaluating the effectiveness of the October 2009 interagency CRE workout and restructuring policy statement. We continue to receive and evaluate comments and feedback from supervised banks and I can assure you we will consider the need for adjustments if feedback suggests they are needed. Small Business LendingNow I would like to turn to small business lending. Small businesses are, in many cases, the most important customer segment for community banks. And because community banks are an important source of credit for small businesses, their challenges and their fates are closely linked. Despite the best efforts of bankers and regulators, we continue to hear of the difficulties experienced by small businesses in obtaining credit. A recent study conducted by the National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB) found that of small employers who attempted to borrow in 2009, about half received all the credit they wanted. But nearly one-quarter received no credit at all. A similar study in 2005 found nearly 90 percent of small employers had most or all their credit needs met and only eight percent obtained no credit. Even though conditions in financial markets have continued to improve in 2010, access to credit remains restricted for many smaller businesses, who largely depend on banks for credit. Risk spreads on small business loans at banks have continued to rise, and the decline in loans outstanding has been stark. A number of factors are contributing to the reduced supply of bank loans. For instance, in response to an increase in the number of delinquent and nonperforming loans, many banks have reduced existing lines of credit sharply and have tightened their standards and terms for new credit. In other cases, banks with capital positions that have been eroded by losses or those with limited access to capital markets may be reducing risk assets to improve their capital positions, especially amid continued uncertainty about the economic outlook and possible future loan losses. A number of government programs intended to increase the supply of credit are currently in place or under consideration and a variety of approaches may be needed to address the different barriers to bank lending. For example, to offset bank concerns about the level of credit risk, increases in the availability of Small Business Administration (SBA) guarantees and streamlining of the SBA application process may be helping to increase bank lending to small businesses. Indeed, in recent testimony before the House Financial Services Committee, the SBA reported significant growth in the number of banks using its programs. If, on the other hand, community bank lending is restricted by concern about capital positions, the Treasury proposal to transfer $30 billion from TARP to establish a Small Business Lending Fund (SBLF) could stimulate lending by providing capital without the perceived stigma or conditions of TARP and at a lower cost to community banks that increase small business lending. If approved, the program would also allow community banks that received capital in the original TARP program to convert to SBLF and lower their interest payments by increasing loans to small businesses, something many are already doing. The reduction in the availability of credit, however, is not the whole story. There is also less demand for credit by sound firms. As businesses reduced inventory levels and capital spending, they tended to pay down debt and build cash positions. Indeed, in the most recent NFIB study, 34 percent of businesses reported lower sales as their biggest problem while only 3 percent cited lack of credit. And while some potential borrowers seek less credit, others are no longer qualified to borrow. Weakened balance sheets, reduced income, falling real estate collateral values, and in some cases, a recent history of payment problems, have made it difficult for some businesses and consumers to qualify for loans, especially under the current stricter standards. Other factors unique to the current financial environment may also be weighing on the ability of small businesses to borrow. A significant fraction of small businesses rely upon personal assets and consumer credit to fund their operations. Thus, small businesses are affected by tight conditions for consumer credit in addition to those for business credit. Many small businesspeople rely on their homes or business real estate to secure their business loans. As collateral values have declined, their borrowing capacity has been reduced. Finally, small business lending often is based on relationships that are solidified over time. Sometimes those relationships are broken as a result of the bank's inability to lend, such as when banks fail or when they reduce lending due to strains or concentrations in their own portfolios. In those circumstances, small businesses may find it quite difficult to establish similar arrangements with a new bank. Improvements in a number of the conditions that depressed lending in 2009, however, lead me to be somewhat optimistic that we will begin to see an increase in bank loans later this year. Economic conditions, the most important determinant of the demand for and availability of small business lending, have improved considerably since the early and middle part of last year. In response, bank attitudes toward lending, including small business lending, may be shifting. In the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey conducted in January, the number of banks that reported having eased credit standards for small business lending over the previous three months about matched the number that reported having tightened lending standards for the first time since before the crisis began, in the summer of 2007. Restoring the Flow of Credit in the EconomyUltimately, the most important step policymakers can take to support community banks and improve credit availability to small businesses, as well as other businesses and households, is to achieve a sustainable economic recovery. Over the course of the past two years, the Federal Reserve has taken aggressive action in response to the financial crisis to help improve financial market conditions and to promote the flow of credit to households and businesses. We have acted on multiple fronts by instituting accommodative monetary policy, expanding existing liquidity programs for depository institutions, and establishing new liquidity facilities to support market functioning. Throughout this period, the Federal Reserve has placed particular emphasis on ensuring that its supervision and examination policies do not inadvertently impede sound lending to businesses, both large and small, and we will continue to do so. Actions taken to stabilize the largest banks during the crisis have received a lot of attention. However, I think it is equally important to note the degree to which banks of all sizes were offered access to the same loan, guarantee, and capital facilities. We should never forget that the objective was to save the system as a whole, not just a handful of large institutions. As attention turns from saving the financial system to strengthening it, any proposed solution must address the assignment of responsibility for regulation and supervision. During the financial crisis, I saw firsthand how important it was that the Fed have a complete view of the financial landscape and how successful was the interaction among the Fed's divisions in crafting solutions to the many different problems we confronted. As of the end of 2009, the Federal Reserve supervised 4,974 top-tier bank holding companies, 844 state member banks and 177 foreign banking organizations operating in the United States. State member banks range from very small community banks to banks with assets of more than $100 billion. Bank holding companies vary similarly in size and now include a number of companies with more of their financial business outside of bank subsidiaries than inside them. I believe that having a window into such varied parts of our financial system is important and that it would be a mistake to focus Fed supervision on only the largest companies. Our strengths as a supervisor include our experience in supervision, knowledge of the markets, and understanding of the economy. And our role in supervision strengthens our performance in other roles. Lending issues have been central to our discussions of monetary policy, at least in my time with the Fed. If you look at the maximum amount reached by each of our lending facilities, we loaned almost $2 trillion in a very short time as we worked to stabilize financial markets. Those loans are now paid down to less than $100 billion. We never could have done that as quickly, as smoothly, or with zero loss without an extensive knowledge of the industry and institutions as well as staff across the country with banking expertise. ConclusionIn summary, the recent financial crisis has underscored the importance of community banking, especially the role you play in providing credit to the local businesses in your community. Even though the environment is challenging and some community banks face significant stress, most community banks are fundamentally sound and will remain so. It is encouraging to see in your conference agenda that you are looking forward to returning to a more stable model of community banking, one focused on prudent underwriting, risk-appropriate pricing, portfolio diversification, and stable deposit funding. At the Federal Reserve we will continue to work to strengthen the economy and to ensure that our supervision and examination policies do not inadvertently impede sound lending by community banks. As we do so, it is important that we hear from you about the economic conditions in your communities and any problems you face in meeting the needs of creditworthy borrowers. I thank you again for the invitation to join you today and look forward to your questions or comments. 1.For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," press release, November 12.Return to text 2.For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Adopts Policy Statement Supporting Prudent Commercial Real Estate (CRE) Loan Workouts," press release, October 30.Return to text 3.For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small Businesses," press release, February 5.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to have the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's role in bank supervision and the actions that we are taking to strengthen our supervisory oversight. The Federal Reserve's Role in SupervisionLike many central banks around the world, the Federal Reserve cooperates with other agencies in regulating and supervising the banking system.1Our specific responsibilities include the oversight of about 5,000 bank holding companies, including the umbrella supervision of large, complex financial firms; the supervision of about 850 banks nationwide that are both state-chartered and members of the Federal Reserve System (state member banks); and the oversight of foreign banking organizations operating in the United States. The Federal Reserve's involvement in regulation and supervision confers two broad sets of benefits to the country.First, because of its wide range of expertise, the Federal Reserve is uniquely suited to supervise large, complex financial organizations and to address both safety and soundness risks and risks to the stability of the financial system as a whole.Second, the Federal Reserve's participation in the oversight of banks of all sizes significantly improves its ability to carry out its central banking functions, including making monetary policy, lending through the discount window, and fostering financial stability.2 The financial crisis has made clear that all financial institutions that are so large and interconnected that their failure could threaten the stability of the financial system and the economy must be subject to strong consolidated supervision. Promoting the safety and soundness of individual banking organizations requires the traditional skills of bank supervisors, such as expertise in examinations of risk-management practices; the Federal Reserve has developed such expertise in its long experience supervising banks of all sizes, including community banks and regional banks. But the supervision of large, complex financial institutions and the analysis of potential risks to the financial system as a whole require not only traditional examination skills, but also a number of other forms of expertise, including macroeconomic analysis and forecasting; insight into sectoral, regional, and global economic developments; knowledge of a range of domestic and international financial markets, including money markets, capital markets, and foreign exchange and derivatives markets; and a close working knowledge of the financial infrastructure, including payment systems and systems for clearing and settlement of financial instruments. In the course of carrying out its central banking duties, the Federal Reserve has developed extensive knowledge and experience in each of these areas critical for effective consolidated supervision. For example, Federal Reserve staff members have expertise in macroeconomic forecasting for the making of monetary policy, which is important for helping to identify economic risks to institutions and markets. In addition, they acquire in-depth market knowledge through daily participation in financial markets to implement monetary policy and to execute financial transactions on behalf of the U.S. Treasury. Similarly, the Federal Reserve's extensive knowledge of payment and settlement systems has been developed through its operation of some of the world's largest such systems, its supervision of key providers of payment and settlement services, and its long-standing leadership in the international Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems. No other agency can, or is likely to be able to, replicate the breadth and depth of relevant expertise that the Federal Reserve brings to the supervision of large, complex banking organizations and the identification and analysis of systemic risks. Even as the Federal Reserve's central banking functions enhance its supervisory expertise, its involvement in supervising banks of all sizes across the country significantly improves the Federal Reserve's ability to effectively carry out its central-bank responsibilities. Perhaps most important, as this crisis has once again demonstrated, the Federal Reserve's ability to identify and address diverse and hard-to-predict threats to financial stability depends critically on the information, expertise, and powers that it has as both a bank supervisor and a central bank. Not only in this crisis, but also in episodes such as the 1987 stock market crash and the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the Federal Reserve's supervisory role was essential for it to contain threats to financial stability.3 The Federal Reserve's making of monetary policy and its management of the discount window also benefit from its supervisory experience.4Notably, the Federal Reserve's role as a supervisor of state member banks of all sizes, including community banks, offers insights about conditions and prospects across the full range of financial institutions, not just the very largest, and provides useful information about the economy and financial conditions throughout the nation. Such information greatly assists in the making of monetary policy. The legislation passed by the House last December would preserve the supervisory authority that the Federal Reserve needs to carry out its central banking functions effectively. Improving the Federal Reserve's Supervision of Banking OrganizationsThe Federal Reserve strongly supports ongoing efforts in the Congress to reform financial regulation and close existing gaps in the regulatory framework.5While we await passage of comprehensive reform legislation, we have been conducting an intensive self-examination of our regulatory and supervisory performance and have been actively implementing improvements. On the regulatory side, we have played a key role in international efforts to ensure that systemically critical financial institutions hold more and higher-quality capital, have enough liquidity to survive highly stressed conditions, and meet demanding standards for company-wide risk management. We have also been taking the lead in addressing flawed compensation practices by issuing proposed guidance to help ensure that compensation structures at banking organizations provide appropriate incentives without encouraging excessive risk-taking.6Less formally, but equally important, since 2005 the Federal Reserve has been leading cooperative efforts by market participants and regulators to strengthen the infrastructure of a number of key markets, including the market for securities repurchase agreements and the markets for credit derivatives and other over-the-counter derivative instruments. To improve both our consolidated supervision and our ability to identify potential risks to the financial system, we have made substantial changes to our supervisory framework. So that we can better understand linkages among firms and markets that have the potential to undermine the stability of the financial system, we have adopted a more explicitly multidisciplinary approach, making use of the Federal Reserve's broad expertise in economics, financial markets, payment systems, and bank supervision to which I alluded earlier. We are also augmenting our traditional supervisory approach that focuses on firm-by-firm examinations with greater use of horizontal reviews that look across a group of firms to identify common sources of risks and best practices for managing those risks. To supplement information from examiners in the field, we are developing an off-site, enhanced quantitative surveillance program for large bank holding companies that will use data analysis and formal modeling to help identify vulnerabilities at both the firm level and for the financial sector as a whole. This analysis will be supported by the collection of more timely, detailed, and consistent data from regulated firms. Many of these changes draw on the successful experience of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP), also known as the banking stress test, which the Federal Reserve led last year. As in the SCAP, representatives of primary and functional supervisors will be fully integrated in the process, participating in the planning and execution of horizontal exams and consolidated supervisory activities. Improvements in the supervisory framework will lead to better outcomes only if day-to-day supervision is well executed, with risks identified early and promptly remediated. Our internal reviews have identified a number of directions for improvement. In the future, to facilitate swifter, more-effective supervisory responses, the oversight and control of our supervisory function will be more centralized, with shared accountability by senior Board and Reserve Bank supervisory staff and active oversight by the Board of Governors. Supervisory concerns will be communicated to firms promptly and at a high level, with more-frequent involvement of senior bank managers and boards of directors and senior Federal Reserve officials. Greater involvement of senior Federal Reserve officials and strong, systematic follow-through will facilitate more vigorous remediation by firms. Where necessary, we will increase the use of formal and informal enforcement actions to ensure prompt and effective remediation of serious issues. In summary, the Federal Reserve's wide range of expertise makes it uniquely suited to supervise large, complex financial institutions and to help identify risks to the financial system as a whole. Moreover, the insights provided by our role in supervising a range of banks, including community banks, significantly increases our effectiveness in making monetary policy and fostering financial stability. While we await enactment of comprehensive financial reform legislation, we have undertaken an intensive self-examination of our regulatory and supervisory performance. We are strengthening regulation and overhauling our supervisory framework to improve consolidated supervision as well as our ability to identify potential threats to the stability of the financial system. And we are taking steps to strengthen the oversight and effectiveness of our supervisory activities. Thank you. I'd be pleased to respond to your questions. 1.In the aftermath of the crisis, the view that the involvement of central banks in bank supervision strongly complements their roles as lender of last resort, guardian of financial stability, and monetary policymaker has received increasing international support. For example, following the problems at Northern Rock in the United Kingdom, the Bank of England was given statutory responsibilities in the area of financial stability, its powers to collect information from banks were augmented, and many have called for it to be given increased supervisory authority. In Germany, plans to shift bank supervisory powers from the financial services regulator to the Bundesbank have received significant attention. In the European Union, a new European Systemic Risk Board is being established under which national central banks and the European Central Bank will play a key role in efforts to protect the financial system from systemic risk. More broadly, in most industrial countries today the central bank has substantial bank supervisory authorities, is responsible for broad financial stability, or both.Return to text 2.See Ben S. Bernanke (2010), letter to Christopher J. Dodd and Richard C. Shelby (with enclosure, "The Public Policy Case for a Role for the Federal Reserve in Bank Supervision and Regulation [880 KB PDF]"), January 13.Return to text 3.For further discussion, see the Bernanke letter to Dodd and Shelby in note 2.Return to text 4.Our ability to monitor key payment and settlement systems also depends critically on our supervisory powers, as several key institutions involved in payments and settlements have state member bank or Edge charters. Without bank supervisory authority, the Federal Reserve would have no ability to examine or regulate such institutions.Return to text 5.Lack of strong consolidated supervision of systemically critical firms not organized as bank holding companies proved to be the most serious regulatory gap. In addition, under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999, the Federal Reserve's consolidated supervision of bank holding companies was both narrowly focused on the safety and soundness of their bank subsidiaries and heavily reliant on functional supervisors of the bank and regulated nonbank subsidiaries of these companies; in turn, the functional supervisors themselves were statutorily focused only on the safety and soundness of the specific entities they regulated. None of the federal regulators had sufficient authority to focus on the systemic risk that large banking organizations posed.Return to text 6.For additional information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Issues Proposed Guidance on Incentive Compensation," press release, October 22. We are currently conducting a horizontal review of compensation practices at the largest firms.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century, Armonk, New York Two years ago this week, Bear Stearns succumbed to severe liquidity stress. It was rescued, and eventually absorbed by JPMorgan Chase, with financing assistance provided by the Federal Reserve. Although it would take another six months before the accumulating stress and uncertainty posed an immediate threat to nearly all of our major financial institutions, it is clear in retrospect that this arranged marriage, and its accompanying dowry of government financing, set off an expansion of the universe of firms perceived as too big to fail. During the financial crisis, government authorities in the United States and elsewhere believed they had only two realistic options in the face of serious distress at a large financial firm. First, they could try to contain systemic risk by stabilizing the firm through capital injections, extraordinary liquidity assistance, a subsidized acquisition by a less vulnerable firm, or some combination of these supports. Second, they could allow the firm to fail and enter generally applicable bankruptcy processes, risking in those times of fear and uncertainty a run on similarly situated firms. The Bear Stearns deal was an example of the first policy option. Lehman Brothers was an example of the second. When its bankruptcy set off a firestorm in the exceedingly dry tinder of financial markets in the fall of 2008, the U.S. government decided that further failures of large, interconnected financial institutions risked bringing down the entire financial system. It responded to the situation with the Troubled Asset Relief Program to provide capital, and the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program to extend debt guarantees, to large financial firms. Indeed, faced with the possibility of a cascading financial crisis, most governments around the world selected the bailout option in most cases. But if the costs of this approach are less dramatic during a crisis, they are no less significant afterward. Entrenching too-big-to-fail status obviously risks imposing significant costs on the taxpayer. It undermines market discipline, competitive equality among financial institutions of different sizes, and normal regulatory and supervisory expectations. The desirability of a third alternative to the Hobson's choice of bailout or disorderly bankruptcy is obvious--hence the prominence during the regulatory reform debate of proposals for a special resolution process that would allow the government to wind down a systemically important firm in an orderly way while still imposing losses on shareholders and creditors. The crisis has also focused attention on the special problems created by the failure of a large, internationally active financial firm. In my remarks I will elaborate on the relationship between resolution regimes and an effective overall system of financial regulation and supervision, both in the international and domestic spheres.1 At the risk of some oversimplification, I would state that relationship as follows: First, an effective domestic resolution process is a necessary complement to supervision that would bring more market discipline into the decisionmaking of large financial firms, their counterparties, and investors. At the same time, even a well-designed resolution mechanism is no substitute for reformed regulatory rules and strengthened supervisory oversight. Second, the high legal and political hurdles to harmonized cross-border resolution processes suggest that, for the foreseeable future, the effectiveness of those processes will largely depend on supervisory requirements and cooperation undertaken before distress appears on the horizon. I would further suggest that the importance of proposed requirements that each large financial firm produce a so-called living will is that this device could better tie the supervisory and resolution processes together. A Resolution Regime for Large, Interconnected FirmsAs compelling as the case for such a process is, the debate around resolution proposals has highlighted the challenge of crafting a workable resolution regime for large, interconnected firms. The basic design problem is that such a regime must advance the goals of both financial stability and market discipline. While these goals are usually complementary, they can at times be competing--especially in periods of high financial stress, when time consistency problems can loom large. In the midst of a crisis, governments fearful of financial upheaval can be tempted to provide assistance to supposedly uninsured creditors, even at the cost of increasing moral hazard in the post-crisis period. Despite the consequent design difficulties, I think there are certain essential features of any special resolution process. First, any new regime should be used only in those rare circumstances where a firm's failure would have serious adverse effects on financial stability. That is, the presumption should be that generally applicable bankruptcy law applies to nonbank financial firms--even large, interconnected ones. One way to help ensure that the regime is invoked only when necessary to protect the public's interest in systemic stability is to use a "multi-key" approach--that is, one that requires the approval of multiple agencies and a determination by each that the high standards governing the use of the special regime have been met. Second, once invoked, the government should have broad authority to wind down the company in an orderly way. This authority should include--among other things--selling assets, liabilities, or business units of the firm; transferring the systemically significant or viable operations of the firm to a new bridge entity that can continue these operations; and repudiating burdensome contracts of the firm, subject to appropriate conditions and compensation. Third, there should be a clear expectation that the shareholders and creditors of the failing firm will bear losses to the fullest extent consistent with preserving financial stability. Shareholders of the firm ultimately are responsible for the organization's management (or, more likely, mismanagement) and are supposed to be in a first-loss position upon failure of the firm. Shareholders, therefore, should pay the price for the firm's failure and should not benefit from a government-managed resolution process. To promote market discipline on the part of the creditors of large, interconnected firms, unsecured creditors of the firms must also bear losses. Here is where the potential conflict of policy goals is obvious. While losses imposed on creditors will increase market discipline in the longer term, the immediate effect could be to provoke a run on other firms with broadly similar positions or business strategies. Thus the extent of these losses and the manner in which they are applied may need to depend on the facts of the individual case. At the very least, however, subordinated debt, or other financial interests that can qualify as regulatory capital, should be fully exposed to losses. Fourth, the ultimate cost of any government assistance provided in the course of the resolution process to prevent severe disruptions to the financial system should be borne by the firm or the financial services industry, not by taxpayers. The scope of financial institutions assessed for these purposes should be appropriately broad, reflecting that a wide range of financial institutions likely would benefit, directly or indirectly, from actions that avoid or mitigate threats to financial stability. However, because the largest and most interconnected firms likely would benefit the most, it seems appropriate that these firms should bear a proportionally larger share of any costs that cannot be recouped from the failing firm itself. To avoid pro-cyclical effects, such assessments should be collected over time. Establishing a resolution regime with these characteristics is, I would suggest, one of the most important financial regulatory reforms for every country that does not already have such a mechanism in place. It would lend substance to the idea that market discipline can be a solid third pillar of financial regulation, along with stronger prudential requirements and improved supervisory oversight. Still, as is implicit in the foregoing discussion, an untested regime will probably not acquire complete credibility until it is actually applied successfully. For this reason, among others, it is important to ensure that other regulatory tools will help compensate for the uncertainties associated with an essentially untested mechanism. International Efforts on Resolution IssuesThe looming or actual failure of a large, internationally active financial firm inevitably complicates the already challenging process of resolution. Mismatches in the amounts and maturities of assets and liabilities held by the firm in the various countries in which it operates can lead host governments to take special action to protect the interests of depositors and creditors. And different insolvency regimes apply to separately incorporated subsidiaries across the world. Some of those regimes may be substantively inconsistent with one another, or may not account for the special characteristics of a large international firm. A natural response, which one can find peppered through various law journals over the years, is to propose an international treaty that would establish and harmonize appropriate insolvency regimes throughout the world. Just to state the proposition is to see the enormous hurdles to its realization. The task of harmonizing divergent legal regimes, and reconciling the principles underlying many of these regimes, would be challenge enough. But an effective international regime would also likely require agreement on how to share the losses and possible special assistance associated with a global firm's insolvency. Despite the good and thorough work being undertaken in both the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee) and the Financial Stability Board, we must acknowledge that satisfyingly clean and comprehensive solutions to the international difficulties occasioned by such insolvencies are not within sight.2It would certainly be useful if jurisdictions could at least broadly synchronize both standard bankruptcy and any special resolution procedures applicable to a failing financial firm. But even this significant advance would not settle many of the nettlesome problems raised by a cross-border insolvency. It thus seems reasonably clear that effective management of these problems will, at least for the foreseeable future, require regulatory coordination and supervisory cooperationbeforea large firm's failure becomes a real possibility. In one sense, this observation reinforces the importance of the international agenda for strengthening capital and liquidity standards. It also counsels continued attention to efforts to ensure that globally active institutions are subject to effective consolidated supervision, and that information-sharing arrangements among home and host country supervisors are well designed and implemented. To this end, the key supervisors and central banks for each of the largest global banks will begin to meet regularly to discuss crisis planning, with particular attention to contingency liquidity planning. The crisis demonstrated that issues around cross-border liquidity support are difficult. Liquidity pressures may arise in unexpected places, time for coordination will be short, and failures in one jurisdiction likely will spread quickly to other jurisdictions. The Basel Committee and the Committee of European Banking Supervisors are each working on definitions of liquid assets, common stress-testing metrics, and structural balance sheet measures. We are actively discussing the appropriate division of responsibility between home and host authorities to provide liquidity support and the related issue of how to approach cross-border branch operations. Some have called into question the traditional assumption that home country authorities will be willing and able to support all of the worldwide operations of a banking group headquartered in its jurisdiction. It is not clear what approach might work better, but there is an obvious need for broad international consistency and careful calibration with other prudential requirements. One of the key issues identified by the Basel Committee's Cross-Border Bank Resolution Group is the complexity and interconnectedness of the largest organizations. Often the complexity is motivated by tax or regulatory factors, rather than a clear business purpose. Given the way these firms are structured and their linkages to key systems and other institutions, resolution of such an organization will carry significant risk of spillovers to other key markets, payments systems, or systemically important institutions. The Cross-Border Bank Resolution Group consequently recommended developing initiatives that would result in simpler, less interconnected organizational structures. Living WillsThis point leads us to one much-discussed idea, that of firm-specific resolution plans--sometimes referred to more colorfully, though not wholly accurately, as living wills. This proposal provides a good opportunity to advance the aim of linking resolution mechanisms to other regulatory tools, both domestically and internationally. In one variant of the idea, each internationally active bank would be required to develop, and potentially to execute, its own resolution plan--literally, to plan for its own demise. Such a requirement could doubtless be helpful to some degree, but it has notable limitations. Most obviously, it is very difficult to predict in advance of a crisis which parts of the firm will be under greatest stress, what geographical regions may be affected most severely, and what the condition in various markets and economies will be, as well as the stability of counterparties and similarly situated institutions. Furthermore, governments may be understandably reluctant to rely too much upon a wind-down plan developed by an internationally active financial firm that so mismanaged itself that it is on the brink of failure, placing other institutions at peril. Finally, management of an institution can be expected to seek to preserve as much value for shareholders as possible in its planning, whereas the supervisors' objective in a crisis is to achieve an orderly resolution, which will often entail winding down or restructuring the insolvent firm in ways that effectively wipe out shareholder interests. The living will requirement could be broadened so as to make it into a potentially very useful supervisory tool for healthy firms, as well as a resource in the event that resolution became necessary. Under this approach, the firm would, in addition to developing a resolution plan, be required to draw up a contingency plan to rescue itself short of failure, identify obstacles to an orderly resolution, and show it can quickly produce the information needed for the supervisor to orchestrate an orderly resolution should the need arise. These plans will need to evolve as the organization's business and economic conditions evolve, and accordingly, the plans will need to become a regular part of normal supervisory processes. A living will of this type could remove some of the uncertainty around a possible resolution. It would force firms and their supervisors to review contingency plans regularly. As part of their ongoing oversight, supervisors could target the areas where a firm's planning falls short of best practices. Focusing on the legal, contractual, and business relationships among the firm's subsidiaries could yield significant benefits for prudential supervision in normal, as well as stressed, times. The various elements of the regulatory system could thus be better integrated by identifying mechanisms and connections for the transmission of risk and liability between affiliates and by identifying relationships that may present an obstacle to the ready sales of businesses, the proceeds from which might allow the firm to avoid failure. Central to the success of a living will as a supervisory tool is the quality of information it would make available in a crisis. Some of the information would be relatively static. A firm would have to inventory all of its legal entities, along with the legal regimes applicable to each one, and map its business lines into legal entities. A firm also would have to document interaffiliate guarantees, funding, hedging, and provision of information technology and other key services. This information would be needed to deal with any crisis, no matter what its specific form. Once the centrality of accurate, comprehensive information is understood, it becomes apparent that a very significant upgrade of management information systems (MIS) may be the only way for the firm to satisfy living will requirements, just as we at the Federal Reserve found when we led the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program--popularly known as the bank stress tests--that improved MIS are needed for ongoing risk management at the institution. Supervisory demands for improved MIS could have another benefit. Just as a homeowner has an incentive to shed belongings to reduce the expense of moving, so a financial firm may have a powerful incentive to simplify its organizational structure and rationalize relationships among its corporate entities to reduce the cost of developing comprehensive MIS that enable an organization to retrieve information in multiple formats across jurisdictions, business lines, and legal entities. Simpler structures can also be encouraged by reemphasizing existing supervisory guidance requiring banking organizations to measure and manage their risks not only on the global, consolidated level, but also on a legal entity basis. Together, the information requirements of living wills and the need to measure and manage risks at the legal entity level can help create the right incentives for firms to simplify their structures without necessarily requiring a supervisor to delve into the details of a banking group's structure. ConclusionAll of this work on resolution, both domestic and international, is important and necessary. But we must be realistic about what it can accomplish. In light of what has happened over the past two years, it is imperative that governments convince markets that they can and will put large financial firms into a resolution process rather than bail out creditors and shareholders. Yet no one can guarantee that future resolutions of systemically important firms will proceed smoothly or predictably. Resolution mechanisms must be understood not as silver bullets, but as critical pieces of a broader agenda directed at systemic risk and the too-big-to-fail problem. 1.The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors.Return to text 2.See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Cross-Border Bank Resolution Group (2009),Report and Recommendations of the Cross-Border Bank Resolution Group(Basel, Switzerland: Basel Committee, September); and Financial Stability Forum (2009),FSF Principles for Cross-Border Cooperation on Crisis Management(Basel, Switzerland: FSF, April). (The Financial Stability Forum subsequently was renamed the Financial Stability Board.) The Basel Committee's Cross-border Resolution Group released its report and recommendations today, and the FSB will present a final report and recommendations to the G-20 in October.Return to text
Donald L. Kohn submitted his intent to resign Monday as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, effective at the expiration of his term as Vice Chairman on June 23, 2010. Kohn, who has been a member of the Board since August 2002 and served as its Vice Chairman since June 2006, submitted his letter to President Obama. "The Federal Reserve and the country owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to Don Kohn for his invaluable contributions over 40 years of public service," Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke said. "Most recently, he brought his deep knowledge, experience, and wisdom to bear in helping to coordinate the Federal Reserve's response to the economic and financial crisis. In addition, Don helped lead the stress tests of major financial institutions; he directed the Board's ongoing efforts to increase the transparency of the Federal Reserve; and he has been leading an international effort within the Bank for International Settlements to help central banks focus on key issues and responses to the crisis. On a personal note, I would like to express my deep appreciation for Don's friendship and counsel during some very difficult times. He will be greatly missed." Dr. Kohn was born in November 1942 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He received a B.A. in economics in 1964 from the College of Wooster and a Ph.D. in economics in 1971 from the University of Michigan. Dr. Kohn is a veteran of the Federal Reserve System. Before becoming a member of the Board, he served on its staff as Adviser to the Board for Monetary Policy (2001-02), Secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee (1987-2002), Director of the Division of Monetary Affairs (1987-2001), and Deputy Staff Director for Monetary and Financial Policy (1983-87). He also held several positions in the Board's Division of Research and Statistics: Associate Director (1981-83), Chief of Capital Markets (1978-81), and Economist (1975-78). Dr. Kohn began his career as a Financial Economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (1970-75). Dr. Kohn has written extensively on issues related to monetary policy and its implementation by the Federal Reserve. He was awarded the Distinguished Achievement Award from The Money Marketeers of New York University (2002), the Distinguished Alumni Award from the College of Wooster (1998), and the Honorary Degree, Doctor of Laws, from the College of Wooster (2006). Dr. Kohn is the Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS), an international central bank panel that monitors and examines broad issues related to financial markets and systems. Dr. Kohn is married and has two adult children and four grandchildren. A copy of his letter is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Anchor Commercial Bank, Juno Beach, Florida, a state chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the State of Florida, Office of Financial Regulation. A copy of the Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Atlantic BancGroup, Inc., Jacksonville Beach, Florida, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among BankTennessee Bancshares, Inc., Collierville, Tennessee, a registered bank holding company, BankTennessee, Collierville, Tennessee, a state chartered member bank, and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Belvedere Capital Partners II LLC, San Francisco, California; Belvedere Capital Fund II LP, San Francisco, California; Socal Bancorporation, San Francisco, California, registered bank holding companies, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Coconut Grove Bank, Miami, Florida, a state chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the State of Florida, Office of Financial Regulation. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among First Chicago Bancorp, a registered bank holding company, First Chicago Bank & Trust, a state chartered member bank, both of Chicago, Illinois, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, Division of Banking. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Florida First City Banks, Fort Walton Beach, Florida, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between FNB Bancorp, Layton, Utah, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Granvalor Holding, Ltd., Tortola, British Virgin Islands, International Bancorp of Miami, Inc., Coral Gables, Florida, both registered bank holding companies, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Heritage Oaks Bancorp, Paso Robles, California, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Idaho Bancorp, a registered bank holding company, Idaho Banking Company, a state chartered member bank, both of Boise, Idaho, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and the State of Idaho Department of Finance. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Northwest Community Bancorp, Inc., Shoreline, Washington, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among NW Services Corporation, Ringgold, Georgia, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the Banking Commissioner of the State of Georgia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Olmsted Holding Corporation, Rochester, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Ravalli County Bankshares, Inc., a registered bank holding company, Ravalli County Bank, a state chartered member bank, both of Hamilton, Montana, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, and the Montana Division of Banking and Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Royal Bancshares of Pennsylvania, Inc., Narberth, Pennsylvania, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among United Security Bancshares, Inc., a registered bank holding company, United Security Bank, a state chartered member bank, both of Fresno, California, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Agreement is attached.