Office of Thrift SupervisionOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencyFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies announced proposed changes today to reporting requirements for savings associations and savings and loan holding companies regulated by the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). The proposed changes include a change from quarterly Thrift Financial Reports to quarterly Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, commonly known as Call Reports. The agencies--the OTS, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Federal Reserve Board--are proposing the changes pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank). Provisions of Dodd-Frank require the transfer of OTS functions to the OCC, the FDIC, the Federal Reserve Board and the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection on July 21, 2011. Benefits of the proposed changes include uniform reporting systems and processes among all FDIC-insured banks and savings institutions. These changes also would make uniform all reporting requirements among all holding companies supervised by the Federal Reserve Board. Also, the agencies would have a common set of reports for monitoring and evaluating financial condition and trends. The proposed changes would: Under the proposals, savings associations and their holding companies would continue their current reporting processes until the effective dates cited above. The agencies are requesting comment on the proposed changes within 60 days of their publication in the Federal Register, which is expected soon. Federal Registernotice: (2011-2780)HTML|PDF Federal Registernotice: (2011-2781)HTML|PDF Federal Registernotice: (2011-2779)HTML|PDF Federal Registernotice: (2011-2782)HTML|PDF
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Ryan, Ranking Member Van Hollen, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to have this opportunity to offer my views on the economic outlook, monetary policy, and issues pertaining to the federal budget. The Economic OutlookThe economic recovery that began in the middle of 2009 appears to have strengthened in the past few months, although the unemployment rate remains high. The initial phase of the recovery, which occurred in the second half of 2009 and in early 2010, was in large part attributable to the stabilization of the financial system, the effects of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, and the strong boost to production from businesses rebuilding their depleted inventories. But economic growth slowed significantly last spring and concerns about the durability of the recovery intensified as the impetus from inventory building and fiscal stimulus diminished and as Europe's fiscal and banking problems roiled global financial markets. More recently, however, we have seen increased evidence that a self-sustaining recovery in consumer and business spending may be taking hold. Notably, real consumer spending rose at an annual rate of more than 4 percent in the fourth quarter. Although strong sales of motor vehicles accounted for a significant portion of this pickup, the recent gains in consumer spending appear reasonably broad based. Business investment in new equipment and software increased robustly throughout much of last year, as firms replaced aging equipment and as the demand for their products and services expanded. Construction remains weak, though, reflecting an overhang of vacant and foreclosed homes and continued poor fundamentals for most types of commercial real estate. Overall, improving household and business confidence, accommodative monetary policy, and more-supportive financial conditions, including an apparently increasing willingness of banks to lend, seem likely to result in a more rapid pace of economic recovery in 2011 than we saw last year. While indicators of spending and production have been encouraging on balance, the job market has improved only slowly. Following the loss of about 8â3/4 million jobs from 2008 through 2009, private-sector employment expanded by a little more than 1 million in 2010. However, this gain was barely sufficient to accommodate the inflow of recent graduates and other new entrants to the labor force and, therefore, not enough to significantly erode the wide margin of slack that remains in our labor market. Notable declines in the unemployment rate in December and January, together with improvement in indicators of job openings and firms' hiring plans, do provide some grounds for optimism on the employment front. Even so, with output growth likely to be moderate for a while and with employers reportedly still reluctant to add to their payrolls, it will be several years before the unemployment rate has returned to a more normal level. Until we see a sustained period of stronger job creation, we cannot consider the recovery to be truly established. On the inflation front, we have recently seen increases in some highly visible prices, notably for gasoline. Indeed, prices of many industrial and agricultural commodities have risen lately, largely as a result of the very strong demand from fast-growing emerging market economies, coupled, in some cases, with constraints on supply. Nonetheless, overall inflation is still quite low and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Over the 12 months ending in December, prices for all the goods and services consumed by households (as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures) increased by only 1.2 percent, down from 2.4 percent over the prior 12 months. To assess underlying trends in inflation, economists also follow several alternative measures of inflation; one such measure is so-called core inflation, which excludes the more volatile food and energy components and therefore can be a better predictor of where overall inflation is headed. Core inflation was only 0.7 percent in 2010, compared with around 2-1/2 percent in 2007, the year before the recession began. Wage growth has slowed as well, with average hourly earnings increasing only 1.7 percent last year. These downward trends in wage and price inflation are not surprising, given the substantial slack in the economy. Monetary PolicyAlthough the growth rate of economic activity appears likely to pick up this year, the unemployment rate probably will remain elevated for some time. In addition, inflation is expected to persist below the levels that Federal Reserve policymakers have judged to be consistent over the longer term with our statutory mandate to foster maximum employment and price stability. Under such conditions, the Federal Reserve would typically ease monetary policy by reducing its target for the federal funds rate. However, the target range for the federal funds rate has been near zero since December 2008, leaving essentially no room for further reductions. As a consequence, since then we have been using alternative tools to provide additional monetary accommodation. In particular, over the past two years the Federal Reserve has further eased monetary conditions by purchasing longer-term securities--specifically, Treasury, agency, and agency mortgage-backed securities--on the open market. These purchases are settled through the banking system, with the result that depository institutions now hold a very high level of reserve balances with the Federal Reserve. Although large-scale purchases of longer-term securities are a different monetary policy tool than the more familiar approach of targeting the federal funds rate, the two types of policies affect the economy in similar ways. Conventional monetary policy easing works by lowering market expectations for the future path of short-term interest rates, which, in turn, reduces the current level of longer-term interest rates and contributes to an easing in broader financial conditions. These changes, by reducing borrowing costs and raising asset prices, bolster household and business spending and thus increase economic activity. By comparison, the Federal Reserve's purchases of longer-term securities do not affect very short-term interest rates, which remain close to zero, but instead put downward pressure directly on longer-term interest rates. By easing conditions in credit and financial markets, these actions encourage spending by households and businesses through essentially the same channels as conventional monetary policy, thereby strengthening the economic recovery. Indeed, a wide range of market indicators suggest that the Federal Reserve's securities purchases have been effective at easing financial conditions, lending credence to the view that these actions are providing significant support to job creation and economic growth.1 My colleagues and I have said that we will review the asset purchase program regularly in light of incoming information and will adjust it as needed to promote maximum employment and stable prices. In particular, we remain unwaveringly committed to price stability, and we are confident that we have the tools to be able to smoothly and effectively exit from the current highly accommodative policy stance at the appropriate time. Our ability to pay interest on reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve Banks will allow us to put upward pressure on short-term market interest rates and thus to tighten monetary policy when needed, even if bank reserves remain high. Moreover, we have developed additional tools that will allow us to drain or immobilize bank reserves as needed to facilitate the smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation when conditions warrant. If necessary, we could also tighten policy by redeeming or selling securities. As I am appearing before the Budget Committee, it is worth emphasizing that the Fed's purchases of longer-term securities are not comparable to ordinary government spending. In executing these transactions, the Federal Reserve acquires financial assets, not goods and services; thus, these purchases do not add to the government's deficit or debt. Ultimately, at the appropriate time, the Federal Reserve will normalize its balance sheet by selling these assets back into the market or by allowing them to run off. In the interim, the interest that the Federal Reserve earns from its securities holdings adds to the Fed's remittances to the Treasury; in 2009 and 2010, those remittances totaled about $125 billion. Fiscal PolicyFiscal policymakers also face significant challenges. Our nation's fiscal position has deteriorated appreciably since the onset of the financial crisis and the recession. To a significant extent, this deterioration is the result of the effects of the weak economy on revenues and outlays, along with the actions that the Administration and the Congress took to ease the recession and steady financial markets. However, even after economic and financial conditions return to normal, the federal budget will remain on an unsustainable path, with the budget gap becoming increasingly large over time, unless the Congress enacts significant changes in fiscal programs. For example, under plausible assumptions about how fiscal policies might evolve in the absence of major legislative changes, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects the deficit to fall from its current level of about 9 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) to 5 percent of GDP by 2015, but then to rise to about 6-1/2 percent of GDP by the end of the decade.2In subsequent years, the budget situation is projected to deteriorate even more rapidly, with federal debt held by the public reaching almost 90 percent of GDP by 2020 and 150 percent by 2030, up from about 60 percent at the end of fiscal year 2010. The long-term fiscal challenges confronting the nation are especially daunting because they are mostly the product of powerful underlying trends, not short-term or temporary factors. The two most important driving forces behind the budget deficit are the aging of the population and rapidly rising health-care costs. Indeed, the CBO projects that federal spending for health-care programs will roughly double as a percentage of GDP over the next 25 years.3The ability to control health-care spending, while still providing high-quality care to those who need it, will be critical for bringing the federal budget onto a sustainable path. The CBO's long-term budget projections, by design, do not account for the likely adverse economic effects of such high debt and deficits. But if government debt and deficits were actually to grow at the pace envisioned, the economic and financial effects would be severe. Sustained high rates of government borrowing would both drain funds away from private investment and increase our debt to foreigners, with adverse long-run effects on U.S. output, incomes, and standards of living. Moreover, diminishing investor confidence that deficits will be brought under control would ultimately lead to sharply rising interest rates on government debt and, potentially, to broader financial turmoil. In a vicious circle, high and rising interest rates would cause debt-service payments on the federal debt to grow even faster, resulting in further increases in the debt-to-GDP ratio and making fiscal adjustment all the more difficult. In thinking about achieving fiscal sustainability, it is useful to apply the concept of the primary budget deficit, which is the government budget deficit excluding interest payments on the national debt. To stabilize the ratio of federal debt to the GDP--a useful benchmark for assessing fiscal sustainability--the primary budget deficit must be reduced to zero.4Under the CBO projection that I noted earlier, the primary budget deficit is expected to be 2 percent of GDP in 2015 and then rise to almost 3 percent of GDP in 2020 and 6 percent of GDP in 2030. These projections provide a gauge of the adjustments that will be necessary to attain fiscal sustainability. To put the budget on a sustainable trajectory, policy actions--either reductions in spending, increases in revenues, or some combination of the two--will have to be taken to eventually close these primary budget gaps. By definition, the unsustainable trajectories of deficits and debt that the CBO outlines cannot actually happen, because creditors would never be willing to lend to a government with debt, relative to national income, that is rising without limit. One way or the other, fiscal adjustments sufficient to stabilize the federal budget must occur at some point. The question is whether these adjustments will take place through a careful and deliberative process that weighs priorities and gives people adequate time to adjust to changes in government programs or tax policies, or whether the needed fiscal adjustments will come as a rapid and painful response to a looming or actual fiscal crisis. Acting now to develop a credible program to reduce future deficits would not only enhance economic growth and stability in the long run, but could also yield substantial near-term benefits in terms of lower long-term interest rates and increased consumer and business confidence. Plans recently put forward by the President's National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform and other prominent groups provide useful starting points for a much-needed national conversation. Although these proposals differ on many details, they demonstrate that realistic solutions to our fiscal problems do exist. Of course, economic growth is affected not only by the levels of taxes and spending, but also by their composition and structure. I hope that, in addressing our long-term fiscal challenges, the Congress and the Administration will undertake reforms to the government's tax policies and spending priorities that serve not only to reduce the deficit, but also to enhance the long-term growth potential of our economy--for example, by reducing disincentives to work and to save, by encouraging investment in the skills of our workforce as well as new machinery and equipment, by promoting research and development, and by providing necessary public infrastructure. Our nation cannot reasonably expect to grow its way out of our fiscal imbalances, but a more productive economy will ease the tradeoffs that we face. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 1.For example, in August 2010 we announced our policy of reinvesting principal payments on agency debt and agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury securities and signaled that we were considering additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities. Since then, equity prices have risen significantly, volatility in the equity market has fallen, corporate bond spreads have narrowed, and inflation compensation as measured in the market for inflation-indexed securities has risen from low to more normal levels. Yields on 5- to 10-year Treasury securities initially declined markedly as markets priced in prospective Fed purchases; these yields subsequently rose, however, as investors became more optimistic about economic growth and as traders scaled back their expectations of future securities purchases. All of these developments are what one would expect to see when monetary policy becomes more accommodative, whether through conventional or less conventional means. Interestingly, these developments are also remarkably similar to those that occurred during the earlier episode of policy easing, notably in the months following our March 2009 announcement of a significant expansion in securities purchases.Return to text 2.This alternative fiscal policy scenario, which assumes, among other things, that most of the tax cuts enacted in 2001 and 2003 are made permanent and that discretionary fiscal outlays rise at the same rate as gross domestic product, is presented in Congressional Budget Office (2010),The Long-Term Budget Outlook(Washington: CBO, June (revised August)).Return to text 3.See the two long-term scenarios for mandatory federal spending on health care shown in figure 2-3, p. 39, in CBO,The Long-Term Budget Outlook, in note 2.Return to text 4.This result requires that the nominal rate of interest paid on government debt equals the rate of growth of nominal GDP, a condition that might plausibly be expected to hold over time. If the interest rate on government debt is higher than the growth rate of nominal GDP, as might happen if creditors become wary of lending, then a primary budget surplus rather than primary balance would be needed to stabilize the ratio of debt to GDP.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify about the Federal Reserve's implementation of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act). The Dodd-Frank Act addresses critical gaps and weaknesses in the U.S. regulatory framework, many of which were revealed by the recent financial crisis. The Federal Reserve is committed to working with the other U.S financial regulatory agencies to implement the act effectively and expeditiously. We are also cooperating with our international counterparts to further strengthen financial regulation, to ensure a level playing field across countries, and to enhance international supervisory cooperation. And we have revamped the supervisory function at the Federal Reserve to allow us to better meet the objectives of the act. The act gives the Federal Reserve important responsibilities both to make rules to implement the law and to apply the new rules. In particular, the act requires the Federal Reserve to complete more than 50 rulemakings and sets of formal guidelines, as well as a number of studies and reports. We have also been assigned formal responsibilities to consult and collaborate with other agencies on a substantial number of additional rules, provisions, and studies. So that we meet our obligations on time, we are drawing on expertise and resources from across the Federal Reserve System in banking supervision, economic research, financial markets, consumer protection, payments, and legal analysis. In all, more than 300 members of the Federal Reserve staff are working on Dodd-Frank implementation projects. We have created a senior staff position to coordinate our efforts and have developed project-reporting and tracking tools to facilitate management and oversight of all of our implementation responsibilities. We have made considerable progress in carrying out our assigned responsibilities. We have been providing significant support to the Financial Stability Oversight Council, of which the Federal Reserve is a member. We are assisting the council in designing its systemic risk monitoring and evaluation process and in developing its analytical framework and procedures for identifying systemically important nonbank firms and financial market utilities. We also are helping the new Office of Financial Research at the Treasury Department develop potential data reporting standards to support the council's systemic risk monitoring and evaluation duties. We contributed significantly to the council's recent studies--one on the Volcker rule's restrictions on banking entities' proprietary trading and private fund activities and a second one on the act's financial-sector concentration limit. And we are now developing for public comment the necessary rules to implement these important restrictions and limits. Last week, the Board adopted a final rule to ensure that activities prohibited by the Volcker rule are divested or terminated in the time period required by the act. We also have been moving forward rapidly in other areas. Last fall, we issued a study on the potential effect of the act's credit risk retention requirements on securitization markets, as well as an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on the use of credit ratings in the regulations of the federal banking agencies. In addition, in December, the Board and the other federal banking agencies requested comment on a proposed rule that would implement the capital floors required by the Collins Amendment. In December, we also requested comment on proposed rules that would establish standards for debit card interchange fees and implement the act's prohibition on network exclusivity arrangements and routing restrictions. In January, the Board, together with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), provided the Congress a comprehensive report on the agencies' progress and plans relating to the transfer of the supervisory authority of the OTS for thrifts and thrift holding companies. In addition, as provided by the act, we and the Federal Reserve Banks each established offices to consolidate and build on our existing equal opportunity programs to promote diversity in management, employment, and business activities. We continue to work closely and cooperatively with other agencies to develop joint rules to implement the credit risk retention requirements for securitizations, resolution plans (or "living wills") for large bank holding companies and council-designated nonbank firms, and capital and margin requirements for swap dealers and major swap participants. We are consulting with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) on a variety of rules to enhance the safety and efficiency of the derivatives markets, including rules that would require most standardized derivatives to be centrally traded and cleared, require the registration and prudential regulation of swap dealers and major swap participants, and improve the transparency and reporting of derivatives transactions. We also are coordinating with the SEC and the CFTC on the agencies' respective rulemakings on risk-management standards for financial market utilities, and we are working with market regulators and central banks in other countries to update the international standards for these types of utilities. The transfer of the Federal Reserve's consumer protection responsibilities specified in the act to the new Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (CFPB) is well under way. A team at the Board, headed by Governor Duke, is working closely with the staff at the CFPB and at the Treasury to facilitate the transition. We have provided technical assistance as well as staff members to the CFPB to assist it in setting up its functions. We have finalized funding agreements and provided initial funding to the CFPB. Moreover, we have made substantial progress toward a framework for transferring Federal Reserve staff members to the CFPB and integrating CFPB employees into the relevant Federal Reserve benefit programs. One of the Federal Reserve's most important Dodd-Frank implementation projects is to develop more-stringent prudential standards for all large banking organizations and nonbank firms designated by the council. Besides capital, liquidity, and resolution plans, these standards will include Federal Reserve- and firm-conducted stress tests, new counterparty credit limits, and risk-management requirements. We are working to produce a well-integrated set of rules that will significantly strengthen the prudential framework for large, complex financial firms and the financial system. Complementing these efforts under Dodd-Frank, the Federal Reserve has been working for some time with other regulatory agencies and central banks around the world to design and implement a stronger set of prudential requirements for internationally active banking firms. These efforts resulted in the adoption in the summer of 2009 of more-stringent regulatory capital standards for trading activities and securitization exposures. And, of course, it also includes the agreements reached in the past couple of months on the major elements of the new Basel III prudential framework for globally active banks. Basel III should make the financial system more stable and reduce the likelihood of future financial crises by requiring these banks to hold more and better-quality capital and more-robust liquidity buffers. We are committed to adopting the Basel III framework in a timely manner. In December 2010, we requested comment with the other U.S. banking agencies on proposed rules that would implement the 2009 trading book reforms, and we are already working to incorporate other aspects of the Basel III framework into U.S. regulations. To be effective, regulation must be supported by strong supervision. The act expands the supervisory responsibilities of the Federal Reserve to include thrift holding companies and nonbank financial firms that the council designates as systemically important, along with certain payment, clearing, and settlement utilities that are similarly designated. Reflecting the expansion of our supervisory responsibilities, we are working to ensure that we have the necessary resources and expertise to oversee a broader range of financial firms and business models. The act also requires supervisors to take a macroprudential approach; that is, the Federal Reserve and other financial regulatory agencies are expected to supervise financial institutions and critical infrastructures with an eye toward not only the safety and soundness of each individual firm, but also taking into account risks to overall financial stability. We believe that a successful macroprudential approach to supervision requires both a multidisciplinary and wide-ranging perspective. Our experience in 2009 with the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (popularly known as the bank stress tests) demonstrated the feasibility and benefits of employing such a perspective. Building on that experience and other lessons learned from the recent financial crisis, we have reoriented our supervision of the largest, most complex banking firms to include greater use of horizontal, or cross-firm, evaluations of the practices and portfolios of firms, improved quantitative surveillance mechanisms, and better use of the broad range of skills of the Federal Reserve staff. And we have created a new Office of Financial Stability within the Federal Reserve, which will monitor financial developments across a range of markets and firms and coordinate with the council and with other agencies to strengthen systemic oversight. The Federal Reserve is committed to its long-standing practice of ensuring that all of its rulemakings are conducted in a fair, open, and transparent manner. Accordingly, we are disclosing on our public website summaries of all communications with members of the public--including banks, trade associations, consumer groups, and academics--regarding matters subject to a proposed or potential future rulemaking under the act. We also have implemented measures within the act to enhance the Federal Reserve's transparency. In December, we publicly released detailed information regarding individual transactions conducted between December 1, 2007, and July 20, 2010, across a wide range of Federal Reserve credit and liquidity programs, and we are developing the necessary processes to disclose information concerning transactions conducted after July 20, 2010, on a delayed basis as provided in the act. To conclude, the Dodd-Frank Act is a major step forward for financial regulation in the United States. The Federal Reserve will work closely with our fellow regulators, the Congress, and the Administration to ensure that the law is implemented expeditiously and in a manner that best protects the stability of our financial system and our economy.
The Federal Reserve System in February will conduct its Survey of Finance Companies as part of an effort to paint a complete and continuing picture of the sector in the aftermath of the financial crisis. "As recent events have made very clear, the availability of credit to consumers and businesses is critical to the efficient functioning of our economy," Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke said in a letter to prospective survey participants. The survey results will further the understanding of the structure of the finance company industry, he noted. The assets and liabilities of finance companies--non-depository companies that provide financing to consumers or businesses--have been surveyed by the Federal Reserve at roughly five-year intervals since 1955. The data collected provide a benchmark for the System's monthly report on the outstanding accounts receivable of finance companies (presented in the Federal Reserve's Finance Companies statistical release) and provide a comprehensive update on these companies' sources of funds. This information in turn becomes an important input to the estimates of total consumer credit (presented in the Federal Reserve's Consumer Credit statistical release) and the U.S. flow of funds accounts. The attached letter from Chairman Bernanke was sent to approximately 2,500 companies urging their participation in the survey. Results of the Survey of Finance Companies will appear in an upcomingFederal Reserve Bulletin.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Cokato Bancshares, Inc. (42 KB PDF), Cokato, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated January 25, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: American Bancorporation of Minnesota, Inc., Baxter, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated February 16, 2011 Eastern Virginia Bankshares, Inc. and EVB, both of Tappahannock, VirginiaWritten Agreement dated February 17, 2011 Marquette Financial Companies, Minneapolis, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated February 17, 2011 National Bancorp, Inc., Schaumburg, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated February 17, 2011
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Bank of Whitman, Colfax, WashingtonPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated February 9, 2011 Idaho Banking Company, Boise, IdahoPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated February 9, 2011 Market Bancorporation, Inc., Elk New Market, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated February 10, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Community Banks of Colorado (46 KB PDF), Greenwood Village, ColoradoPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated February 8, 2011 Financial Services of St. Croix Falls, Inc. (47 KB PDF), St. Croix Falls, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated February 7, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: BankVest, Inc., Castle Rock, Colorado (53 KB PDF)Written Agreement dated February 2, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board announced Wednesday that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, March 10. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace Level, in the Board's Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is open to the public. For security purposes, anyone planning to attend the meeting should register no later than Tuesday, March 8, by completing the form foundonline. Attendees must present photo identification to enter the building and should allow sufficient time for security processing. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Reports by committees and other matters initiated by Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
On February 7, 2011, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $5 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were pro-rated at 35.53 percent. Resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 except that all awards below $10,000 were rounded up to $10,000. The awarded deposits will settle on February 10, 2011, and will mature on March 10, 2011. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded deposits.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) and the president and vice president of the council for 2011. CDIAC will provide input to the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues. Members were selected from representatives of banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on newly created local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils will serve on the CDIAC, which will meet twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. The Board announced in October that it was forming the CDIAC to replace the Thrift Institutions Advisory Council. Barrie G. Christman, chairman of Principal Bank in Des Moines, Iowa, will serve as president of CDIAC in 2011, and Howard T. Boyle, president and chief executive officer of Home Savings Bank in Kent, Ohio, will serve as vice president. The other members of the CDIAC are: William T. StapletonPresident and Chief Executive OfficerNorthampton Co-Operative BankNorthampton, Mass. Peter G. HumphreyPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFive Star Bank and Financial Institutions, Inc.Warsaw, N.Y. Richard J. GreenChief Executive OfficerFirstrust BankConshohocken, Pa. Charles MajorsChairman and Chief Executive OfficerAmerican National BankDanville, Va. Claire W. TuckerPresident and Chief Executive OfficerCapStar BankNashville, Tenn. Dennis M. TerryPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFirst Clover Leaf BankEdwardsville, Ill. Peter J. JohnsonPresident and Chief Executive OfficerAmerican Federal Savings BankHelena, Mont. Michael KloiberPresident and Chief Executive OfficerTinker Federal Credit UnionTinker Air Force Base, Okla. Randy M. SmithPresident and Chief Executive OfficerRandolph-Brooks Federal Credit UnionUniversal City, Texas Kay M. HovelandPresident and Chief Executive OfficerKaiser Federal Bank and K-Fed BancorpCovina, Calif.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it does not expect to finalize three pending rulemakings under Regulation Z, which implements the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), prior to the transfer of authority for such rulemakings to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). The proposed rules were published as part of the Board's comprehensive review of its mortgage lending regulations under TILA. The first phase of the review consisted of two proposals issued in August 2009, which would have reformed the consumer disclosures under TILA for closed-end mortgage loans and home equity lines of credit (Docket Nos. R-1366 and R-1367). The third proposal was issued in September 2010 (Docket No. R-1390). Among other things, the September 2010 proposal included changes to the disclosures consumers receive to explain their right to rescind certain loans and would have clarified the responsibilities of the creditor if a consumer exercises this rescission right. The September 2010 proposal also included changes to the disclosures for reverse mortgages, proposed new disclosures for loan modifications, restrictions on certain advertising practices and sales practices for reverse mortgages, and changes to the disclosure obligations of loan servicers. In response to the three proposals, the Board received more than 5,000 comments expressing divergent views on many substantive and technical issues. General rulemaking authority for TILA is scheduled to transfer to the CFPB in July 2011. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act also requires that the CFPB issue a proposal within 18 months after the designated transfer date to combine, in a single form, the mortgage disclosures required by TILA and the disclosures required by the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA). In light of that mandate, and the upcoming transfer date, the Board has carefully evaluated whether there would be public benefit in proceeding with the rulemakings initiated with the Board's August 2009 and September 2010 proposals at this time. Because the Board's 2009 and 2010 TILA proposals would substantially revise the disclosures for mortgage transactions, any new disclosures adopted by the Board would be subject to the CFPB's further revision in carrying out its mandate to combine the TILA and RESPA disclosures. In addition, a combined TILA-RESPA disclosure rule could well be proposed by the CFPB before any new disclosure requirements issued by the Board could be fully implemented. For these reasons, the Board has determined that proceeding with the 2009 and 2010 proposals would not be in the public interest. Although there are specific provisions of these Board proposals that would not be affected by the CFPB's development of joint TILA-RESPA disclosures, adopting those portions of the Board's proposals in a piecemeal fashion would be of limited benefit, and the issuance of multiple rules with different implementation periods would create compliance difficulties. Accordingly, the Board does not expect to finalize the August 2009 and September 2010 proposals prior to the July 2011 date for transfer of rulemaking authority to the CFPB.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday issued aSpanish version of the 2010 Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council'sBank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering Examination Manual(PDF). The Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, developed the Spanish version to make the regulatory expectations regarding Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering compliance programs accessible to a wider group of people. The manual provides current and consistent guidance on risk-based policies, procedures, and processes for banking organizations to comply with the Bank Secrecy Act and safeguard operations from money laundering and terrorist financing.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday issued a final rule and requested public comment on a second rule under Regulation Z to revise the escrow account requirements for certain home mortgage loans. The revisions to the regulation, which implements the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), are being made pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The final rule implements a provision of the Dodd-Frank Act that increases the annual percentage rate (APR) threshold used to determine whether a mortgage lender is required to establish an escrow account for property taxes and insurance for first-lien, "jumbo" mortgage loans. Jumbo loans are loans exceeding the conforming loan-size limit for purchase by Freddie Mac, as specified by the legislation. In July 2008, the Board issued final rules requiring creditors to establish escrow accounts for first-lien higher-priced mortgage loans. A first-lien mortgage is considered a higher-priced mortgage loan if its APR is 1.5 percentage points or more above the current average prime offer rate. Under the final rule being issued today, the escrow requirement will apply to first-lien jumbo loans only if the loan's APR is 2.5 percentage points or more above the average prime offer rate. The APR threshold for non-jumbo loans remains unchanged. The final rule is effective for covered loans for which the creditor receives an application on or after April 1, 2011. The Board is also proposing a rule that would expand the minimum period for mandatory escrow accounts for first-lien, higher-priced mortgage loans from one to five years, and longer under certain circumstances, such as when the loan is delinquent or in default. The proposed rule would provide an exemption from the escrow requirement for certain creditors that operate in "rural or underserved" counties, as authorized by the legislation. The proposal also would implement new disclosure requirements contained in the Dodd-Frank Act. Disclosures would be required at least three business days before consummation of a mortgage loan to explain, as applicable, how the escrow account works or the effects of not having an escrow account if one is not being established. The proposed rule also would require consumers to receive disclosures three days before an escrow account is closed. The Board is soliciting comment on the proposed rule for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. The Board's notices for the final rule and the proposed rule are attached. Federal Registernotice, Final Rule -- Regulation Z:HTML|73 KB PDF Federal Registernotice, Proposed Rule -- Regulation Z:HTML|1.65 MB PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of a final rule to implement the provisions of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act that give banking firms a period of time to conform their activities and investments to the prohibitions and restrictions of the so-called Volcker Rule. The Volcker Rule generally prohibits banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading in securities, derivatives, or certain other financial instruments and from investing in, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with a hedge fund or private equity fund. The statute generally provides banking entities two years to bring their activities and investments into compliance and allows the Board to extend this conformance period under certain conditions. The Dodd-Frank Act requires that the Board issue rules implementing the Volcker Rule's conformance period. In developing the rule, the Board consulted with the Department of the Treasury, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. The final rule is substantially similar to the proposal published in November. The final rule is effective April 1, 2011. Federal Registernotice:HTML|103 KB PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday requested comment on a proposed rule that implements two provisions of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act related to the designation by the Financial Stability Oversight Council of systemically important nonbank financial companies for consolidated supervision by the Board. First, the proposed rule establishes the requirements for determining if a company is "predominantly engaged in financial activities." Under the Dodd-Frank Act, a company generally can be designated by the Council only if 85 percent or more of the company's revenues or assets are related to activities that have been determined to be financial in nature under the Bank Holding Company Act. Second, the proposed rule defines the terms "significant nonbank financial company" and "significant bank holding company." Among the factors the Council must consider in determining whether to designate a nonbank financial company for supervision by the Board is the extent and nature of the company's transactions and relationships with other "significant" nonbank financial companies and "significant" bank holding companies. Under the proposal, a firm would be considered "significant" if it has $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets or had been designated by the Council as systemically important. Comments on the proposal must be submitted by March 30, 2011. Submit comment|View comments Federal Registernotice:HTML|93 KB PDF
On Monday, February 7, 2011 the Federal Reserve will offer $5 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of theTerm Deposit Facility. Description of Offering and Competitive Auction Parameters Competitive bids submitted at the stop-out rate will be pro-rated and will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. Non-Competitive bids are allowed in this auction. All non-competitive bids will be automatically awarded in full at the stop-out rate of the competitive auction. The minimum amount for a non-competitive bid is $10,000; the maximum amount is $5,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. Non-Competitive bids must be submitted between 10:00 a.m. ET and 2:00 p.m. ET on the auction date. Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by accessing theTerm Deposit Facility applicationbetween the opening time and the closing time on the auction date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on theBoard of Governors' websiteat approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, results will be posted on the Term Deposit Facility Resource Center page of theCentral Bank Central website. Participant awards will be posted to the Term Deposit Facility application at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date, and participants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the University of North Carolina Kenan-Flagler Dean's Speaker Series, Chapel Hill, North Carolina It is great to be back at the University of North Carolina. And I am most honored to take part in the Kenan-Flagler Business School's Dean's Speaker Series. I am a proud graduate of UNC-Chapel Hill. However, my area of study was not what most would consider a logical first step for someone who would one day become a central banker. I was an aspiring actress, and spent most of my time across campus at Playmaker Theater earning a degree in dramatic art. Tonight I have been asked to share with you some of the memorable experiences I have had since I was last in a Chapel Hill classroom--some of the amazing opportunities that shaped my journey from Carolina Playmaker to Federal Reserve Governor. I'll talk a bit about banking and the important role lending plays in the economy. I'll describe how my banking career led me to a seat on the Federal Reserve Board and how that unique perspective helped me add value after I arrived there. I will then explain some of the actions taken by the central bank at a time of extraordinary financial uncertainty, and I'll describe some of the attributes that make the Federal Reserve an institution like no other. I'll end with a few thoughts that might resonate with the students in the audience as they conclude their studies and prepare to join the workforce. Bye, Bye Broadway, Hello BoardroomI chose a career in banking for one simple reason: I needed a job. Regardless of economic conditions, the acting profession has an unemployment rate of about 95 percent--or so it seemed to me at the time. So I looked for something I could do almost anywhere and with hours that would leave plenty of time to pursue my dream. I found a job as a part-time drive-through teller. Later when I needed a full-time job, I went to work in a start-up bank. And even though I didn't start out to be a banker, I found a career in that little bank. The president of the bank was an old-fashioned community banker and a natural teacher. He taught me everything he knew about banking, and that was plenty. Fifteen years later, when he died suddenly of a massive heart attack, I had learned enough to take his place as chief executive officer. My banking education began with him as my mentor and with plenty of on-the-job training. Because the bank was just starting up, there were only 11 employees. With lots of work to be done and not many people to do it, I was able to try my hand at nearly every job at the bank and to see the results of every action that was taken. One of those early jobs was reconciling the bank's account at the Federal Reserve and calculating the bank's reserve position. Today, I spend a lot of my time thinking about the collective reserves held by all banks and how those reserves impact our economy. My early experiences with making reserve decisions for a tiny community bank makes it much easier to connect the dots between Federal Reserve actions to add or withdraw reserves, bankers' decisions to manage their reserve accounts, and the resulting impact on interest rates, which in turn influence economic activity. The banking industry has a tradition of teaching basic concepts of bank management through in-house or industry-sponsored banking schools. Once I realized that my talent for banking was much stronger than my natural acting ability, I started going to banking schools to learn about bank investments, lending, and bank management. And I earned a masters in business administration while going to school at night. I soon began teaching bank management in the same schools I had attended earlier. One of the best teaching tools I discovered was bank simulation. I worked with a number of models, helped design a few of them, and ran several hundred simulation exercises over the years. As issues have developed throughout the financial crisis and the recovery, I have had more than a few occasions to be grateful for the deep understanding of how banks and bankers react to various external conditions that I gained from all those simulations. I guess you could say that, though I was the teacher, the person who learned the most from those simulations was me. And I have discovered that the Federal Reserve uses its own models of the economy to simulate outcomes and create economic forecasts under a variety of assumptions. Much of my time as a community banker was spent lending to small businesses. In many banks today, small business lending is an automated process that relies on computers to analyze data and determine a borrower's creditworthiness. For me, the process was personal. It involved sitting eyeball to eyeball across the table from my customer. More often than not, the customer was someone I knew well, and had been lending to for years. Occasionally, he or she represented the second or even third generation to run the business. Or the business itself was the second or third venture that I had financed for the same borrower. There were financial statements to be gathered and analyzed. Usually it was difficult, if not impossible, to separate the business and personal finances. But understanding the borrower's ability to successfully run a business was just as important as analyzing the numbers. I spent a lot of time talking to business owners about their businesses. In fact, sometimes I thought they came in looking for a sounding board for their ideas as much as they were looking for money. And I couldn't always make the loan. At times, especially during the economic downturn of the early 1990s, I had to deal with problem loans. Some were resolved through restructure and some through foreclosure. Now, as a bank regulator in the middle of a financial crisis, this deep personal understanding of the lending and loan collection process strongly influences my policy views. And I have never lost sight of the importance of those small businesses to local economies or the importance of loan availability to small businesses. From Community Banker to Central BankerI fully expected to complete my career working as a community banker in my hometown. But in early 2007, I received a call asking if I would be interested in serving as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. I was intrigued, flattered, and more than a little intimidated by the prospect. I had interacted with the Fed throughout my banking career and had even served on the Board of Directors of the Richmond Federal Reserve Bank. So I knew a lot about the Federal Reserve. But there was no way that I, or anyone else, could have foreseen the tumultuous events that were about to unfold. The Federal Reserve is the central bank of the United States. The Congress created the Federal Reserve in 1913, after a series of banking panics, "to furnish an elastic currency, to afford a means of rediscounting commercial paper, to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States and for other purposes."1When I joined the Board of Governors in August 2008, the Fed's ability to respond to financial crises was about to be tested as never before. For as long as they have existed, central banks have calmed financial crises by lending to financial institutions against good collateral. Because central banks step in when other sources of funds retreat, central banks acting in this capacity are known as lenders of last resort. But that phrase doesn't mean that central banks make bad loans; nearly all of their loans are to sound borrowers with sound collateral. Banks rely on short-term funding such as overnight interbank loans or customer deposits to make the longer-term loans their customers need. If funding becomes scarce, banks become less willing to extend credit. To maintain the flow of credit to businesses and consumers, the Federal Reserve provides short-term credit to sound depository institutions as needed. To ensure that banks use the facility only as a backup source of funds, Federal Reserve loans are made at an above-market rate. In the Panic of 2008, liquidity needs were not confined to the banking system. The shadow banking system, made up of investment banks, money market funds, finance companies, and investors in a wide range of debt securities, provided a large part of the credit that fueled our economy. When panic set in, it froze lending in banks and non-banks alike and produced funding pressures across a wide range of markets and institutions. The actions taken by the Federal Reserve to fight the crisis were quite traditional in the sense that, for years, central banks have been providing liquidity by lending to financial intermediaries. But they were unconventional in that the concepts had to be adapted to fit markets and lenders that had never been supported by the Federal Reserve before. Now, I didn't live through the banking crises of the distant past or those that might have occurred in other countries. But I can tell you what it was like at the center of the most recent crisis. Funding was drying up for one institution after another and for one market after another. Our efforts to provide liquidity were criticized by some as bailouts for the banks. I can understand how it could seem that way, but I also know that every action the Fed took was directed at improving the economy rather than the well-being of the banks. We had to make many difficult decisions in the darkest days of the crisis. For me, the decisions were made a bit less difficult by several factors. First and foremost was the calm, decisive leadership by Chairman Bernanke, whose lifelong study of economics and economic history provided unique preparation for his own role in history. Almost as important were the hundreds of Fed economists, lawyers, bank supervisors, and market specialists who worked around the clock to craft creative solutions to every financial market challenge. I will never know how many hours it took to develop and implement all of the programs they presented in a series of emergency Board meetings. I do know that they responded to every question and strived to mitigate every risk that was identified. And while the strain was evident in their tired eyes, the collegiality and intellectual rigor that I have come to know as a hallmark of the Federal Reserve never wavered. Finally, for me, was the knowledge of all those small businesses that depended on credit to run their businesses. The Fed provided credit to banks large and small. In addition, through other programs, we supported securities made up of loans to households and businesses, including loans for business equipment, for inventory, for insurance payments, for business credit cards, and for loans guaranteed by the small business administration. To be sure, lenders reacted to uncertain economic conditions and weaker borrowers by tightening credit standards. But, with liquidity provided by the Federal Reserve, loans to borrowers who met the tighter standards continued to flow. The U.S. economy continues to face challenges, but I am convinced that the forceful actions of the Federal Reserve in 2008 helped prevent what might have been a far worse scenario. The Federal Reserve was originally created to guard against financial panics. But in modern times, many people think of its primary role as responsibility for monetary policy. The Congress has given the Federal Reserve two objectives, known as our dual mandate, to foster maximum employment and price stability. In its conduct of monetary policy, the Fed influences the level of output and the level of prices in the economy through changes to interest rates and credit conditions. During more normal times, the Federal Reserve's policymaking is focused on short-term interest rates, our main tool for steering the economy. The Fed influences the costs of borrowing to buy everything from cars to condos to computers by controlling short-term interest rates. Interest rates can be lowered to stimulate borrowing and spending when demand is otherwise weak, or raised to dampen demand and curb inflation. Before I arrived in August 2008, the Federal Reserve had already responded to the weakening in the economy by aggressively lowering its federal funds rate target from 5-1/4 percent in September 2007 to 2 percent. From a historical perspective, 2 percent is an extremely low level for interest rates. But as the financial crisis intensified and the economic outlook grew more dire in the fall of 2008, the Fed continued to cut rates. For more than two years now, our policies have held short-term interest rates close to zero. Just as the Federal Reserve used traditional concepts in unconventional ways to provide liquidity to the shadow banking system and stop the panic, once our main short‑term interest rate lever was effectively at zero, we moved beyond traditional monetary policy to purchase longer-term assets and push down longer-term interest rates. In November 2008, the Fed began purchasing large volumes of longer-term, U.S. government debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, eventually increasing the commitment to more than $1.7 trillion before completing the purchases in March 2010. Those purchases put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates generally and helped normalize the spread between mortgage rates and long-term Treasury rates, which had widened during the financial crisis. Reducing longer-term rates influences the economy in much the same way as lowering the expected path of short-term rates. For instance, the decline in longer-term rates lowers the cost and increases the availability of capital and credit, which in turn encourages business expansion. In the most recent episode, another important result of lower rates has been a reduction in debt service burdens from existing debt. Households in particular have significantly reduced mortgage payments through refinancing. And numerous small business owners have told me that they could not have survived the downturn without low rates. In November 2010, recognizing that progress toward the achievement of our dual mandate was disappointingly slow, the Fed decided to put additional downward pressure on longer-term interest rates by purchasing longer-term Treasury securities with a stated objective to purchase $600 billion by the end of June 2011. So far, I have talked about what the Federal Reserve has done during the time I have been there. But I haven't really told you what the Fed is or what it has been like to be a policymaker there. The Federal Reserve is an independent entity within the federal government in that its decisions do not have to be ratified by the President or any other executive branch official. The Congress, through the Federal Reserve Act, sets the Federal Reserve's goals and oversees it, but the Federal Reserve decides independently how to achieve its congressionally mandated goals. The ability to make monetary policy decisions that are free of short-term political influence is critical for central banks. This is especially true because the effective conduct of monetary policy requires a long-term perspective. A central bank that is subject to political pressure might opt for policies that favor rapid expansion in the near term at the expense of higher inflation in the future. Such actions would surely result in the loss of the confidence and credibility that are needed to achieve the objectives of monetary policy. Indeed, research has shown that countries with independent central banks have better economic performance and lower inflation than countries whose central banks are not independent.2 The structure of the Federal Reserve is uniquely American in its decentralization. The Federal Reserve System is made up of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and 12 Federal Reserve Banks across the country. The seven members of the Board of Governors are nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. Each Reserve Bank has a board of directors drawn from business, public, labor, nonprofit, and banking leadership within its district. In consultation with the Board of Governors, the Reserve Bank directors choose a president to run the bank.3The Board of Governors oversees the Reserve Banks and is responsible for formulating bank regulations; supervising banks; and for making decisions regarding lending, other than discount window lending, to depository institutions.4 The Reserve Banks provide financial services to depository institutions, the U.S. gov­ernment, and foreign official institutions, including making discount window loans and playing a major role in operating the nation's payments system. Under delegated authority from the Board, the Reserve Banks also conduct on-site supervision of bank holding companies and state-chartered banks that choose to join the Federal Reserve System. Monetary policy decisions are made by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). While all 12 Reserve Bank Presidents and all members of the Board of Governors participate in FOMC discussions, the voting members of the FOMC are made up of the members of the Board of Governors, the President of the New York Reserve Bank, and four of the remaining Presidents on a rotating basis.5 The culture of the Federal Reserve is an interesting blend of government, academia, and business. Differences of opinion regularly occur, but they are a source of strength rather than conflict within the institution. They add liveliness to the debate and richness to the decisionmaking process. The System is a treasure trove of data, research, and institutional memory about the economy and the financial system. It is stimulating, and occasionally exhausting, to be surrounded by so much brainpower and intellectual curiosity. But everyone approaches the work with a serious sense of purpose and collegiality. It is hard for me to describe what it is like to work there, but if you ever get the chance to do so, I would highly recommend it. Lessons LearnedThis brings me to my final task--to offer some career advice to those of you just preparing to enter the business world. As someone who has spent more years than I care to count in that world, let me begin where I began. I needed a job just as many of you will soon. In searching for that first job or even some of the ones that come later, don't be afraid to take one at an entry level, as I did when I started as a teller, or one that seems quite daunting, regardless of your qualifications, as I faced when I joined the Federal Reserve. Look for a career that you enjoy and one that is well suited to your temperament and your talents. Remember that what you think you want most in life might not be the thing that makes you truly happy. I could have been miserable as a mediocre actress. Instead, I happened upon a deeply rewarding profession that I loved. Indeed, I have found that life usually works out for the best--if you let it. Whether you have found your perfect career or just a job to pay the bills, make the most of every assignment. I told you earlier about my banking mentor, Burt Harrison. He was always loading me up with projects. One day, while I was struggling to dig my way out from under a mountain of work, Burt came to me with yet another assignment. I looked up from the task at hand and said, "You bring me work like you're bringing me presents." Burt huffed and returned to his office. He returned a short time later and said, "Idothink they are presents." And he was right. Those projects taught me more than any class could have. Finally, if, as I suggest, you are going to take advantage of all the opportunities that come your way, I would like to stress the importance of lifelong learning to develop the skills that will be needed to tackle new challenges. You might very well find yourself pursuing a direction different than the one you trained for in business school. But the lessons you learn here will still be important. You will need to apply the concepts you know to situations that are different than those you expected to find. And you may need to learn new concepts. Your ability to think critically and creatively, along with your skill at tracking down the information you don't have, will be among your most valuable assets. Remember that, sometimes, asking the right questions is just as important as knowing the right answers. And if you get a chance to teach others, take it. Nothing solidifies your understanding of a subject like having to communicate it clearly to others. Use everything you have learned so far, take advantage of any educational opportunity that comes along, and apply what you learn. It is one investment that I can guarantee will yield an enormous return. ConclusionIn closing, I'd like to make a shameless plug for public service. Putting your knowledge and skills to work for the good of the nation is a very high ideal. I think Woodrow Wilson--the President who inspired the Federal Reserve Act--said it well, albeit long-windedly: "You are not here merely to make a living. You are here in order to enable the world to live more amply, with greater vision, with a finer spirit of hope and achievement. You are here to enrich the world, and you impoverish yourself if you forget that errand." Aside from the obvious societal benefits, there is much to be gained personally from working to achieve the greatest good for the greatest number of people. It has been richly rewarding for me to bring decades of experience as a banker to discussions on matters that have the power to transform that very industry. And I have been fortunate to work alongside other public servants who share the commitment to bettering the lives of the people we serve by working to ensure a strong financial system and a stable economy. Thank you for the opportunity to be here today. 1. Federal Reserve Act, ch. 6, 38 Stat. 251 (1913).Return to text 2. See Alberto Alesina (1988), "Macroeconomics and Politics," in Stanley Fischer, ed.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 3 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, September), pp.13-52; Vittorio Grilli, Donato Masciandaro, and Guido Tabellini (1991), "Political and Monetary Institutions and Public Finance Policies in the Industrial Countries,"Economic Policy,vol. 6 (13), pp. 342-92; Alex Cukierman (1992),Central Bank Strategies, Credibility, and Independence: Theory and Evidence (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press); Alex Cukierman, Steven B. Webb, and Bilin Neyapti (1992), "Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes,"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 6 (3), 353-98; Alberto Alesina and Lawrence H. Summers (1993), "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62; Alex Cukierman, Pantelis Kalaitzidakis, Lawrence H. Summers, and Steven B. Webb (1993), "Central Bank Independence, Growth, Investment, and Real Rates,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (1), pp. 95-140 ; and Alex Cukierman, Geoffrey P. Miller, and Bilin Neyapti (2002), "Central Bank Reform, Liberalization and Inflation in Transition Economies--An International Perspective,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49 (2), 237-64.Return to text 3. Each Federal Reserve Bank's Class B and Class C directors appoint a president. See section 4(4), subparagraph "Fifth," of the Federal Reserve Act, as amended by section 1107 of Pub. L. No. 111-203 (2010).Return to text 4. For a fuller discussion of the responsibilities of the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Banks, seeThe Federal Reserve System: Purposes & Functions.Return to text 5. For more information about the FOMC, seewww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc.htm.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Banque de France Financial Stability Review Launch Event, Paris, France By facilitating the allocation of the world's savings to the most productive uses, the free flow of capital across national borders confers substantial economic benefits, including the promotion of economic growth. That said, we have seen a number of episodes in which international capital flows have brought with them challenges for macroeconomic adjustment, financial stability, or both. Such challenges have tended to arise in two situations: first, when the "rules of the game" of the international monetary system--the policy responses that countries are expected to take to help foster a balanced global economy over time--are either poorly articulated or not observed by key countries; and second, when the financial systems of nations receiving strong capital inflows have not been up to the task of investing those inflows productively. These issues are hardly new. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, the U.S. dollar and French franc were undervalued, with the result that both countries experienced current account surpluses and strong capital inflows. Under the unwritten but long-standing rules of the gold standard, those two countries would have been expected to allow the inflows to feed through to domestic money supplies and prices, leading to real appreciations of their currencies and, with time, to a narrowing of their external surpluses. Instead, the two nations sterilized the effects of these capital inflows on their money supplies, so that their currencies remained persistently undervalued. Under the constraints imposed by the gold standard, these policies in turn increased deflationary pressures and banking-sector strains in deficit countries such as Germany, which were losing gold and foreign deposits. Ultimately, the unwillingness of the United States and France to conduct their domestic policies by the rules of the game, together with structural vulnerabilities in financial systems and in the gold standard itself, helped destabilize the global economic and financial system and bring on the Great Depression. The Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s illustrates a somewhat different type of risk associated with large cross-border flows of capital. During the 1990s, strong capital inflows helped support robust growth in many Asian economies. But Thailand's devaluation in mid-1997 triggered closer scrutiny of developments in the region. Investors began to recognize that the financial systems of some Asian economies--because of institutional weaknesses, inadequate regulation, or other deficiencies--had not effectively channeled the surge of incoming funds into productive investments. As foreign investors lost confidence, capital flows into the region reversed sharply, and the credit-driven boom came to a precipitous end. The Asian crisis imposed heavy costs in terms of financial and macroeconomic instability in the affected countries. In this case, capital inflows posed a problem because of weaknesses in the financial systems and regulatory oversight in countries receiving foreign capital. Although these issues are now generally discussed in the context of emerging market economies, the United States--the recipient of the largest capital inflows in the world--has also faced challenges coping with capital inflows. Notably, the failures of the U.S. financial system in allocating strong flows of capital, both domestic and foreign, helped precipitate the recent financial crisis and global recession. Why was the United States, a mature economy, the recipient of net capital inflows that rose to as much as 6 percent of its gross domestic product prior to the financial crisis? A significant portion of these capital inflows reflected a broader phenomenon that, in the past, I have dubbed the global saving glut.1Over the past 15 years or so, for reasons on which I have elaborated in earlier remarks, many emerging market economies have run large, sustained current account surpluses and thus have become exporters of capital to the advanced economies, especially the United States. These inflows exacerbated the U.S. current account deficit and were also a factor pushing U.S. and global longer-term interest rates below levels suggested by expected short-term rates and other macroeconomic fundamentals. My earlier comments on the global saving glut hypothesis focused on the sources of the capital inflows to the United States and their effects on global longer-term interest rates and the U.S. current account, without attention to the composition of those flows. My paper for the Banque de FranceFinancial Stability Reviewextends the basic global saving glut hypothesis to consider the portfolio preferences of foreign investors in the United States and the implications of those preferences.2Several researchers have argued that capital flows from emerging markets to advanced economies will tend to be directed to the safest and most liquid assets, of which, these researchers argue, there is a relative shortage in emerging markets.3My paper confirms empirically that the global saving glut countries--principally, some emerging Asian economies and Middle Eastern oil exporters--did indeed evince a strong preference for very safe and liquid U.S. assets in the middle of the past decade, especially Treasury and agency securities. Although a large share of the net capital inflows to the United States came from emerging markets, substantial gross capital inflows were received from the advanced economies as well. An additional contribution of the paper is to examine the portfolio preferences of these advanced economy, especially European, investors. The paper finds that, like the global saving glut countries, European investors placed a high value on safety and liquidity in their U.S. investments; however, relative to purchases by emerging markets, those of European investors encompassed a broader range of U.S. securities, including sizable amounts of private-label mortgage-backed securities (MBS) as well as other highly rated asset-backed securities. Unlike the global saving glut countries, which funded their acquisitions of U.S. assets through their current account surpluses, Europe on net had a roughly balanced current account and thus issued liabilities to fund acquisitions of U.S. assets. However, as these liabilities were tilted toward more traditional securities, including sovereign debt, as well as bank deposits, the result here too was a net increase in the global demand for highly rated U.S. assets. The preferences of foreign investors for highly rated U.S. assets, together with similar preferences by many domestic investors, had a number of implications, including for the relative yields on such assets. Importantly, though, the preference by so many investors for perceived safety created strong incentives for U.S. financial engineers to develop investment products that "transformed" risky loans into highly rated securities. Remarkably, even though a large share of new U.S. mortgages during the housing boom were of weak credit quality, financial engineering resulted in the overwhelming share of private-label mortgage-related securities being rated AAA. The underlying contradiction was, of course, ultimately exposed, at great cost to financial stability and the global economy. To be clear, these findings are not to be read as assigning responsibility for the breakdown in U.S. financial intermediation to factors outside the United States. Instead, in analogy to the Asian crisis, the primary cause of the breakdown was the poor performance of the financial system and financial regulation in the country receiving the capital inflows, not the inflows themselves. In the case of the United States, sources of poor performance included misaligned incentives in mortgage origination, underwriting, and securitization; risk-management deficiencies among financial institutions; conflicts of interest at credit rating agencies; weaknesses in the capitalization and incentive structures of the government-sponsored enterprises; gaps and weaknesses in the financial regulatory structure; and supervisory failures.4In reflecting on this experience, I have gained increased appreciation for the challenges faced by policymakers in emerging market economies who have had to manage large and sometimes volatile capital inflows for the past several decades. The global financial crisis is receding, but capital flows are once again posing some notable challenges for international macroeconomic and financial stability. These capital flows reflect in part the continued two-speed nature of the global recovery, as economic growth in the emerging markets is far outstripping growth in the advanced economies.5 In light of the relatively muted recoveries to date in the advanced economies, the central banks of those economies have generally continued accommodative monetary policies. Some observers, while acknowledging that an aborted recovery in the advanced economies would be highly detrimental to the emerging market economies, have nevertheless argued that these monetary policies are generating negative spillovers. In particular, concerns have centered on the strength of private capital flows to many emerging market economies, which, depending on their policy responses, could put upward pressure on their currencies, boost their inflation rates, or lead to asset price bubbles. Although policymakers in the emerging markets clearly face important challenges, such concerns should be put into perspective. First, these capital flows have been driven by many factors, including expectations of more-rapid growth and thus higher investment returns in the emerging market economies than in the advanced economies. Indeed, recent data suggest that the aggregate flows to emerging markets are not out of line with longer-term trends. Second, as I noted earlier, emerging market economies have a strong interest in a continued economic recovery in the advanced economies, which accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies are intended to promote. Third, policymakers in the emerging markets have a range of powerful--although admittedly imperfect‑‑tools that they can use to manage their economies and prevent overheating, including exchange rate adjustment, monetary and fiscal policies, and macroprudential measures. Finally, it should be borne in mind that spillovers can go both ways. For example, resurgent demand in the emerging markets has contributed significantly to the sharp recent run-up in global commodity prices. More generally, the maintenance of undervalued currencies by some countries has contributed to a pattern of global spending that is unbalanced and unsustainable. Such imbalances include those not only between emerging markets and advanced economies, but also among the emerging market economies themselves, as those countries that have allowed their exchange rates to be determined primarily by market forces have seen their competitiveness erode relative to countries that have intervened more aggressively in foreign exchange markets. Our collective challenge is to reshape the international monetary system to foster strong, sustainable growth and improve economic outcomes for all nations. Working together, we need to clarify and strengthen the rules of the game, with an eye toward creating an international system that more effectively supports the simultaneous pursuit of internal and external balance. To achieve a more balanced international system over time, countries with excessive and unsustainable trade surpluses will need to allow their exchange rates to better reflect market fundamentals and increase their efforts to substitute domestic demand for exports. At the same time, countries with large, persistent trade deficits must find ways to increase national saving, including putting fiscal policies on a more sustainable trajectory. In addition, to bolster our individual and collective ability to manage and productively invest capital inflows, we must continue to increase the efficiency, transparency, and resiliency of our national financial systems and to strengthen financial regulation and oversight. None of these changes will be easy or immediate. To help us achieve them, we must continue to strengthen our mechanisms for international cooperation, including in the Basel Committee, the Financial Stability Board, and the Group of Twenty Mutual Assessment Process, and work together to enhance surveillance by the International Monetary Fund. I am pleased that our French hosts are focusing the work of the Group of Twenty on these challenging, but crucially important, issues. I am hopeful that we will make substantive progress on them in the year ahead--an outcome that will strengthen the global economy and benefit all countries. 1. See Ben S. Bernanke (2005), "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," speech delivered at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Va., March 10; and Ben S. Bernanke (2007), "Global Imbalances: Recent Developments and Prospects," speech delivered at the Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, Germany, September 11.Return to text 2. See Ben S. Bernanke, Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin (2011), "International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003-2007," Banque de FranceFinancial Stability Review, no. 15 (February), pp.13-26.Return to text 3. See, for example, Ricardo J. Caballero, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2008), "An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global Imbalances' and Low Interest Rates,"American Economic Review, vol. 98 (1), pp. 358-93; and Ricardo J. Caballero and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2009), "Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility,"American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, vol. 99 (May), pp. 584-88.Return to text 4. For a discussion, see Ben S. Bernanke (2010), "Causes of the Recent Financial and Economic Crisis," statement before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, September 2.Return to text 5. For a discussion of the international implications of the two-speed recovery, see Ben S. Bernanke (2010), "Rebalancing the Global Recovery," speech delivered at the Sixth European Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, Germany, November 19.Return to text
Kevin Warsh announced his intent to resign as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on or around March 31, 2011. Governor Warsh, a member of the Board since February 2006, submitted his letter of resignation to President Obama today. "Kevin rendered the Federal Reserve and the nation exemplary service during his time at the Board," Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke said. "In particular, his intimate knowledge of financial markets and institutions proved invaluable during the recent crisis. And he worked energetically and effectively behind the scenes overseeing the operations of the Board and the Federal Reserve System. I deeply appreciate his insights and wise counsel and, most especially, his fortitude and friendship during the difficult days, nights, and weekends of the crisis." Warsh has focused most significantly on issues related to financial markets and the conduct of monetary policy. Warsh has served as the Federal Reserve's representative to the Group of Twenty and the Board's emissary to the emerging and advanced economies in Asia. In addition, he has served as Administrative Governor, managing and overseeing the Board's operations, personnel, and financial performance. Prior to his appointment to the Board, from 2002 until 2006, Warsh served as Special Assistant to the President for Economic Policy and Executive Secretary of the White House National Economic Council. Previously, Warsh was a member of the Mergers & Acquisitions department at Morgan Stanley & Co. in New York, serving as Vice President and Executive Director. Warsh was born in Albany, New York. He received his A.B. from Stanford University, and his J.D. from Harvard Law School. A copy of his letter is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meeting on January 24, 2011. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 25-26, 2011. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the January 25-26, 2011 meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximately quarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 25-26, 2011:378 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Dacotah Bank, Aberdeen, South Dakota, a state member bank. Dacotah Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Datocah Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $10,995, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Franklin Savings Bank, Farmington, Maine, a state member bank. Franklin Savings Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Franklin Savings Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $5,160, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of consent Civil Money Penalty Orders against MyAnns Corporation and G. Larry Curry, a former director and institution-affiliated party of MyAnns Corporation, Piqua, Kansas, a registered bank holding company. The Orders require civil money penalty payments of $37,500 and $7,500 respectively. MyAnns and Mr. Curry, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Orders based on allegations that without prior consent of the Board of Governors, Mr. Curry served as a director of MyAnns from at least 2006 until 2010, in violation of the prohibition of section 19 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, which is applicable to Mr. Curry because of a prior criminal conviction. In addition, MyAnns submitted allegedly false FR Y-6 Reports that did not disclose that Mr. Curry was a member of its board of directors for each of the years 2006-2009. A copy of the Order is attached.
Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Congressional Oversight Panel, Washington, D.C. Chairman Kaufman, members of the Congressional Oversight Panel, thank you for your invitation to discuss the current state of commercial real estate (CRE) finance and its relationship to the overall stability of the financial system. Since the panel published its report,Commercial Real Estate Losses and the Risk to Financial Stability, one year ago, the rate of deterioration in market and credit conditions has leveled off, and there are some early signs of price stabilization in a number of key markets. Nonetheless, CRE delinquencies and losses are expected to remain elevated for some time. Weakness in real estate markets, both commercial and residential, continues to be a drag on overall growth in the economy. Construction of nonresidential structures continues to lag because of weak fundamentals in the sector, including high vacancy rates and low property values, factors that are unlikely to change in the near term. Similarly, new home construction is likely to be constrained by the continuing overhang of distressed and vacant homes. CRE-related issues also present ongoing problems for the banking industry, particularly for community and regional banking organizations. Losses associated with CRE, particularly residential construction and land development lending, were the dominant reason for the high number of bank failures since the beginning of 2008, and further CRE-related bank failures are expected over the next few years. Credit losses for bank CRE loans typically continue well past the trough of recessions, and we expect this pattern to continue in this cycle. Working through the large volume of troubled CRE loans will take time as banks go through the difficult process of loan workouts and loan restructurings. If done prudently and effectively, including allocating appropriate levels of reserves and capital, loan restructuring can reduce the ultimate losses to the banking system. In addition, proper restructuring can reduce the damage done to businesses and the economy by limiting the forced liquidation of commercial properties that would further depress prices. While we expect significant ongoing CRE-related problems, it appears that worst-case scenarios are becoming increasingly unlikely. CRE portfolio loan concentrations are not a significant risk factor for systemically important financial institutions. Some systemically important financial institutions have substantial exposures to commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) and to derivatives securities such as CRE collateralized debt obligations. However, risks in these areas have been reduced, as significant mark downs have already been taken on these securities. In addition, conditions in the CMBS market have been improving, with spreads tightening and some new deals coming to market. However, we see losses in CRE to be an ongoing negative factor in bank portfolios that will need to be worked through over the next several years. Current Conditions in the Commercial Real Estate MarketAs housing market conditions deteriorated sharply throughout 2007, CRE markets began to experience weakness. Broad CRE market conditions remained relatively healthy until the second half of 2008, when CRE performance metrics turned down rapidly as a result of severe financial market disruptions and accelerating job losses. Vacancy rates increased sharply, rental rates plummeted, and property sales and values declined substantially. The higher vacancy rates and declines in the values of existing properties placed particularly heavy pressure on construction and development projects, which depend on market conditions at the time of completion for absorption and thus repayment. Underlying market fundamentals of CRE remain a significant concern, but they have shown some signs of stabilizing. For instance, vacancy rates on office, industrial, and retail properties have stopped increasing, although they remained at elevated levels at the end of 2010, ranging between 13 percent and more than 16 percent, depending upon the property type and location. These levels are, on average, 5 to 6 percentage points above levels experienced in 2007. The rate of decline in rental rates has also slowed. At the beginning of 2010, office and industrial rental rates were between 10 and 12 percent lower than a year earlier, on average, but declines had slowed to between 5 and 7 percent at an annual rate at the end of the year. Sales volume of CRE properties improved each quarter during 2010, accumulating to almost $135 billion for the year as a whole.1This total is double the CRE property sales volume for all of 2009. Recent readings from CRE price indexes indicate that the rate of price declines has slowed substantially. The NCREIF Transactions Based Index fell more than 36 percent from its peak in the second quarter of 2007 to the first quarter of 2010. In contrast, the index indicated that prices as of the third quarter of 2010 were only 0.2 percent lower than they were at the beginning of the year. However, the degree of price stabilization across different types of properties and locations is uneven. In particular, demand has been rebounding for well-occupied properties in top-tier markets, while less desirable properties in less favorable markets are still struggling from a lack of demand. Concentrations of CRE Exposure on Bank Balance SheetsAt the end of the third quarter of 2010, approximately $3.2 trillion of outstanding debt was associated with CRE, including loans for multifamily properties. Of this amount, about one-half, or $1.6 trillion, was held on the balance sheets of commercial banks and thrifts. An additional $700 billion represented collateral for CMBS, and the remaining balance of $900 billion was held by a variety of investors, including pension funds, mutual funds, and life insurance companies. Outstanding CRE debt has contracted 6 percent from its peak in 2008, while outstanding CRE loans at banks have contracted by almost 12 percent. The majority of the decrease in bank loans was associated with reductions in construction and development loan balances, which were largely the result of foreclosures and charge-offs. Despite the decline in aggregate CRE loans at commercial banks, many banks still have CRE loan concentrations, as defined in the 2007 "Interagency Guidance on Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate."2Banks are considered to have a CRE concentration when loans for construction, land development, and other land exceed 100 percent of risk-based capital or total CRE is greater than 300 percent of risk-based capital.3By this definition, almost 1,200 commercial banks, or 18 percent of all banks, had CRE concentrations at the end of the third quarter of 2010. CRE concentrations have been the dominant factor in bank failures. Of the more than 300 commercial banks and thrifts that have failed since the beginning of 2008, more than three-fourths had CRE concentrations at year-end 2007. Notably, CRE concentrations are not a significant issue at the largest banks. Among banks with total assets of $10 billion or more, 10 percent had CRE concentrations. In contrast, one-third of all banks with assets between $1 billion and $10 billion had CRE concentrations. For banks with less than $1 billion in assets, approximately 17 percent had CRE concentrations. Credit Quality of Commercial Real Estate in Bank PortfoliosAt the end of the third quarter of 2010, almost 10 percent of CRE loans in bank portfolios were considered delinquent, a three-fold increase since the end of 2007.4Not surprisingly, loan performance problems have been most striking for construction and development loans, especially for those that finance residential development. Almost 19 percent of all construction and development loans were considered delinquent at the end of the third quarter of last year. During 2010, delinquency rates on construction and development loans began to improve slightly, falling 1 percent in the first three quarters of 2010. Additionally, delinquency rates on loans backed by existing nonfarm, nonresidential properties leveled off in 2010. Still, even if CRE delinquency metrics continue improving, there remains a sufficiently large overhang of distressed CRE at commercial banks such that loss rates for this portfolio will likely stay high for some time and many banks with CRE concentrations will remain under stress. Approximately one-third of all CRE loans (both bank and non-bank), totaling more than $1 trillion, are scheduled to mature over the next two years. This circumstance represents substantial refinancing risk as CRE loans typically have large balloon payments due at maturity. Banks have been dealing with maturing loans in a variety of ways, including providing extensions of performing assets, troubled debt restructurings, equity injections, collateral sales, and, in some cases, pursuing foreclosures. Since the issuance of the October 2009 supervisory guidance on prudent loan workouts, banks have significantly increased the level of restructuring of CRE loans.5Economic incentives to restructure or refinance existing loans are aided by the current low interest rate environment. Some banks with properties in healthier markets are also beginning to see a pick-up in investor demand for high-quality properties with strong tenants. Since the beginning of 2008 through the third quarter of 2010, commercial banks have incurred almost $80 billion of losses related to CRE exposure, equating to a little over 5 percent of the average exposure outstanding during this time. In past cycles, CRE credit and market fundamentals generally lagged the larger economy by a year or more. Given this historical experience and the recent improvement witnessed in the broader economy, it is estimated that banks have taken roughly 40 to 50 percent of the CRE losses that they will realize over this cycle. Using past cycles as a guide, we expect that the remaining losses will likely be incurred over the next few years. While we can project potential losses facing banks, losses ultimately realized through this cycle will depend on the pace of improvement in the labor market, overall credit availability, and other macroeconomic and financial factors, especially unemployment rates and interest rates. Those factors are why we continue to emphasize the importance of stress testing as a critical element of managing risks associated with CRE concentrations. Federal Reserve Supervisory Approach to Commercial Real Estate ConcentrationsAs noted in our previous statement to the panel on CRE conditions, the Federal Reserve led an interagency effort to develop supervisory guidance on CRE concentrations that was finalized in 2006 and published in theFederal Registerin early 2007.6In that guidance, we outlined our expectations that institutions with concentrations in CRE lending need to perform ongoing assessments to identify and manage concentrations through stress testing and similar exercises to identify the impact of adverse market conditions on earnings and capital. Since the quality of CRE loans at supervised banking organizations began to weaken, the Federal Reserve has devoted significant additional resources to assessing the quality of CRE portfolios. These efforts include monitoring the impact of changing cash flows and collateral values, as well as assessing the extent to which banks have been complying with our CRE guidance. Examiners have taken a balanced approach to ensuring that banks are recognizing losses in a timely manner, maintaining sufficient loan loss reserves, and monitoring collateral values while being mindful not to discourage healthy banks from making loans available to creditworthy borrowers. Additionally, in an effort to encourage prudent CRE loan workouts, especially among maturing loans, the Federal Reserve led the development of interagency guidance issued in October 2009 regarding CRE loan restructurings and workouts.7To better understand the effectiveness of this guidance, the agencies conducted a survey of financial institutions during their examinations. The survey was completed in the third quarter of 2010. The survey was designed to gain an understanding of the current trends in the institution's CRE portfolios and an estimation of the volume of loan restructurings that are likely to occur within the next year. The majority of respondents described the quality of their CRE portfolios as relatively stable but expressed concern regarding borrowers' deteriorating repayment abilities and declining collateral values, which were of particular concern where maturing loans no longer met the institution's underwriting standards. Approximately two-thirds of the respondents were engaged in workout activity. Of note, respondents reported that almost three-fourths of loan modifications were performing according to their modified terms. The survey also noted that the volume of future CRE workouts was estimated to increase by approximately 60 percent during 2011. In contrast, banks have only restructured approximately 5 percent of all outstanding CRE portfolios to date. Given the level of restructured loans to date and the estimated volume of future restructurings, the Federal Reserve will continue to review institutions' restructuring policies to ensure that modifications are pursued in a prudent manner. Moreover, examiners will also monitor banks' internal reporting systems to determine if restructured loans are performing in accordance with modified terms. Regulated institutions continue to face significant challenges in determining the value of real estate in the current environment. For this reason, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies issued revisions to theInteragency Appraisal and Evaluation Guidelinesin December 2010.8The Federal Reserve expects institutions to have policies and procedures for obtaining new or updated appraisals as part of their ongoing credit reviews. An institution should have appraisals or other market information that provide appropriate analysis of the market value of the real estate collateral and reflect relevant market conditions, the property's current "asis" condition, and reasonable assumptions and conclusions. Changes to Supervision at the Federal ReserveTo improve both the Federal Reserve's consolidated supervision and our ability to identify potential risks to the financial system, we have made substantial changes to our supervisory framework. We have augmented our traditional supervisory approach, which focuses on examinations of individual firms, with greater use of horizontal reviews, which simultaneously examine portfolios across a group of firms, to identify common sources of risks and best practices for managing those risks. To supplement information from examiners in the field, we have enhanced our quantitative surveillance program to use data analysis and formal modeling to help identify vulnerabilities at both the firm level and for the financial sector as a whole. This analysis is supported by the collection of more timely, detailed, and consistent data from regulated firms. Many of these changes draw on the 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, or SCAP. Regarding CRE exposures specifically, we are working with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on the collection of loan-level CRE data from a number of national and regional banks. The data collected will provide critical information on the credit quality and performance of these loan portfolios. These data will aid in the development of more forward-looking loan loss projections that will provide a useful benchmark for the broader CRE market that can be used for all institutions. They will also be used to develop more accurate stress test parameters for CRE portfolios of banks that the Federal Reserve supervises. In addition, the agencies have made adjustments to the Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, or the Call Report, filed quarterly by banks, to obtain more detailed information with respect to their CRE restructurings. ConclusionOver the past year, CRE market and credit conditions have shown signs of stabilization and, in some areas, modest signs of improvement. We are also seeing signs of price stabilization in a number of CRE markets. Nevertheless, while some directional metrics are improving, the CRE market is still distressed and the strength and pace of improvements remains uneven. We expect that banks will continue to incur substantial additional CRE losses over the next two years and that many banks with CRE concentrations will continue to be under stress. While problems in the CRE market will be an ongoing concern for a number of banking organizations and a negative factor for economic growth and lending, we do not see CRE losses as a threat to systemically important financial institutions. Progress on working through the overhang of distressed CRE will take time and will depend on banks taking strong steps to ensure that losses are recognized in a timely manner, that loan loss reserves and capital appropriately reflect risk, that loans are modified in a safe and sound manner, and that loans continue to be made available to creditworthy borrowers. To this end, the Federal Reserve will continue to work with lenders to ensure that bank management and supervisors take a balanced approach to ensuring safety and soundness and serving the credit needs of the community. 1.Real Capital AnalyticsReturn to text 2.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2007), "Interagency Guidance on Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 07-1 (January 4).Return to text 3.Owner-occupied CRE loans are not included in the CRE concentration definition.Return to text 4.Delinquent CRE loans are defined as those that are 30 days or more past due.Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Adopts Policy Statement Supporting Prudent Commercial Real Estate (CRE) Loan Workouts," press release, October 30.Return to text 6.See Jon D. Greenlee (2010), "Commercial Real Estate," statement before the Congressional Oversight Panel Field Hearing, Atlanta, Ga., January 27; also see Board of Governors, "Interagency Guidance," innote2.Return to text 7.See Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve Adopts Policy Statement," in note 5.Return to text 8.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of Thrift Supervision, and National Credit Union Administration (2010), "Agencies Issue Final Appraisal and Evaluation Guidelines," joint press release, December 2.Return to text
Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin At the 2011 Midwinter Housing Finance Conference, Park City, Utah Good evening. I would like to thank the sponsors of the Midwinter Housing Finance Conference for kindly inviting me to join you. Tonight, I'm going to share with you some thoughts about the powerful impact the housing and mortgage markets have on the nation's economic recovery, present some ideas to effect positive change in the mortgage servicing industry, and finally impart a guiding principle that should help us find our way through the current struggles and drive the way our industry operates in the future. Speaking strictly in an economic sense, the recession that emerged in 2008 is over. But I know that the millions of Americans still looking for work, living in cars or motels, or trying to keep their businesses out of bankruptcy would beg to disagree. Our economy is growing, but the pace of recovery is agonizingly slow, well behind the pace of recovery in prior recessions. There are several causes for this lethargy, but, in my view, the critically important drag on the economy is the absence of any substantial recovery in the housing sector. Traditionally, housing is thefirstsector to recover after a recession, buoyed by low interest rates and pent-up demand. The increase in housing sales and construction usually is followed by a robust increase in consumer expenditures on durable goods, like furniture and appliances, which magnifies and multiplies the effect of the housing recovery. Yet today, demand for housing is weighted down by the enormous losses in income and net worth that households suffered in the recession. In addition, the persistent high rate of unemployment is further depressing housing demand, creating uncertainty about housing prices, and impeding that robust recovery in the housing sector that we generally see. With a pipeline full of distressed properties, the unfortunate consensus is that we should expect even more downward pressure on house prices. Potential buyers seem inclined to wait and see if they can get a better buy in the future. Builders, too, are deterred by the additional competition lurking in this reservoir of vacant and distressed properties. Significantly, uncertainty about house prices destabilizes expectations outside of the housing sector. When banks have troubled mortgages on their books, they may be required to increase their loss provisioning and implement troubled debt restructuring, which in turn reduces the amount of funds they have to lend. Uncertainty about house prices also clearly undermines consumer confidence and undercuts consumers' willingness to spend. According to the Census Bureau, homeownership rates have fallen so significantly in recent years that they have more than wiped out the increase in homeownership that had taken place between 2000 and 2007. When I think about this statistic, I see not only the drag on the nation's already-tepid recovery, but the millions of American families who have lost their homes and their hopes. When people lose their homes, the impact is felt not only by the homeowners, but by the broader community: the bonds of community are weakened, business investment is undermined, homelessness increases, children are uprooted, unemployment deepens, and even health problems multiply. I emphasize all this bad news not to dampen the dinner mood here tonight, but to underscore the importance of the work that you do and to reiterate what we already know: The recovery of the housing sector is critical to the robust and sustainable recovery of the American economy. To see the kind of economic recovery we want, we need to revive our housing sector and restore the communities that were shaken by its collapse. So what needs to happen now? To begin with, we should start at the ground level and work with troubled borrowers to prevent additional foreclosures that will further weaken the market. We need to make certain that foreclosures take place only when there is no option available that would be preferable to both the borrower and the investor. It is critical for servicers to review all options on any given delinquent loan before deciding that foreclosure is the best course of action. Certainly foreclosure cannot be avoided in every case. However, servicers must identify those instances where both the borrower and the investor would be better off modifying the loan than foreclosing on it. Some distressed borrowers should be able to qualify for a modification through Treasury's Home Affordable Mortgage Program (HAMP). If the HAMP evaluation has been properly done and the borrower still does not qualify, the servicer should consider all other reasonable alternatives, ranging from proprietary modifications to short sales to deeds-in-lieu-of-foreclosure,beforefiling for foreclosure. And, for homeowners whose financial distress is the result of job loss, something as simple as payment forbearance while the homeowner is unemployed could prevent the loan from going to foreclosure. Servicing shops need to be diligent in pursuing these options, and investors need to be supportive of efforts to find net-positive alternatives to foreclosure. These actions will have a far-reaching positive impact: A lower inventory of distressed properties for sale results in higher house prices, which leads to a healthier pace of recovery in the housing market and the broader economy. I can't emphasize enough how important it is that servicers be willing and diligent in offering assistance to troubled homeowners: It is key to the pace of economic recovery. For those in the housing and mortgage fields, making needed changes will not be easy. In particular, for those in the mortgage servicing industry, it means difficult changes and significant investments to rectify broken systems. For those servicers who are subsidiaries or affiliates of a broader parent financial institution, the responsibility for change and further investment absolutely extends up to that parent company, many of which have enjoyed substantial profits while their servicing arms have been run on the cheap. In November, I spoke about the problems in residential mortgage servicing operations that were undermining the performance of this industry. These problems existed before November and as far as I can tell they remain unaddressed. How do I know this? Late last year, the federal banking agencies began a targeted review of loan servicing practices at large financial institutions that had significant market concentrations in mortgage servicing. The preliminary results from this review indicate that widespread weaknesses exist in the servicing industry. The agencies intend to report more specific findings to the public soon, but I can tell you that these deficiencies pose significant risk to mortgage servicing and foreclosure processes, impair the functioning of mortgage markets, and diminish overall accountability to homeowners. I'm sure this has been said, but I'll say it again because I have seen little to no evidence of improvement in the operational performance of servicers since the onset of the crisis in 2007: Until these operational problems are addressed once and for all, the foreclosure crisis will continue and the housing sector will languish. What is needed is strong corporate governance procedures for servicers that are established, monitored, and enforced enterprise-wide in order to prevent process breakdowns. Servicers need sound policies and procedures that outline the rules, laws, standards, and processes by which internal operations are assessed. Senior executives need to emphasize compliance and qualitative measures over short-run cost efficiency, and need to articulate the presence of adequate quality controls and audit processes to identify risks and take timely, corrective actions where needed. Corporate leadership needs to communicate performance expectations that hold all business lines accountable to strong procedural controls. If errors occur or internal processes become challenged, servicers must act swiftly and responsibly to contain the damage to consumers and markets. Going forward, the servicing industry must foster an operational environment that reflects safe and sound banking principles and compliance with applicable state and federal law. This is a primary responsibility of the servicing industry, but regulators now have to be prepared to monitor servicing functions on an ongoing basis to ensure confidence is restored and take enforcement actions, when necessary, to address significant failures. I'm not going to outline for you the consequences of these failures. You know them all too well. Suffice it to say that when servicers misapply payments, lose paperwork, file incorrect foreclosure affidavits, or simply do not answer the phone or make available knowledgeable staffpersons, there are consequences to the consumer. With few adequate remedies to provide meaningful recourse in the event errors occur--after all, it's not as if consumers have a choice regarding who does their servicing--many consumers find themselves captive to practices that have emphasized speed and aggressive timeframes over responsiveness, accuracy, and completeness. So something is wrong. Here we are in 2011, looking at high levels of foreclosures on the horizon, looking at significant failures in process, and nothing much has changed since 2007. I always thought this dysfunction was going on for too long--but I'm someone who thought the successive waves of foreclosures in 2007 amounted to a virtual tsunami. In my mind, massive foreclosures were always a sign of an equally massive market failure. Well, now it seems to me we have reached a point where this sign of failure is hindering our economy's ability to rebound. In addition to improvements that individual servicers need to make, we also have to find a way to fix broader problems in the industry and make it functional. In my November remarks, I began the conversation about a flawed business model that creates misaligned incentives in ways that are more difficult for any one company to change on its own. So let's talk now a little bit about how a better-functioning servicing industry would be structured. One step the industry could take that would have an enormous payoff for consumers and market participants would be to change its pricing model. The economic incentives and pressure points of the current servicing model cause problems at multiple levels. In addition to float income and ancillary fees, servicers earn money through an annual fee on each loan. This annual servicing fee is an important income source that has to cover some wildly varying costs. On a performing loan for which costs to servicers are minimal, the revenue stream from ancillary fees and float may itself be nearly enough to fairly compensate servicers. But when a loan becomes non-performing, costs start climbing. Costs associated with collections, loss mitigation, foreclosure, the maintenance and disposition of real-estate owned properties, and so on, are lumpy and can be high. The current model is structured with the hope that, over a given period of time, there are enough of the low-touch performing loans to cross-subsidize the high-touch non-performing ones, so that the overall pool of servicing fee revenue is sufficient to cover expenses and return a reasonable profit. But if that doesn't happen, servicers are either being paid too much for their efforts or not enough. The current model also rests on the expectation that, in good times, servicers are using some of the residual income to build out systems and procedures to handle the pressures that come with worse times. Unfortunately, as we have seen, this has not happened. A better business model--one that might attract more entrants and increase competition--would more closely tie expenses with compensation and reduce many of the principal-agent problems that currently exist. Rather than rolling most of the compensation into one annual fee that covers performing and delinquent loans alike, servicers could be compensated quite modestly for the routine processing of payments involved with performing assets. They would be required to have either significant capacity for loss mitigation and the other work involved with non-performing loans, or business relationships with third parties, such as specialty servicers, that do. Contracts could spell out a structure wherein the investor would pay significantly higher and more direct compensation for the more labor-intensive work involved in delinquent loans, though they would need to be careful not to create perverse incentives to encourage such delinquencies. There would also need to be much more clarity and specificity about loss mitigation standards and systems for auditing internal procedures. Such a system could more appropriately compensate servicers and sub-servicers for the level of work involved in servicing very different types of loans. Specialists could emerge who focus primarily on the routine performing loans or the more involved non-performing ones. If the non-performing specialist was a third party, the existing servicer could either transfer the servicing rights once a loan hits a certain delinquency trigger, or simply have the loans subserviced--of course with high levels of accountability--on a fee-for-services basis until the delinquency is resolved. One structure along these general lines has recently been proposed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae. While many details would need to be worked out and possible implications thought through, I believe it is a promising start. Another structural change that would help would be a limit on the extent to which servicers have to advance principal and interest on non-performing loans. In times of high delinquency, this can put considerable financial strain on servicers, which can lead to negative consequences for consumers trying to work with those stressed servicers. This could be addressed by changing secondary market standards so that servicers only have to advance mortgage principal and interest up to, say, 60 or 90 days beyond delinquency. Alternatively, they could advance principal and interest payments only as they come in--a so-called "actual/actual" schedule. Either change would affect the payment streams to investors, but I would imagine that participants in the secondary markets would be able to model with some confidence how this would affect the value of securities and adjust pricing accordingly. This means that future pooling and servicing agreements will need to look different than those of the past. They will need to be much more detailed and provide clarity about what the servicer can and cannot do. They should explicitly allow for loan modifications and other non-foreclosure workout actions when they are determined to lead to a smaller loss to the investor than would a foreclosure. There also needs to be clarity that the servicer is expected to work in the aggregate best interests of the investor, regardless of tranche. And we need to find ways to deal with the problems that arise from the conflicting interests of senior and junior lien interests that can hold up workable alternatives to foreclosure. Too many of the practices in the mortgage servicing industry have been developed and defended solely on the basis of "standard industry practice," but many practices were not only standard but shoddy. This has proven true, I might add, on the underwriting and secondary market sides of the house, and we are now seeing courts reject some of those practices. More explicit rules and procedures need to replace standard practices. And these rules and procedures need to be incorporated into the deals with investors, who will factor them in to the value they see in the securities. These are some initial thoughts on how to rebuild an important but currently dysfunctional sector of the housing market. Surely details need to be worked out, costs accounted for, and potential unintended consequences thought through. This isn't easy, and time is of the essence because the drag on our recovery is palpable. We need the incentives that permit us to reengineer this sector of the market and build a business model that actually works. That model will need to provide adequate and appropriate compensation for servicers, protect consumers, give investors what they need, and be sufficiently transparent to all parties and the public. It needs to be transparent and accountable--one that better aligns the interests and incentives of homeowners, investors, and servicers. And servicers need to understand that the homeowner is an important constituent, if for no other reason than that it is the homeowner who is critical to the revitalization of the housing sector. In the process of rebuilding, we all have a significant and urgent role to play. The Federal Reserve Board has acted to provide unprecedented levels of liquidity to the market since the crisis began through the development of an accommodative monetary policy and the establishment and implementation of back-stop facilities and last-resort lending. We clearly need to continue thinking about obstacles that exist in the realm of strong mortgage lending. There is always more that the Federal Reserve can consider in terms of reforms that are needed for housing finance, mortgage lending, and mortgage service providers. But the government can only do so much, and relevant private sector actors need to think beyond their bottom line and focus on how their firms' actions are or are not contributing to the economic recovery. I am convinced that, in order for our economic reconstruction to come about, it will be essential for each of us to commit to furthering the good of our nation, our neighborhoods, and our fellow citizens. I do not want to revisit all of the sordid events that brought us to economic crisis in 2008 but, suffice it to say that, in the housing sector, we traveled a very low road that had nothing to do with looking out for the greater good. On the contrary, there were too many people in all of the functional component parts--mortgage brokers, loan originators, loan securitizers, sub-prime lenders, Wall Street investment bankers, and rating agencies--who were interested only in making their own fast profits and were indifferent to the consequences of their actions for homeowners and communities, much less the nation as a whole. This selfish free-for-all ultimately led to an economic slide the effects of which are still visible in the boarded-up houses and sheriffs' foreclosure notices posted all over America. We pulled back from the brink of depression only through a massive and unprecedented infusion of public dollars in the banking system, and in other systemically important firms, to prevent collapse. In other words, the public was forced into a position where it had to put a lot on the line to save the financial system from its own follies and from total ruin. And many were bitter about having to do so. Now, it is time to pay back the American citizenry in full, and not just in the literal sense, but in the sense that there must be reciprocity and mutuality in our structuring of economic policy so that we do not travel this low road again. Bluntly stated, the government reluctantly provided the taxpayer funds necessary to unfreeze the financial markets and get our financial institutions on their feet again, with the expectation that the benefits would be directly meaningful to those taxpayers in their households and communities. The financial institutions that have been bolstered directly and indirectly by government subsidy and aid must now seek to support those who have been buffeted and injured by the housing crisis. This must go beyond the corrective actions that need to be taken to rectify current deficiencies. It means that financial institutions need to understand the effects their actions will have on consumers and the country as a whole, and factor those considerations in to their business decisions. This is the high road--a moral and economic imperative that must be the driving purpose that unifies and animates our efforts. Indeed, the high road demands that we become effective institutional innovators for positive changes in our communities and for housing practices that promote community well-being. When we traveled the low road, the only question was: Will this practice make me rich? Taking the high road means we continually ask: Do our financial and legal arrangements contribute to the public welfare and the common good? Yes, our economy has started to rebound, but we need a strong housing market in order to ensure a complete, stable, and sustainable recovery. The meltdown in the housing sector set off our economic crisis, and the reconstruction of the housing sector will help bring it to a close. Each of you has a role to play in this mission, and I urge you to embrace this challenge and to do your part to contribute to the economic rebuilding of our country. Thank you.
Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Board's proposed Regulation II, which implements the interchange fee provisions of section 1075 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The proposed rule has two main components. First, the proposal implements the statutory prohibition on network exclusivity arrangements and merchant routing restrictions. Second, as required by the statute, the proposal establishes standards for determining the maximum permissible level of debit card interchange fees that issuing banks covered by this portion of the statute may receive. These provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and the Board's implementing regulations may result in significant market changes. The nature of these changes is subject to debate, and the banking industry, the retail community, and consumers have very different perspectives regarding the expected effects and their desirability. I will provide some context regarding the role of interchange fees and other restrictions in the debit card system, describe the Board's proposed interchange rule and alternative approaches that we considered, and discuss some of the concerns that have been raised regarding the effect of the statutory requirements on various parties. Overview of Debit Card MarketTo put these provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and our proposed rule in context, debit cards now play a prominent role in our payments system. For millions of consumers, debit cards provide a convenient means of payment to merchants for goods and services. These cards access balances that are held in the cardholder's transaction account at a depository institution or have been loaded on a gift card or other form of prepaid card. The results of a recent Federal Reserve survey show that debit cards are now used in 35 percent of noncash payment transactions, and have eclipsed checks as the most frequently used noncash payment method.1Debit card payments have grown more than any other form of noncash payment over the past decade, increasing from slightly more than 8 billion payments in 2000 to almost 38 billion payments in 2009. Debit cards are accepted at roughly 8 million merchant locations in the United States. Interchange fees are a controversial feature of the debit card system. Most consumers are not aware of these fees. Interchange fees are fees paid by a merchant's bank, also known as the acquirer, to a cardholder's bank, also known as the issuer, for each debit card transaction. The interchange fee schedules are determined by card networks and are generally the same for all issuing banks participating in a network. Merchants' banks generally pass the costs associated with interchange fees through to merchants. In recent years, increases in debit card interchange fee rates, together with the significant growth in the volume of debit card transactions, have led to a substantial rise in the total value of interchange fees paid by merchants. This increase in the aggregate value of interchange fees has precipitated a national and international debate about the appropriate level of those fees. Supporters of the current interchange system contend that payment cards provide substantial value to both consumers and merchants, and that interchange fees are essential for the proper operation of the card networks. Interchange proponents believe that interchange fees play an economically important role in influencing the incentives of merchants to accept cards, card issuers to issue cards, and consumers to hold and use them. Interchange proponents argue that, when setting its fees, a card network must recognize the need to attract consumers and merchants, both of whom are necessary for the card network to exist. In this view, the resulting fees attempt to balance the two sides of the payment card market to maximize the value of the network, including the value of card services for both consumers and merchants. Critics of interchange fees focus on their level and even their very existence. They argue that merchants have limited ability to drop a network's card brand once their customers have come to expect acceptance of those cards. Moreover, critics contend that merchants are constrained from charging customers different prices for different payment methods. They also argue that networks and issuers impose restrictions that eliminate merchants' choice of network over which to route transactions. They assert that, because of these characteristics of the debit card market, merchants generally do not have the leverage to control the costs of accepting debit cards and that network competition tends to result inhigherinterchange fees as networks strive to attract issuers (the recipients of interchange fee revenue) and cardholders (who are beneficiaries of attractive account terms, such as rewards programs, funded by interchange fee revenues). Proposed Regulation IIThe statute addresses transaction routing flexibility for merchants and debit card pricing in several ways. As discussed in more detail below, the statute provides for a minimum number of networks per debit card and establishes the ability of merchants to direct the routing of debit card transactions over those networks. The statute also contains provisions, not subject to implementing rules by the Board, that protect the merchant's ability to provide pricing incentives for customers to use different forms of payment.2In addition, the statute provides overall limitations on interchange fees through standards to be set by the Board. Input to the rulemaking. As input to the development of our proposed rule, Board staff held numerous meetings with card issuers, networks, merchants, consumer advocates, and others to deepen our understanding of the debit card industry. These discussions provided information about the structure and mechanics of the debit card system, fraud losses and fraud-mitigation activities, and fees and costs associated with debit card transactions. Staff also reviewed written submissions by interested parties that highlighted issues to be considered in implementing the statute.3 To obtain further input, last fall the Board surveyed debit card issuers that would be subject to the interchange fee standards, payment card networks, and large merchant acquirers. We requested information about the volume, costs, fees, fraud-prevention activities, and fraud losses associated with different types of debit card transactions. We also asked about network exclusivity arrangements and routing restrictions. The information gathered through these surveys informed our development of the proposed rule. Based on this information, we published a proposed rule for public comment in December. The comment period closes next Tuesday, February 22. We will carefully review all the comments we receive before we adopt a final rule. Let me turn now to the substance of our proposed rule. I will summarize each major statutory requirement, and then describe how the proposed rule implements it, including alternative approaches we considered. Prohibition on network exclusivity and routing restrictions. The statute requires the Board to prescribe rules related to the routing of debit card transactions. First, the Board must adopt rules that prohibit issuers and payment card networks from restricting the number of networks on which a debit card transaction may be processed to fewer than two unaffiliated networks. Second, the Board must adopt rules that prohibit issuers and networks from inhibiting the ability of merchants to route debit card transactions over any network that may process such transactions. Together, these provisions appear designed to give merchants a choice of networks over which a debit card transaction may be routed. The statute applies these provisions to all issuers, including the small issuers and government-administered payment and other prepaid programs that are exempt from the interchange fee standards. The Board requested comment on two alternative interpretations of the prohibition on network exclusivity arrangements. The first possible interpretation would require issuers and networks to allow a debit card transaction to be routed over at least two unaffiliated payment card networks. Under this approach, an issuer could, for example, enable a debit transaction to be routed over one signature-based network and one unaffiliated personal identification number or PIN-based network. The second possible interpretation would require a debit card to have at least two unaffiliated payment card networks for each method of authorization available to the cardholder. For example, under the second interpretation, a debit card that can be used for both signature and PIN debit transactions would have to be able to be routed over at least two unaffiliated signature debit networks and two unaffiliated PIN debit networks. This latter approach would provide more merchants with routing choice,4but would entail far more substantial operational changes by debit card networks, issuers, merchant acquirers, merchants, and their processors.5 As noted above, the law also requires rules that prohibit issuers and networks from inhibiting merchant routing choice. The proposed rule includes examples of issuer or network actions that would impede merchant routing flexibility, such as issuer or network rules that require routing of a transaction over a particular network when multiple networks are available. These proposed network exclusivity and routing rules, along with the statutory provisions that provide merchants more flexibility to set differential prices based on method of payment used, could promote competition among networks and place downward pressure on interchange fees. Interchange fee standards. In addition to these market approaches to constraining interchange fees, the law also limits the amount of any interchange fee that an issuer receives for a debit card transaction to an amount that is "reasonable and proportional to the cost incurred by the issuer with respect to the transaction."6The Board is required by law to establish standards for assessing whether an interchange fee meets the reasonable-and-proportional requirement; the statute directs the Board to adopt these standards by April 21. In developing these standards, the statute explicitly requires the Board to consider certain factors and not to consider other factors. In particular, the statute instructs the Board to consider the functional similarity between debit card transactions and checks, which clear at par (i.e., with no interchange fees).7The statute also directs the Board to distinguish between the issuer's incremental cost to authorize, clear, and settle a particular transaction, which the Boardmustconsider, and other costs that are not specific to a particular electronic debit transaction, which the Boardmay notconsider.8These are the directives that Congress provided in the law. The statute exempts certain issuers and cards from the restrictions on interchange fees. In particular, the law states that the interchange fee standards do not apply to issuers that, together with affiliates, have assets of less than $10 billion.9In addition, the law states that the standards do not apply to debit cards used in government-administered payment programs and certain reloadable, general-use prepaid cards.10 As stated above, the statute requires the Board to consider "the incremental cost incurred by an issuer for the role of the issuer in the authorization, clearance, or settlement" of a particular transaction. We considered limiting the allowable costs to only those costs associated with authorizing a debit card transaction. This approach would reflect a key distinction between debit card and check transactions: the fact that debit card transactions are authorized by the issuer, whereas check transactions are not (although merchants may purchase a third-party check guarantee service). However, because the statute explicitly instructs the Board to consider clearing and settlement costs, in addition to authorization costs, the proposal includes those costs, rather than limiting allowable costs only to authorization costs. We also considered including other costs that are associated with a particular transaction but that are not directly associated with authorizing, clearing, and settling the transaction. Such costs might include, for example, the cost of providing cardholder rewards and the cost of responding to cardholder inquiries regarding specific transactions. However, given the statute's mandate to consider the functional similarities between debit card and check transactions, and the fact that these costs are not charged to merchants in check transactions, our proposal limits allowable costs to those costs that the statute explicitly directs the Board to consider. We specifically requested comment on whether other costs of a particular transaction should be included as allowable costs and what criteria should be used to determine the costs to be included. As I mentioned earlier, the statute directs us to consider theincrementalcost of a particular transaction. There is no single, generally accepted definition of the term "incremental cost," as it applies to a particular transaction, so arriving at a definition was challenging. The incremental cost of a particular transaction could be interpreted to be the same as the marginal cost of that transaction. This approach of interpreting incremental cost would be impractical, in part because marginal cost cannot be identified from cost accounting data and can differ for each transaction. The proposed rule interprets the incremental cost as average variable cost. This interpretation of incremental cost excludes fixed costs, such as network connectivity costs, and common or overhead costs, based on the premise that these categories of costs generally cannot be attributed to any particular transaction, given that they could not be avoided if any particular transaction did not occur. Under this view, the exclusion of fixed costs is required by the statute's explicit directive that the Board may not consider costs that are not specific to a particular transaction. If marginal cost does not vary materially over the relevant volume range, then average variable cost will provide a close approximation of marginal cost. Hence, average variable cost appears to be the closest approximation of what the statute requires when it directs the Board to set standards for "incremental costs." In addition to requesting comment on using the average variable cost of authorizing, clearing, and settling a debit card transaction as the standard for determining whether an interchange fee is reasonable and proportional to the issuer's incremental cost, the Board also requested comment on two alternative approaches for implementing that standard. The first approach is based on each issuer's allowable costs with a safe harbor and a cap. The second approach adopts a cap that is applicable to all covered issuers. We developed these approaches for implementing the standard after analyzing the data collected in our surveys and considering the economic incentives and burdens associated with various approaches to implementation.11Under the first alternative, an issuer would comply with the standard if it received an interchange fee that did not exceed the lesser of its allowable average variable cost and a cap, which we proposed initially be set at 12 cents per transaction. Eighty percent of issuers that responded to the survey and provided the necessary information reported average variable costs of authorizing, clearing, and settling a debit card transaction that were below the proposed 12 cent cap. This alternative would also permit an issuer to comply with the standard by receiving an interchange fee that does not exceed the level of a safe harbor. If the interchange fee is at or below the safe harbor, the issuer would not need to determine its maximum interchange fee based on allowable costs. The proposed rule initially sets the safe harbor at 7 cents per transaction, which represents the median average variable cost of authorizing, clearing, and settling a debit card transaction reported by issuers that responded to our survey and provided that information. Under the second alternative, an issuer would comply with the interchange fee standard as long as it does not receive an interchange fee above the cap. The proposed rule provides the same initial cap of 12 cents per transaction. The statute requires the Board to collect data from card issuers or payment card networks as necessary to carry out the provisions of the statute (and to publish aggregate data on a biannual basis). The Board expects that it would adjust the cap or safe harbor amounts in the future, if warranted by future data collections. Fraud-prevention adjustment. The statute permits, but does not require, the Board to allow for an adjustment to an interchange fee to account for an issuer's costs in preventing fraud, provided the issuer complies with standards established by the Board relating to fraud-prevention activities.12The statute excludes fraud losses as a category of costs that may be recovered through the fraud-prevention adjustment. The proposed rule does not currently include a specific adjustment to the amount of interchange fees for an issuer's fraud-prevention costs because at the time the proposed rule was issued, the Board had insufficient information upon which to propose a specific adjustment and the standards an issuer must meet to qualify to receive it. Instead, the Board requested comment on two general approaches and posed a number of questions related to those alternatives. Under the first approach, the fraud adjustment would allow issuers to recover costs incurred for implementing major innovations that would likely result in substantial reductions in total, industry-wide fraud losses. Under the second approach, the fraud adjustment would reimburse the issuer for reasonably necessary steps it takes to maintain an effective fraud-prevention program. The second approach would not prescribe specific technologies that must be employed as part of the program. After considering the comments we receive, the Board plans to issue a specific proposal on the fraud-prevention adjustment for public comment. Prohibition against circumvention or evasion. The statute grants the Board authority to address circumvention or evasion of the interchange fee restrictions. Under the proposed rule, a finding of circumvention or evasion will generally depend on the facts and circumstances. The proposed rule, however, specifically provides that circumvention or evasion occurs when an issuer receives compensation from a payment card network (for example, in the form of incentive payments) that exceeds the total amount of fees that the issuer pays to the network. Under these circumstances, the net compensation from the network would effectively serve as a transfer to an issuer in excess of the amount allowed under the interchange fee standard. The proposal requests comment on other forms of circumvention or evasion that should be addressed in the rule. Consideration of key issues. The public comment period is still open on the Board's proposal. The Board has already received thousands of comments raising a variety of issues, and we expect to receive many more in the next several days. In addition, one issuing bank has already initiated a court challenge to the constitutionality of the statute. In light of the novelty and unusual complexity of the issues raised in this rulemaking effort, my colleagues and I are very interested in reviewing the full range of comments offered on our proposed rule and are reserving judgment on the terms of the final rule until we have the opportunity to benefit from these comments. A common theme among many commenters and the court challenge is concern about the effect that the statute may have on debit card issuers, including small issuers. As I noted earlier, the statute exempts small issuers from the interchange fee standards. Community banks and credit unions are concerned that the interchange revenue they currently receive will decline to the extent networks do not implement a two-tier interchange fee system that retains the current interchange fee levels for exempt issuers. They are also concerned that even if the networks did differentiate between covered and exempt issuers, some merchants would steer their customers to use lower-cost payment options. Another concern expressed by small issuers is that the statute does not exempt them from the prohibitions on network exclusivity and routing restrictions. Small issuers are concerned that they will incur additional costs to participate in additional debit card networks. Small issuers are also concerned that these provisions may provide an incentive to networks to lower their interchange fees to encourage merchants to route their debit card transactions through that network, thus lowering interchange revenue to all issuers, including small issuers. The plaintiff in the suit against the Board on this rulemaking, on the other hand, is a debit card issuer that does not qualify for the small issuer exemption and is concerned this exemption will effectively put large issuers at a competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis small issuers, which are not subject to the interchange fee restrictions. It contends that small issuers will be able to continue to fund their debit card operations through interchange fees charged to merchants while larger issuers will either be unable to recoup their total costs or will be forced to increase fees to their customers, and thus risk losing the account relationships. Commenters also have differing perspectives on the potential effect of the statute and the proposed rule on consumers. The magnitude of the ultimate effect is not clear and will depend on the behavior of various participants in the debit card networks. For example, card issuers may choose to make up their lost interchange fee revenue by imposing higher fees, or reducing rewards programs, for debit card use or for deposit accounts in general. On the other hand, consumers will benefit to the extent merchants pass on their interchange fee savings in the form of lower prices. ConclusionThe provisions of section 1075 of the Dodd-Frank Act raise a number of complex issues. The Board is devoting substantial resources to understanding and addressing these issues within the parameters established by the statute. We welcome input from the public and from members of the Committee in this effort. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 1.Seehttp://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/other/20101208a.htm.Return to text 2.The statute prohibits payment card networks from inhibiting merchants from providing a discount or other incentive for any particular form of payment, as long as any discount for card use is clearly disclosed and does not differentiate on the basis of issuer or payment card network.&Return to text 3.The meeting summaries and written submissions are posted on the Board's public website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/reform_interchange.htm.Return to text 4.This approach would provide routing choice to merchants that only accept signature debit. About 6 million of the 8 million merchant locations in the United States that accept debit cards do not have PIN debit capability and only have the capability to accept signature debit transactions. In addition, there are currently operational or market impediments to using PIN debit for certain types of transactions, such as most online transactions.Return to text 5.This approach would require issuers to have multiple signature debit networks, such as Visa and MasterCard, on their cards (unless a card had only PIN functionality). The signature debit network over which a transaction is routed is determined by the first digit of the card number; therefore, the industry currently does not have the capability to enable transactions using a particular debit card to be routed over either of two signature networks.Return to text 6.EFTA § 920(a)(2), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(2).Return to text 7.EFTA § 920(a)(4)(A), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(4)(A).Return to text 8.EFTA § 920(a)(4)(B), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(4)(B).Return to text 9.EFTA § 920(a)(6), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(6).Return to text 10.EFTA § 920(a)(7), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(7).Return to text 11.We believe that both alternatives provide better economic incentives for covered issuers to improve the efficiency of their card operations than would be provided by an approach based solely on each issuer's allowable costs. The safe harbor in the first alternative and the cap in the second alternative are also intended to reduce the administrative compliance burden on industry participants and would improve the consistency and ease of enforcement by supervisors.Return to text 12.EFTA § 920(a)(5), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(5).Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Bachus, Ranking Member Frank, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to provide the Federal Reserve Board's views on the implementation of Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). The Board's responsibilities with respect to over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives fall into three broad areas: consultation and coordination with other authorities, both domestic and international; efforts to strengthen the infrastructure of derivatives markets; and supervision of many derivatives dealers and market participants. Consultation and CoordinationThe Dodd-Frank Act requires that the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission consult with the Board on the rules they are crafting to implement Title VII. Immediately after passage of the act, the staff from the commissions and the Board met to fashion a process for this consultation; at the Board, we identified members of the staff with relevant expertise, both here and across the Federal Reserve System. Our staff have commented on proposed rules of the commissions at each stage of the development process to date. In providing feedback, we have tried to bring to bear our experience from supervising dealers and market infrastructure and our familiarity with markets and data sources to assist the commissions. Important coordination activities related to derivatives regulation also are occurring within international groups. Most prominently, the Group of Twenty (G-20) leaders have set out commitments related to reform of the OTC derivatives markets that, when implemented by national authorities, will form a broadly consistent international regulatory approach. Work on the G-20 commitments is being carried forward in numerous groups of technical and policy experts, and staff members from the Federal Reserve are actively participating in these groups. More generally, the Board participates in many international groups that serve as vehicles for coordinating policies related to the participants and the infrastructure of derivatives markets. These groups include the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee), which has recently enhanced international capital, leverage, and liquidity standards for derivatives, and the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, which is working with the International Organization of Securities Commissions to update international standards for systemically important clearing systems, including central counterparties that clear derivatives instruments, and trade repositories. The goal of all of these efforts is to develop a consistent international approach to the regulation and supervision of derivatives products and market infrastructures, as well as to the sound implementation of the agreed-upon approaches. Our aim is to ensure a level playing field that will promote both financial stability and fair competitive conditions by preventing activity from flowing to less regulated jurisdictions. Infrastructure IssuesThe Dodd-Frank Act addressed both the infrastructure of the derivatives markets and the regulation and supervision of its dealers and major participants. Central counterparties are given an expanded role in the clearing and settling of swap and security-based swap (hereafter referred to as "swap") transactions, and the Board believes benefits can flow from this reform. Since 2005, Federal Reserve staff members have worked with market participants to strengthen the infrastructure for OTC derivatives, including developing and broadening the use of central clearing mechanisms and trade repositories. Market participants have already established central counterparties that provide clearing services for some OTC interest rate, energy, and credit derivatives contracts. If properly designed, managed, and overseen, central counterparties offer an important tool for managing counterparty credit risk, and thus they can reduce risk to market participants and to the financial system. Both central counterparties and trade repositories also support regulatory oversight and policymaking through provision of more comprehensive data on the derivatives markets. The Board is committed to continuing to work with other authorities, both in the United States and abroad, to ensure that a largely consistent international approach is taken to central counterparties and trade repositories and that their risk-reducing benefits are realized. Title VIII of the act complements the role of central clearing in Title VII through heightened supervisory oversight of systemically important financial market utilities, including systemically important facilities that clear swaps. This heightened oversight is important because financial market utilities such as central counterparties concentrate risk and thus have the potential to transmit shocks throughout the financial markets. As part of Title VIII, the Board also was given new authority to provide emergency collateralized liquidity in unusual and exigent circumstances to systemically important financial market utilities. We are carefully considering ways to implement this provision in a manner that protects taxpayers and limits any rise in moral hazard. Supervisory IssuesAlthough central counterparties will provide an additional tool for managing counterparty credit risk, enhancements to the risk-management policies and procedures for individual market participants will continue to be a high priority for supervisors. As the reforms outlined in the act are implemented, the most active firms in bilateral OTC markets likely will become active clearing members of central counterparties. As such, the quality of risk management at these firms importantly affects the ability of the central counterparty to manage its risks effectively and to deliver risk-reducing benefits to the markets. Capital and margin requirements are central to the prudential regulation of financial institutions active in derivatives markets, as well as to the internal risk-management processes of such firms. The major rulemaking responsibility of the Board and other prudential regulators under Title VII is to adopt capital and margin regulations for the noncleared swaps of banks and other prudentially regulated entities that are swap dealers and major swap participants. The commissions are responsible for adopting capital and margin requirements for swap dealers and major swap participants that are not supervised by a prudential regulator. The prudential regulators and the commissions are consulting in developing the rules, and all agencies must, to the maximum extent practicable, adopt comparable standards. The commissions also have the responsibility for defining those dealers and major participants, and they have consulted with the Board prior to issuing their proposed rules. The commissions have tried to identify objective criteria that would enable firms to monitor whether they fall within the scope of the definitions. The comment process should provide information as to the effectiveness and appropriateness of the proposed approaches. The capital and margin rules for banks and other prudentially regulated dealers and major participants are to be developed jointly with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and the Farm Credit Administration. The Board and the other U.S. banking agencies played an active role in developing the enhanced capital, leverage, and liquidity regime agreed to in the Basel Committee. These requirements will, among other things, strengthen the prudential framework for OTC derivatives by increasing OTC derivatives' risk-based capital and leverage requirements and by requiring banking firms to hold an additional buffer of high-quality, liquid assets to address potential liquidity needs resulting from their derivatives portfolios. The statute requires the prudential regulators to adopt rules imposing initial and variation margins on noncleared swaps to which a swap dealer or major swap participant that they oversee is a party. The statute also directs that these margin requirements be risk based. Within these statutory constraints, the Board and the other prudential regulators are working to implement the margin provisions in a way that takes appropriate account of the relatively low systemic risk posed by most end users. For example, we are considering if it would be appropriate to allow a banking organization that is a dealer or major participant to establish a threshold with respect to an end-user counterparty, based on a credit exposure limit that is approved and monitored as part of the credit approval process, below which the end user would not have to post margin. The Board appreciates that posting margin would impose costs on end users, possibly inhibiting their ability to manage their risks. The Board also believes that the margin regime should be applied only to contracts entered into after the new requirement becomes effective. A much-discussed part of the act is the requirement that banks push portions of their swap activity into affiliates or face restrictions on their access to the discount window or deposit insurance. Under the push-out provisions, banking organizations with deposit insurance or access to the Federal Reserve's discount window will have to reorganize some of their derivatives activity, pushing certain types of swaps out of subsidiary banks and into separate legal entities that will require separate capitalization and separate documentation of trades with existing customers. The act permits domestic banks to continue to engage in derivatives activities that have been a traditional focus of banks, including hedging activities and dealing in interest rate swaps, cleared credit default swaps, and other swaps that reference assets that banks are eligible to hold. However, because of the specific language contained in the act, this exemption for traditional bank derivatives activities does not apply to foreign banking firms that have access to the Federal Reserve's discount window through their U.S. branches. A possibly unintended effect of the act's push-out provision may be to require some foreign firms to reorganize their existing U.S. derivatives activities to a greater extent than U.S. firms. ConclusionAs the implementation process for the act continues, the challenge facing the Board is to enhance supervision, oversight, and prudential standards of major derivatives market participants in a manner that promotes more-effective risk management and reduces systemic risk, while retaining the significant benefits of derivatives to the businesses and investors who use them to manage financial market risks. The Board is working diligently to achieve these goals.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the National Press Club, Washington, D.C. Good afternoon. I am pleased to be here at the National Press Club, and I'm especially glad for the opportunity to have a conversation with journalists who write about economic policy from our nation's capital. Your job is not easy, but it is essential. Virtually every American is affected by developments in the economy and in economic policy. But contemporary economic issues can be highly complex, and few nonspecialists have the time or the background to master these issues on their own. The public must therefore rely on the diligent reporting, clear thinking, and lucid writing of reporters determined to go beyond dueling bumper stickers and sound bites to help people understand what they need to make good decisions, both in their personal finances and at the polls. These are weighty responsibilities, and the journalists I know take them very seriously. Today, I will provide a brief update on the economy and how I expect it to evolve in the near term. Then I will turn to the implications for monetary policy. Finally, I will briefly discuss the daunting fiscal challenges that we face as a nation. The Economic OutlookThe economic recovery that began in the middle of 2009 appears to have strengthened in recent months, although, to date, growth has not been fast enough to bring about a significant improvement in the job market. The early phase of the recovery, in the second half of 2009 and in early 2010, was largely attributable to the stabilization of the financial system, the effects of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, and a strong boost to production from businesses rebuilding their depleted inventories. But economic growth slowed significantly last spring as the impetus from inventory building and fiscal stimulus diminished and as Europe's debt problems roiled global financial markets. More recently, however, we have seen increased evidence that a self-sustaining recovery in consumer and business spending may be taking hold. Notably, we learned last week that households increased their spending in the fourth quarter, in real terms, at an annual rate of more than 4 percent. Although a significant portion of this pickup reflected strong sales of motor vehicles, the recent gains in consumer spending look to have been reasonably broad based. Businesses' investments in new equipment and software grew robustly over most of last year, as firms replaced aging equipment and as the demand for their products and services expanded. In contrast, in the housing sector, the overhang of vacant and foreclosed homes continues to weigh heavily on both home prices and residential construction. Overall, however, improving household and business confidence, accommodative monetary policy, and more-supportive financial conditions, including an apparent increase in the willingness of banks to make loans, seems likely to lead to a more rapid pace of economic recovery in 2011 than we saw last year. While indicators of spending and production have, on balance, been encouraging, the job market has improved only slowly. Following the loss of about 8‑1/2 million jobs in 2008 and 2009, private-sector employment showed gains in 2010. However, these gains were barely sufficient to accommodate the inflow of recent graduates and other new entrants to the labor force and, therefore, not enough to significantly reduce the overall unemployment rate. Recent data do provide some grounds for optimism on the employment front; for example, initial claims for unemployment insurance have generally been trending down, and indicators of job openings and firms' hiring plans have improved. Even so, with output growth likely to be moderate for awhile and with employers reportedly still reluctant to add to their payrolls, it will be several years before the unemployment rate has returned to a more normal level. Until we see a sustained period of stronger job creation, we cannot consider the recovery to be truly established. On the inflation front, we have recently seen significant increases in some highly visible prices, notably for gasoline. Indeed, prices of many commodities have risen lately, largely as a result of the very strong demand from fast-growing emerging market economies, coupled, in some cases, with constraints on supply. Nevertheless, overall inflation remains quite low: Over the 12 months ending in December, prices for all the goods and services purchased by households increased by only 1.2 percent, down from 2.4 percent over the prior 12 months.1To assess underlying trends in inflation, economists also follow several alternative measures of inflation; one such measure is so-called core inflation, which excludes the more volatile food and energy components and therefore can be a better predictor of where overall inflation is headed. Core inflation was only 0.7 percent in 2010, compared with around 2-1/2 percent in 2007, the year before the recession began. Wage growth has slowed as well, with average hourly earnings increasing only 1.8 percent last year. These downward trends in wage and price inflation are not surprising, given the substantial slack in the economy. Monetary PolicyIn sum, although economic growth will probably increase this year, we expect the unemployment rate to remain stubbornly above, and inflation to remain persistently below, the levels that Federal Reserve policymakers have judged to be consistent over the longer term with our mandate from the Congress to foster maximum employment and price stability. Under such conditions, the Federal Reserve would typically ease monetary policy by reducing the target for its short-term policy interest rate, the federal funds rate. However, the target range for the funds rate has been near zero since December 2008, and the Federal Reserve has indicated that economic conditions are likely to warrant an exceptionally low target rate for an extended period. As a result, for the past two years we have been using alternative tools to provide additional monetary accommodation. In particular, over the past two years the Federal Reserve has further eased monetary conditions by purchasing longer-term securities on the open market. From December 2008 through March 2010, we purchased about $1.7 trillion in longer-term Treasury, agency, and agency mortgage-backed securities. In August 2010, we began reinvesting the proceeds from all securities that matured or were redeemed in longer-term Treasury securities, so as to keep the size of our securities holdings roughly constant. Around the same time, we began to signal to financial markets that we were considering providing additional monetary policy accommodation by conducting further asset purchases. And in early November, we announced a plan to purchase an additional $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities by the middle of this year. All these purchases are settled through the banking system, with the result that depository institutions now hold a very high level of reserve balances with the Federal Reserve. Although large-scale purchases of longer-term securities are a different monetary policy tool than the more familiar approach of targeting the federal funds rate, the two types of policies affect the economy in similar ways. Conventional monetary policy easing works by lowering market expectations for the future path of short-term interest rates, which, in turn, reduces the current level of longer-term interest rates and contributes to an easing in broader financial conditions. These changes, by reducing borrowing costs and raising asset prices, bolster household and business spending and thus increase economic activity. By comparison, the Federal Reserve's purchases of longer-term securities have not affected very short-term interest rates, which remain close to zero, but instead put downward pressure directly on longer-term interest rates. By easing conditions in credit and financial markets, these actions encourage spending by households and businesses through essentially the same channels as conventional monetary policy, thereby supporting the economic recovery. A wide range of market indicators supports the view that the Federal Reserve's securities purchases have been effective at easing financial conditions. For example, since August, when we announced our policy of reinvesting maturing securities and signaled we were considering more purchases, equity prices have risen significantly, volatility in the equity market has fallen, corporate bond spreads have narrowed, and inflation compensation as measured in the market for inflation-indexed securities has risen from low to more normal levels. Yields on 5- to 10-year Treasury securities initially declined markedly as markets priced in prospective Fed purchases; these yields subsequently rose, however, as investors became more optimistic about economic growth and as traders scaled back their expectations of future securities purchases. All of these developments are what one would expect to see when monetary policy becomes more accommodative, whether through conventional or less conventional means. Interestingly, these developments are also remarkably similar to those that occurred during the earlier episode of policy easing, notably in the months following our March 2009 announcement of a significant expansion in securities purchases. The fact that financial markets responded in very similar ways to each of these policy actions lends credence to the view that these actions had the expected effects on markets and are thereby providing significant support to job creation and the economy. My colleagues and I have said that we will review the asset purchase program regularly in light of incoming information and will adjust it as needed to promote maximum employment and stable prices. In particular, it bears emphasizing that we have the necessary tools to smoothly and effectively exit from the asset purchase program at the appropriate time. In particular, our ability to pay interest on reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve Banks will allow us to put upward pressure on short-term market interest rates and thus to tighten monetary policy when required, even if bank reserves remain high. Moreover, we have developed additional tools that will allow us to drain or immobilize bank reserves as required to facilitate the smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation when conditions warrant. If needed, we could also tighten policy by redeeming or selling securities. Fiscal PolicyFiscal policymakers also face significant challenges. The federal budget deficit has expanded to an average of more than 9 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) over the past two years, up from an average of about 2 percent of GDP during the three years prior to the recession. The extraordinarily wide deficit largely reflects the weakness of the economy along with the actions that the Administration and the Congress took to ease the recession and steady financial markets. However, even after economic and financial conditions have returned to normal, the federal budget will remain on an unsustainable path, with the budget gap becoming increasingly large over time, unless the Congress enacts significant changes in fiscal programs. For example, under plausible assumptions about how fiscal policies might evolve in the absence of major legislative changes, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects the deficit to fall from around 9 percent of GDP currently to roughly 5 percent of GDP by 2015, but then to rise to about 6‑1/2 percent of GDP by the end of the decade.2After that, it projects the budget outlook to deteriorate even more rapidly, with federal debt held by the public reaching almost 90 percent of GDP by 2020 and 150 percent of GDP by 2030, up from about 60 percent at the end of fiscal year 2010. The long-term fiscal challenges confronting the nation are especially daunting because they are mostly the product of powerful underlying trends, not short-term or temporary factors. The two most important driving forces for the federal budget are the aging of the U.S. population and rapidly rising health-care costs. Indeed, the CBO projects that federal spending for health-care programs--which includes Medicare, Medicaid, and subsidies to purchase health insurance through new insurance exchanges--will roughly double as a percentage of GDP over the next 25 years.3The ability to control health-care costs, while still providing high-quality care to those who need it, will be critical for bringing the federal budget onto a sustainable path. The retirement of the baby-boom generation will also strain Social Security, as the number of workers paying taxes into the system rises more slowly than the number of people receiving benefits. Currently, there are about five individuals between the ages of 20 and 64 for each person aged 65 and older. By 2030, when most of the baby boomers will have retired, this ratio is projected to decline to around 3.4Overall, the projected fiscal pressures associated with Social Security are considerably smaller than the pressures associated with federal health programs, but they are still notable. The CBO's long-term budget projections, by design, do not account for the likely adverse economic effects of such high debt and deficits. But if government debt and deficits were actually to grow at the pace envisioned, the economic and financial effects would be severe. Sustained high rates of government borrowing would both drain funds away from private investment and increase our debt to foreigners, with adverse long-run effects on U.S. output, incomes, and standards of living. Moreover, diminishing investor confidence that deficits will be brought under control would ultimately lead to sharply rising interest rates on government debt and, potentially, to broader financial turmoil. In a vicious circle, high and rising interest rates would cause debt-service payments on the federal debt to grow even faster, causing further increases in the debt-to-GDP ratio and making fiscal adjustment all the more difficult. How much adjustment is needed to restore fiscal sustainability in the United States? To help answer this question, it is useful to apply the concept of the primary budget deficit, which is the government budget deficit excluding interest payments on the national debt. To stabilize the ratio of federal debt to the GDP--a convenient benchmark for assessing fiscal sustainability--the primary budget deficit must be reduced to zero.5Under the CBO projection that I noted earlier, the primary budget deficit is expected to be 2 percent of GDP in 2015 and then rise to almost 3 percent of GDP in 2020 and 6 percent of GDP in 2030. These projections provide a gauge of the adjustments that will be necessary to attain fiscal sustainability. To put the budget on a sustainable trajectory, policy actions--either reductions in spending or increases in revenues or some combination of the two--will have to be taken to eventually close these primary budget gaps. By definition, the unsustainable trajectories of deficits and debt that the CBO outlines cannot actually happen, because creditors would never be willing to lend to a government with debt, relative to national income, that is rising without limit. The economist Herbert Stein succinctly described this type of situation: "If something cannot go on forever, it will stop."6One way or the other, fiscal adjustments sufficient to stabilize the federal budget must occur at some point. The question is whether these adjustments will take place through a careful and deliberative process that weighs priorities and gives people adequate time to adjust to changes in government programs or tax policies, or whether the needed fiscal adjustments will be a rapid and painful response to a looming or actual fiscal crisis. Acting now to develop a credible program to reduce future deficits would not only enhance economic growth and stability in the long run, but could also yield substantial near-term benefits in terms of lower long-term interest rates and increased consumer and business confidence. Plans recently put forward by the President's National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform and other prominent groups provide useful starting points for a much-needed national conversation. Although these proposals differ on many details, they demonstrate that realistic solutions to our fiscal problems are available. Of course, economic growth is affected not only by the levels of taxes and spending, but also by their composition and structure. I hope that, in addressing our long-term fiscal challenges, the Congress and the Administration will seek reforms to the government's tax policies and spending priorities that serve not only to reduce the deficit, but also to enhance the long-term growth potential of our economy--for example, by reducing disincentives to work and to save, by encouraging investment in the skills of our workforce as well as in new machinery and equipment, by promoting research and development, and by providing necessary public infrastructure. Our nation cannot reasonably expect to grow its way out of our fiscal imbalances, but a more productive economy will ease the tradeoffs that we face. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 1. Inflation data are derived using the price index for personal consumption expenditures.Return to text 2. The so-called alternative fiscal policy scenario, which assumes, among other things, that most of the tax cuts enacted in 2001 and 2003 are made permanent and that discretionary federal outlays rise at the same rate as GDP, is presented in Congressional Budget Office (2010),The Long-Term Budget Outlook(Washington: CBO, June (revised August)).Return to text 3. See the two long-term scenarios for mandatory federal spending on health care shown in figure 2-3, p. 39, in CBO,The Long-Term Budget Outlook, in note 2.Return to text 4. These figures are the inverse of the ratio of the population age 65 or older as a percentage of the population ages 20 to 64 shown in figure 3-2, p. 47, in CBO,The Long-Term Budget Outlook, in note 2.Return to text 5. This result requires that the nominal rate of interest paid on government debt equal the rate of growth of nominal GDP, a condition which usually serves as a reasonable approximation. If the rate of interest on government debt is higher than the growth rate of nominal GDP, as might happen if creditors become wary of lending, then a primary budget surplus rather than primary balance is needed to stabilize the ratio of debt to GDP.Return to text 6. Herbert Stein (1997), "Herb Stein's Unfamiliar Quotations,"Slate, May 16, www.slate.com/id/2561.Return to text
Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the University of Chicago Booth School of Business U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York The U.S. Monetary Policy Forum has become an important venue for promoting an exchange of views among policymakers, academics, and financial market participants. I'm pleased to participate in this panel on lessons learned about unconventional monetary policy. In my remarks today, I'll highlight the role of central bank communications in bolstering the effectiveness of unconventional monetary policy.1It is not my intention to provide new information about the outlook for the U.S. economy or monetary policy. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has deployed unconventional monetary policy tools to promote economic recovery and price stability since late 2008. In particular, after the intensification of the financial crisis, conventional monetary policy became constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. At that point, the FOMC began to provide forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate, and the Federal Reserve also announced a program to buy agency debt and mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Over time, the purchase program was augmented substantially and was expanded to include longer-term Treasury securities. Furthermore, on several occasions, the FOMC has communicated to the markets about the likely longer-term trajectory of its holdings of Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS. In the remainder of my remarks, I will present some evidence regarding the effectiveness of these policy tools and discuss important similarities and differences in the transmission mechanisms through which they influence the economy. I will also present some simulations of a macroeconometric model to illustrate the importance of clear and effective communication in conjunction with the use of these unconventional policy tools. Some General ObservationsIt is important to recognize at the outset that conventional and unconventional monetary policy actions bear many similarities. Forward guidance concerning the path of the federal funds rate, for example, is explicitly intended to influence market expectations concerning the future trajectory of shorter-term interest rates and thereby affect longer-term interest rates. That said, standard monetary policy actions also typically alter not just current short-term rates, but theanticipatedpath of short-term rates as well, influencing longer-term rates through the identical channel. In fact, central bankers have long recognized that this "expectations channel" operates most effectively when the public understands how policymakers expect economic conditions and monetary policy to evolve over time, and how the central bank would respond to any changes in the outlook. The transmission channels through which longer-term securities purchases and conventional monetary policy affect economic conditions are also quite similar, though not identical. In particular, central bank purchases of longer-term securities work through a portfolio balance channel to depress term premiums and longer-term interest rates. The theoretical rationale for the view that longer-term yields should be directly linked to the outstanding quantity of longer-term assets in the hands of the public dates back at least to the 1950s.2 Each of these policy tools tends to generate spillovers to other financial markets, such as boosting stock prices and putting moderate downward pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar. My reading of the evidence, which I will briefly review, is that both unconventional policy tools--the use of forward guidance and the purchases of longer-term securities--have proven effective in easing financial conditions and hence have helped mitigate the constraint associated with the zero lower bound on the federal funds rate. The Effectiveness of Forward GuidanceI will begin with an assessment of the FOMC's forward guidance concerning the federal funds rate, which began when the FOMC reduced its funds rate target to a range of 0 to 1/4 percentage point. In particular, the December 2008 FOMC meeting statement indicated that "economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some time." Identical guidance was reiterated in January 2009, and in March 2009 the phrase "for some time" was changed to "for an extended period." Figure 1suggests that the provision of guidance concerning the future path of the federal funds rate likely contributed to more accommodative financial market conditions. In particular, the consensus outlook of professional forecasters regarding the path of the funds rate shifted down markedly in the Blue Chip survey published at the beginning of February 2009 (the solid line) compared with the survey published two months earlier (the dashed line).3 A crucial feature of the FOMC's policy communications is that the Committee's forward guidance has been framednotas an unconditional commitment to a specific federal funds rate path, but rather as an expectation that is explicitly contingent on economic conditions. Since November 2009, the Committee has specifically indicated that the relevant economic conditions include "low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations." An important consequence of such conditionality, serving to enhance the effectiveness of the guidance, is that incoming information about economic and financial developments has led forecasters and investors to revise their outlook for the path of the funds rate even in the absence of a change in the forward guidance language. The evolution of financial market expectations concerning the funds rate path over the past year illustrates that the conditional nature of the FOMC's forward guidance allows incoming economic data to shift market views. For example, as shown in the left panel ofFigure 2, the expected path of the funds rate shifted down markedly during the spring and early summer of last year in the wake of weaker readings on economic activity and prices and of some concerns about potential spillovers from developments in Europe. Those expectations shifted down somewhat further during late summer and early autumn. Conversely, as shown in the right panel, funds rate expectations have shifted upward over the past several months in response to more-positive economic news and greater confidence that a self-sustaining economic recovery may be taking hold. Down the road, once the recovery is well established and the appropriate time for beginning to firm the stance of policy appears to be drawing near, the FOMC will naturally need to adjust its "extended period" guidance and develop an alternative communications strategy to shape market expectations about the policy outlook. However, if there were an unexpected faltering of the recovery or a substantial widening of downside risks to economic activity and inflation, the forward guidance now in place might well be sufficient to facilitate an outward shift in the expected path of the funds rate, just as we saw over the course of last year. If financial market participants appeared to be expecting policy firming to begin somewhat sooner than policymakers considered desirable or appropriate under such circumstances, the language of the forward guidance could be adjusted to shift expectations toward the somewhat longer horizon over which the Committee expected the federal funds rate to remain extraordinarily low.Figure 3illustrates the potential for such a change in forward guidance to support economic activity. In the left panel, the dashed line denotes the baseline path for the federal funds rate as embedded in current financial market data, while the solid line corresponds to an alternative path in which the initiation of policy firming is postponed by one year. If policymakers viewed that alternative path as appropriate and market participants came to share that view, then financial conditions would become significantly more accommodative, even in the absence of any change in the current level of the funds rate. As shown in the right panel, a simulation of the FRB/US model--a macroeconometric model developed and maintained at the Federal Reserve Board--indicates that such a shift in policy expectations would be associated with a lower trajectory for the unemployment rate (solid line) and a somewhat higher path of core inflation (dashed line) over coming years. The Effectiveness of Asset PurchasesI will now turn to an assessment of the FOMC's program of longer-term securities purchases. Both theory and empirical evidence suggest that asset prices and yields are affected not only by current securities purchases but also, importantly, by market expectations concerning future FOMC securities holdings. This observation implies that central bank communications pertaining to any important feature of the path of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet should influence financial conditions. Event studies can therefore be helpful in gauging the financial market effects of such communications.4For example,table 1reports the response of selected financial variables on several key dates associated with the FOMC's purchases of longer-term securities. In late November 2008, the Federal Reserve announced that it would purchase up to $600 billion in agency MBS and agency debt, and Chairman Bernanke provided further details in a speech one week later. On March 18, 2009, the FOMC announced that the program would be expanded by an additional $850 billion in purchases of agency securities and by $300 billion in purchases of longer-term Treasury securities. Evidently, each of those communications was associated with substantial declines in longer-term nominal and real Treasury yields and in rates on agency MBS and corporate debt. Last August, the FOMC announced that it would begin reinvesting principal payments on agency MBS and agency debt into longer-term Treasury securities, and over the subsequent couple of months or so, the public remarks of Federal Reserve officials made note of the possibility of a further expansion of the portfolio. Consequently, when the Committee announced in early November that it intended to purchase an additional $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities, that decision was largely anticipated by financial market participants, and it occasioned only minimal market response. However, taken together the movements in longer-term interest rates that occurred between the August and November FOMC meetings are strikingly similar to those on the prior announcement dates shown in the table, bolstering the judgment that these securities purchases contribute to more accommodative financial conditions. One complication that arises in evaluating the contribution of portfolio balance effects to the observed movements in longer-term rates is that news about large-scale asset purchases may also influence investors' perceptions regarding the likely path of short-term interest rates. Such effects may not have been very important, however, when the FOMC announced the expansion of its securities purchases in March 2009. As shown infigure 4, that announcement appeared to have only modest effects on the outlook of professional forecasters (left panel) and investors (right panel) regarding the likely trajectory of the federal funds rate. Thus, the substantial decline in longer-term yields following this announcement appears to have mainly reflected the effect of the purchases in pushing down term premiums rather than a shift in the expected path of the funds rate.5This evidence suggests that the portfolio balance channel of influence is not only operative but also fairly large. That said, as we saw in figure 2, the expected path of the federal funds rate does appear to have flattened for a time during the late summer and early autumn of last year. Even allowing for that change in near-term policy expectations, however, it seems reasonable to conclude that the announcement of additional securities purchases mainly affected financial conditions through the portfolio balance channel. To assess the macroeconomic effects of the Fed's large-scale asset purchase program, I would like to highlight some findings from a recent study by four Federal Reserve System economists.6As shown infigure 5, the authors constructed an illustrative baseline trajectory for the Federal Reserve's securities holdings over the course of this decade (solid line) as well as an alternative trajectory corresponding to a counterfactual scenario in which the FOMC never decided to initiate any securities purchases (dashed line). The baseline incorporates the first round of asset purchases--which brought the Federal Reserve's securities holdings to a little more than $2 trillion. It embeds an assumption that the FOMC will complete the purchases announced last November so that the balance sheet expands to about $2.6 trillion by the middle of this year. From that point forward, the authors assume that the overall size of the portfolio will remain unchanged until mid-2012 and then shrink gradually at a rate sufficient to return it to its pre-crisis trend line by mid-2016, whereupon the Federal Reserve resumes expanding its holdings at the trend rate. Full convergence of thecompositionof the portfolio is not complete until 2017, however, as the average maturity of the portfolio is still somewhat elevated in 2016. It should also be noted that the trend line itself rises gradually over time as a consequence of steady growth in demand for U.S. currency. Of course, the baseline trajectory is purely illustrative: The actual evolution of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet will depend on the decisions that the FOMC will make in light of economic and financial developments. Nonetheless, the overall characteristics of this assumed trajectory seem broadly consistent with the sense of the Committee's discussions last spring. In particular, as reported in the minutes of the April 2010 FOMC meeting, most Committee participants expressed a preference for renormalizing the size and composition of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet over a period of about five years that would commence following the initiation of policy firming. Figure 6shows the results of simulations of the FRB/US model to gauge the effect of these asset purchases on the unemployment rate and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation. For this purpose, the baseline path (denoted by the dashed line in each panel) is constructed using historical data in conjunction with the latest set of consensus projections from the Survey of Professional Forecasters conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Then the staff model is used to simulate the counterfactual scenario in which the FOMC never conducts any asset purchases (denoted by the solid line in each panel).7The pace of recovery under the baseline scenario is expected to be painfully slow. But the counterfactual scenario suggests that conditions would have been even worse in the absence of the Federal Reserve's securities purchases: The unemployment rate would have remained persistently above 10 percent, and core inflation would have fallen below zero this year. Of course, considerable uncertainty surrounds those estimates, but they nonetheless suggest that the benefits of the asset purchase programs probably have been sizeable. My final observation concerning the FOMC's asset purchase program pertains to the importance of clear and effective communications in the years ahead. As I noted earlier, both theory and empirical evidence suggest that market prices and yields at any particular time reflect both the Federal Reserve's current securities holdings and also markets participants' expectations for its future holdings. Consequently, a shift in expectations concerning the trajectory of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet could have an important effect on financial conditions going forward. In particular, financial conditions depend on market expectations not only concerning the amount of the FOMC's purchases but also concerning the anticipated timing and pace of the eventual unwinding of those holdings. For example, financial conditions would likely tighten immediately if market participants came to expect a more rapid renormalization of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. In contrast, if market participants were to anticipate a more gradual renormalization, financial conditions would likely become more stimulative. To illustrate the potential importance of such changes in expectations,figure 7depicts a scenario in which markets come to anticipate that the Federal Reserve will shrink its balance sheet more rapidly than in the baseline scenario. The left panel shows the assumed contour of an expected acceleration of asset sales that would renormalize the overall size of the portfolio within about two years (solid line), roughly twice as fast as under the baseline scenario (dashed line). The announcement of such a strategy would cause a substantial rise in term premiums relative to the baseline scenario, and, assuming no offsetting change in the path of the federal funds rate, the resulting higher level of long-term interest rates would damp aggregate spending. The right panel depicts the macroeconomic effects of the more rapid runoff of the balance sheet in terms of deviations from the baseline scenario: The unemployment rate (solid line) is significantly higher, and core PCE inflation (dashed line) is somewhat lower. ConclusionIn conclusion, I believe that both forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases have been effective tools for providing additional monetary accommodation under circumstances in which conventional monetary policy has been constrained by the zero lower bound on the federal funds rate. My colleagues on the FOMC and I are regularly reviewing the asset purchase program in light of incoming information, and we will adjust the program as needed to promote our statutory mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. Recognizing the importance of market expectations to the effectiveness of unconventional policies, the Committee will continue to seek ways to enhance the clarity and effectiveness of our monetary policy communications. ReferencesBlue Chip Financial Forecasts: Top Analysts' Forecasts of U.S. and Foreign Interest Rates, Currency Values, and the Factors That Influence Them(2008 and 2009). New York: Aspen Publishers, monthly, http://www.aspenpublishers.com/blue-chip-publications.htm. Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams (2011). "Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events? (567 KB PDF)" Working Paper series 2011-01. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, January. Culbertson, John M. (1957). "The Term Structure of Interest Rates,"Quarterly Journalof Economics, vol. 71 (November), pp. 485-517. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2010). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-52. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2010). "Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports441. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March. Hamilton, James D., and Jing (Cynthia) Wu (2011). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment (877 KB PDF)," working paper. San Diego: University of California, San Diego, February. Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2010). "The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing (748 KB PDF)," Working Paper 393. London: Bank of England, July (revised August). Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Sutch (1966). "Innovations in Interest Rate Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 56 (March), pp. 178-97. Tobin, James (1958). "Liquidity Preference as Behavior towards Risk,"Review of Economic Studies, vol.25 (February), pp. 65-86. Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila (2009). "A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 15487. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. 1.These remarks solely reflect my own views and not necessarily those of any other member of the Federal Open Market Committee. I appreciate assistance from the members of the Board staff--including William English, Yuriy Kitsul, Jean-Philippe Laforte, Andrew Levin, David Reifschneider, and David Wilcox--who contributed to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text 2.Early examples include Culbertson (1957), Tobin (1958), and Modigliani and Sutch (1966). More recently, Vayanos and Vila (2009) study a preferred-habitat model in which short- and long-term assets are imperfect substitutes in investors' portfolios and the effect of arbitrageurs is limited by their risk aversion or other market frictions such as capital constraints.Return to text 3.See Blue Chip Financial Forecasts (2008, 2009).Return to text 4.A burgeoning literature focuses on the experience with asset purchase programs of the Federal Reserve and other central banks; for example, see D'Amico and King (2010); Gagnon and others (2010); Hamilton and Wu (2010); and Joyce and others (2010).Return to text 5.As noted earlier, in the March 2009 FOMC statement, the Committee did modify its forward guidance by indicating that exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would likely be warranted "for an extended period" (rather than "for some time", as in the December 2008 and January 2009 FOMC statements), but that modification does not appear to have substantially influenced professional forecasters' expectations about the near-term path of the federal funds rate. To the extent that the expanded asset purchases were expected to strengthen the economic recovery, the change in the forward guidance may have helped clarify that the FOMC did not intend to offset that effect by accelerating the initiation of policy firming; consequently, expectations for the trajectory of the federal funds rate were little changed on balance.Return to text 6.See Chung and others (2011).Return to text 7.Because the latest release of the Survey of Professional Forecasters provided forecasts of the unemployment rate only through 2014, the authors extrapolated the forecasts through 2018 using the extended consensus forecasts reported in the October 2010 Blue Chip survey.Return to text