Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencySecurities and Exchange Commission Four federal agencies on Friday extended until February 13, 2012, the comment period on a proposal to implement the so-called Volcker Rule of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The Dodd-Frank Act requires regulators to implement certain prohibitions and restrictions on the ability of a banking entity and nonbank financial company to engage in proprietary trading and have certain interests in, or relationships with, a hedge fund or private equity fund. The comment period was extended as part of a coordinated interagency effort to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Originally, comments were due by January 13, 2012. The proposal was issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examinations procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small asset-size threshold are not subjected to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for urban wage earners and clerical workers, not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 3.43 percent increase in the CPI index for the period ending in November 2011, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2012. The agencies will publish the adjustments in the Federal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on thewebsiteof the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Agencies Seek Comment on Additional Revisions to the Market Risk Capital Rules The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced they are seeking comment on a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) that would amend an earlier NPR announced in December 2010. The initial NPR proposed modifications to the agencies' market risk capital rules for banking organizations with significant trading activities. The amended NPR includes alternative standards of creditworthiness to be used in place of credit ratings to determine the capital requirements for certain debt and securitization positions covered by the market risk capital rules. The proposed creditworthiness standards include the use of country risk classifications published by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development for sovereign positions, company-specific financial information and stock market volatility for corporate debt positions, and a supervisory formula for securitization positions. The earlier NPR was based largely on the revisions to the market risk framework published by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision since 2005. However, it did not include aspects of the Basel Committee revisions that rely on credit ratings. Under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, all federal agencies must remove references to, and requirements of, reliance on credit ratings from their regulations and replace them with appropriate alternatives for evaluating creditworthiness. The agencies believe that the capital requirements resulting from the implementation of these alternative standards would be generally consistent with the standards in the Basel Committee's revisions. The agencies expect to publish a final market risk capital rule after consideration of the comments on both NPRs. Comments on this NPR are requested by February 3, 2012. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTMLComments:Submit|View
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Submitted to the Subcommittee on Housing, Transportation, and Community Development, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. IntroductionChairman Menendez, Ranking Member DeMint, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to submit a statement for the record for the hearing entitled "Helping Homeowners Harmed by Foreclosures: Ensuring Accountability and Transparency in Foreclosure Reviews." I welcome the opportunity to update the Subcommittee on the Federal Reserve's progress in implementing the foreclosure review process as well as its progress in implementing the requirements of the enforcement actions that the Board issued in April 2011 against 10 banking organizations. Those actions were taken in response to patterns of misconduct and negligence related to deficient practices in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing.1Those deficiencies were identified by examiners during reviews conducted from November 2010 to January 2011 and represented significant and pervasive failures as well as unsafe and unsound practices at those 10 institutions. Corrective actions and other measures were required by the formal enforcement actions. This statement focuses on the most significant requirements of these orders and on the implementation and execution of those requirements. More specifically, this statement addresses the implementation of the requirements in the Federal Reserve's enforcement actions that each banking organization with servicing operations supervised by the Federal Reserve (a) retain one or more independent consultants acceptable to the Federal Reserve to conduct an independent review of residential mortgage foreclosure actions (the "Foreclosure Review") to determine whether borrowers suffered financial injury as a result of errors, misrepresentations, or other deficiencies in the foreclosure process; (b) submit an engagement letter acceptable to the Federal Reserve that describes how each independent consultant retained by the institution and approved by the Federal Reserve will conduct the Foreclosure Review; (c) establish, in connection with the Foreclosure Review, a process for the receipt and review of borrower claims and complaints (the "Borrower Outreach Program"); and (d) submit specific plans acceptable to the Federal Reserve designed to correct practices that resulted in servicer errors and to prevent future abuses in the loan modification and foreclosure processes. This statement also addresses the requirements in the Federal Reserve's enforcement actions that parent holding companies submit plans acceptable to the Federal Reserve to improve holding company oversight of residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing conducted by bank and nonbank subsidiaries. The Foreclosure Review and Independent ConsultantsThe Federal Reserve's enforcement actions require the servicers to retain one or more independent consultants acceptable to the Federal Reserve to conduct the Foreclosure Review to determine whether borrowers suffered financial injury as a result of errors, misrepresentations, or other deficiencies in the foreclosure process. Where financial injury is found, the servicers must compensate the injured borrowers pursuant to a remediation plan that is acceptable to the Federal Reserve. In determining the acceptability of consultants, the Federal Reserve closely scrutinized their independence. Importantly, the Federal Reserve reviewed whether the consultant currently provides or had previously provided advice to the banking organization regarding its foreclosure practices, opinions, or actions that may have contributed to the deficiencies identified by examiners during their reviews conducted from November 2010 to January 2011. This determination was made to ensure that the consultant would not review any action or opinion previously recommended by the consultant to the banking organization. We will continue to oversee the Foreclosure Review process to make sure that the consultants who were accepted act independently. The Federal Reserve orders require the servicers to review the files of borrowers whose primary residence was in the foreclosure process of the servicer in 2009 or 2010, whether or not the foreclosure was completed. At this time, we are requiring the independent consultants to include in the review all files for particular categories of borrowers who we have determined present a significant risk of being financially injured in the foreclosure process. Any borrower who falls into any one of those categories must receive an independent foreclosure review. The categories for mandatory review include all mortgages in the mortgage foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010 involving members of the military who were covered by the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act. It also includes all borrowers who had previously filed complaints with the servicers about foreclosure actions that were pending during 2009 or 2010. High risk files involving borrowers in bankruptcy will also be reviewed. Other files outside of these categories must be reviewed on a sampling basis to detect if errors, misrepresentations, or deficiencies occurred. Going forward, we may determine that additional file reviews are appropriate. The Borrower Outreach ProgramThe Federal Reserve's enforcement actions require that each banking organization with servicing operations supervised by the Federal Reserve implement, in connection with the Foreclosure Review, a process for the receipt and review of borrower claims and complaints. We view this Borrower Outreach Program and the submission by borrowers of requests for review as critical to ensuring that borrowers who suffered financial injury are identified and appropriately compensated for financial injury they suffered as a result of errors, misrepresentations, or other deficiencies in the foreclosure process. The Borrower Outreach Program was first announced on November 1, 2011, and is intended to make eligible borrowers aware of the opportunity they have to have their foreclosures independently reviewed as part of the Foreclosure Review. Borrowers are eligible to request that their files be reviewed if their primary residence was in the foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010, whether or not the foreclosure was completed. Borrowers are eligible to request a review even if they previously filed a complaint with their servicer about their foreclosure. Information about the review process, including how to request a review as part of the Foreclosure Review, is being provided in mailings to borrowers who may be eligible for a review. The servicers initiated mailings on November 1 and have represented that they should be completed by the end of the year. In connection with those mailings, the servicers are required to take measures, such as skip tracing (collecting information about an individual from various sources to determine the individual's location), to identify borrowers who may have moved. The servicers also have established a tollâfree number that borrowers can call and a website that borrowers can access to get more information about the review.2Additionally, servicers are required to conduct an advertising campaign to make borrowers aware of the opportunity to request reviews of their foreclosures as part of the Foreclosure Review. The Federal Reserve is overseeing the servicers it supervises to make sure they are effectively doing everything they can to find borrowers who are potentially eligible for the Foreclosure Review. The Federal Reserve is working closely with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in overseeing the development and operation of the Borrower Outreach Program, and with the independent consultants, servicers, and community groups to increase awareness of this program and promote participation by borrowers. We emphasize thatany borrower whose primary residence was in the foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010, can have his or her file included in the Foreclosure Review simply by submitting a claim or complaint pursuant to that program. The Engagement LettersThe Federal Reserve's enforcement actions require the servicers to each submit an engagement letter to the Federal Reserve for approval that describes how the independent consultants retained by the servicer and approved by the Federal Reserve will conduct the Foreclosure Review. The Federal Reserve is nearing completion of its review and finalization of those engagement letters. Because our review of the letters contemplates more extensive criteria for conducting the Foreclosure Review than those that apply to the national bank servicers, finalization of the engagement letters has required more time to complete. We believe that the actions taken by the Federal Reserve and the banking organizations it supervises to implement the enforcement actions should be accessible by the public to the maximum extent possible. To that end, we expect to disclose significant portions of the final engagement letters, consistent with the need to protect proprietary financial information and personal privacy. The Action PlansThe Federal Reserve's enforcement actions require that each banking organization with servicing operations supervised by the Federal Reserve submit specific plans acceptable to the Federal Reserve designed to correct practices that resulted in servicer errors and prevent future abuses in the loan modification and foreclosure process. Each servicer regulated by the Federal Reserve must, among other things, submit specific plans acceptable to the Federal Reserve that In addition, the enforcement actions issued in April require the parent holding companies to submit plans acceptable to the Federal Reserve to improve holding company oversight of residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing conducted by bank and nonbank subsidiaries. We continue to review and approve plans required by the Board's enforcement actions to ensure they meet the Federal Reserve's supervisory expectations, and we will be working to ensure that words are followed through with the required actions. Consistent with our approach with regard to the engagement letters, we expect to disclose significant portions of the documentation related to the final action plans, consistent with the need to protect proprietary financial information and personal privacy. The Federal Reserve will continue to monitor, on an ongoing basis, the corrective measures that are being taken by the servicers and bank holding companies it supervises, as required by the orders. Additionally, each institution is required to submit quarterly reports to the Federal Reserve detailing the measures it has taken to comply with the enforcement action and the results and progress toward meeting those measures. The Federal Reserve will closely review the servicers' and bank holding companies' progress reports and will also conduct examinations to ensure that the plans are implemented as approved and that the changes are effective. The Federal Reserve will take appropriate supervisory action including a cease and desist order or monetary penalties to address any inadequacies or violations of the enforcement actions. As we have previously stated, the Federal Reserve believes monetary sanctions in these cases are appropriate and plans to announce monetary penalties. These monetary penalties will be in addition to the compensation provided to borrowers in the independent review process. The Federal Reserve continues to work with other federal and state agencies to resolve these matters. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve takes seriously its responsibility to oversee the implementation and execution of the requirements of its April 2011 enforcement actions, including the Foreclosure Review and other requirements described above. We understand that implementing and executing those requirements effectively is critical to ensuring that the deficiencies identified by examiners during reviews conducted from November 2010 to January 2011 are corrected; that future abuses in the loan modification and foreclosure process are prevented; and that borrowers are compensated for financial injury they suffered as a result of errors, misrepresentations, or other deficiencies in the foreclosure process. Thank you for the opportunity to submit this statement on the status of the Foreclosure Review process and other progress made in implementing the enforcement actions that the Federal Reserve issued in April 2011. 1.The 10 banking organizations included four organizations with residential mortgage servicing operations supervised by the Federal Reserve, as well as the parent holding companies of banks with servicing operations supervised by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.Return to text 2.To apply for a review, individuals may call 888-952-9105, Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. (ET) and Saturday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. The servicers' website iswww.IndependentForeclosureReview.com.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the appointment of Steven B. Kamin as director of the Division of International Finance, effective December 11. The division supports the Board and the Federal Open Market Committee by providing information and analysis pertaining to economic and financial developments in foreign countries and the performance of the U.S. external sector. In addition, the division's director represents the Board at international meetings and in its contacts with foreign central banks. "Steve's deep understanding of international economic and financial matters make him uniquely qualified to lead the division during this pivotal time for the global economy," said Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. Kamin joined the Federal Reserve Board in 1987 and was appointed to the official staff in 1999. He has been serving as acting director of the Division of International Finance since August. In his previous role as a deputy director of the division, he was responsible for monitoring and analyzing developments in international financial markets and has published research on a range of topics including global finance and monetary policy, capital flows, exchange rates, and current account imbalances. He has also served as a visiting economist at the Bank for International Settlements, a senior economist for international financial affairs at the Council of Economic Advisers, and as a consultant for the World Bank. Kamin succeeds D. Nathan Sheets, who announced in August that he was stepping down after 18 years of service with the Federal Reserve Board, including nearly 4 years as the director of the division. Kamin holds a bachelor's degree from the University of California at Berkeley and received a Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the designation of the chairs and deputy chairs of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks for 2012. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as chair and a second as deputy chair. Following are the names of the chairs and deputy chairs designated by the Board for 2012: BostonKirk A. Sykes, President, Urban Strategy America Fund, L.P., Boston, Mass., named Chair. William D. Nordhaus, Sterling Professor of Economics, Yale University, New Haven, Conn., named Deputy Chair. New YorkLee C. Bollinger, President, Columbia University, New York, N.Y, renamed Chair. Kathryn S. Wylde, President and Chief Executive Officer, Partnership for New York City, New York, N.Y., renamed Deputy Chair. PhiladelphiaJeremy Nowak, President, William Penn Foundation, Philadelphia, Penn., named Chair. James E. Nevels, Chairman, The Swarthmore Group, Philadelphia, Penn., named Deputy Chair. ClevelandAlfred M. Rankin, Jr., Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, NACCO Industries, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, renamed Chair. Richard K. Smucker, Chief Executive Officer, The J.M. Smucker Company, Orrville, Ohio, renamed Deputy Chair. RichmondMargaret E. McDermid, Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer, Dominion Resources, Inc., Richmond, Va., renamed Chair. Linda D. Rabbitt, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Rand Construction Corporation, Washington, D.C., renamed Deputy Chair. AtlantaCarol B. Tomé, Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President, The Home Depot, Atlanta, Ga., renamed Chair. Thomas I. Barkin, Director, McKinsey & Company, Atlanta, Ga., renamed Deputy Chair. ChicagoWilliam C. Foote, Retired Chairman of the Board, USG Corporation, Chicago, Ill., renamed Chair. Jeffrey A. Joerres, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ManpowerGroup, Milwaukee, Wis., named Deputy Chair. St. LouisWard M. Klein, Chief Executive Officer, Energizer Holdings, Inc., St. Louis, Mo., named Chair. Sharon D. Fiehler, Executive Vice President & Chief Administrative Officer, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Mo., named Deputy Chair. MinneapolisMary K. Brainerd, President and Chief Executive Officer, HealthPartners, Minneapolis, Minn., named Chair. Randall J. Hogan, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Pentair, Incorporated, Minneapolis, Minn., named Deputy Chair. Kansas CityPaul DeBruce, Chief Executive Officer and Founder, DeBruce Grain, Inc., Kansas City, Mo., renamed Chair. Barbara Mowry, Chief Executive Officer, GoreCreek Advisors, Greenwood Village, Colo., named Deputy Chair. DallasHerbert D. Kelleher, Founder and Chairman Emeritus, Southwest Airlines, Dallas, Tex., renamed Chair. Myron E. Ullman III, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, J.C. Penney Company, Inc., Plano, Tex., renamed Deputy Chair. San FranciscoDouglas W. Shorenstein, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Shorenstein Properties LLC, San Francisco, Calif., renamed Chair. Patricia E. Yarrington, Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Chevron Corporation, San Ramon, Calif., renamed Deputy Chair.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application of Brookline Bancorp, Inc., Brookline, Massachusetts, to acquire Bancorp Rhode Island, Inc. and its subsidiary bank, Bank Rhode Island, both of Providence, Rhode Island. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and PNC Bancorp, Inc., Wilmington, Delaware, to acquire RBC Bank (USA), Raleigh, North Carolina. A statement of the reasons for the Board's approval will be issued shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application by Banco do Brasil, S.A., Brasilia, and Caixa de Previdência dos Funcionarios do Banco do Brasil, Rio de Janiero, all of Brazil, to acquire EuroBank, Coral Gables, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the proposal by Bankia, S.A., Valencia, Spain, to establish a branch in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Prohibition against Tyrone Green, a former precious metals trader at the New York Agency of the Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Green, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order, which was based on his alleged participation in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duty that resulted in substantial losses to Bank of Nova Scotia. Green allegedly entered fictitious trades that concealed a significant trading loss and allowed the trading loss to increase substantially without detection. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Alliance Financial Services, Inc. (PDF), Saint Paul, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated December 8, 2011 Patriot Bancshares, Inc. (PDF), Houston, Texas, and Patriot Holdings Nevada, Inc., Reno, NevadaWritten Agreement dated November 17, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: First St. Charles Bancshares, Inc. (PDF), Boutte, LouisianaWritten Agreement dated December 21, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: First St. Charles Bancshares, Inc. (PDF), Boutte, LouisianaWritten Agreement dated December 21, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: First St. Charles Bancshares, Inc. (PDF), Boutte, LouisianaWritten Agreement dated December 21, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Waccamaw Bank (PDF), Whiteville, North Carolina Prompt Corrective Action Directive dated December 2, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Bank of Hampton Roads (PDF), Norfolk, Virginia, successor by merger with Gateway Bank and Trust, Elizabeth City, North CarolinaOrder of assessment of civil money penalty in the amount of $33,600, dated December 13, 2011. State Bank and Trust Company (PDF), Defiance, OhioOrder of assessment of civil money penalty in the amount of $9,340, dated December 15, 2011. Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued a final notice for a two-year phase-in period for most savings and loan holding companies (SLHCs) to file Federal Reserve regulatory reports and an exemption for some SLHCs from initially filing Federal Reserve regulatory reports. Under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, supervisory and rulemaking authority for SLHCs and their nondepository subsidiaries transferred from the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) to the Board on July 21, 2011. Earlier this year, the Board requested comment on proposals to require SLHCs to submit the same reports as bank holding companies, beginning with the March 31, 2012, reporting period. After consideration of comments, the Board is finalizing the proposed collections of information from SLHCs with modifications. The final notice exempts a limited number of SLHCs from most regulatory reporting using the Board's existing regulatory reports and provides a two-year phase-in period for regulatory reporting for all other SLHCs. Exempt SLHCs would continue to submit Schedule HC, which is currently a part of the Thrift Financial Report, and the OTS H-(b)11 Annual/Current Report. Exempt firms will also file the Federal Reserve's FR Y-6, Annual Report for Bank Holding Companies, or the FR Y-7, Annual Report for Foreign Banking Organizations. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday proposed steps to strengthen regulation and supervision of large bank holding companies and systemically important nonbank financial firms. The proposal, which includes a wide range of measures addressing issues such as capital, liquidity, credit exposure, stress testing, risk management, and early remediation requirements, is mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The proposal generally applies to all U.S. bank holding companies with consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and any nonbank financial firms that may be designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council as systemically important companies. The Board will issue a proposal regarding foreign banking organizations shortly. In general, savings and loan holding companies (SLHCs) would not be subject to the requirements in this proposal, except certain stress test requirements. The Board plans to issue a separate proposal later to address the applicability of the enhanced standards to SLHCs. The Board is proposing a number of measures, including: The Board is proposing that firms would need to comply with many of the enhanced standards a year after they are finalized. The requirements related to stress testing for bank holding companies, however, would take effect shortly after the rule is finalized. The Federal Reserve consulted with other members of the Financial Stability Oversight Council in developing the proposal. Comments on the proposal are requested by March 31, 2012. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDFComments on this proposal:Submit|View Federal Reserve Board extends comment period on proposed rule to implement enhanced prudential standards and early remediation requirements
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released a statement concerning its action of December 19, 2011, approving the application by The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and PNC Bancorp, Inc., Wilmington, Delaware, to acquire RBC Bank (USA), Raleigh, North Carolina. Attached is the Board's statement relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately, notwithstanding some apparent slowing in global growth. While indicators point to some improvement in overall labor market conditions, the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending has continued to advance, but business fixed investment appears to be increasing less rapidly and the housing sector remains depressed. Inflation has moderated since earlier in the year, and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expect a moderate pace of economic growth over coming quarters and consequently anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. However, the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to continue its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in September. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions--including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run--are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. The Committee will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Richard W. Fisher; Narayana Kocherlakota; Charles I. Plosser; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Daniel K. Tarullo; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the action was Charles L. Evans, who supported additional policy accommodation at this time.
Steven B. Kamin, Director, Division of International Finance Before the Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services, and Bailouts of Public and Private Programs, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Quigley, and members of the Subcommittee for inviting me today to talk about the economic situation in Europe and recent actions taken by the Federal Reserve in response to this situation. For two years now, the tone of global financial markets has become progressively more entangled with fiscal and financial developments in Europe. The combination of high debt levels and low growth prospects in several European countries using the euro has raised concerns about their fiscal sustainability. Such concerns were initially focused on Greece but have since spread to other euro-area countries, leading to substantial increases in their sovereign borrowing costs. Pessimism about their fiscal situation, in turn, has helped to undermine confidence in the strength of European financial institutions, increasing their cost of raising funds and threatening to curtail their supply of credit. These developments have placed significant strains on global financial markets and have weighed on global economic activity. Late last week, European leaders announced new steps to address the crisis, including proposals to strengthen fiscal rules and European fiscal coordination, as well as to enhance and provide additional clarity on the timing and design of a more credible euro-area financial backstop. These steps are a positive development and indicate the commitment of European leaders to alleviate the crisis. However, many key details of their proposed policies have yet to be worked out, and implementing them will be a challenge. Hence, it will be critical for European authorities to follow through on their commitments in the days and weeks ahead. Here at home, the financial stresses in Europe are undoubtedly spilling over to the United States by restraining our exports, helping to push down business and consumer confidence, and adding to pressures on U.S. financial markets and institutions. Of note, foreign financial institutions, especially those in Europe, are finding it more difficult to fund themselves in dollars. A great deal of trade and investment the world over is financed in dollars, so many foreign financial institutions have heavy borrowing needs in our currency. These institutions also borrow heavily in dollars because they are active in U.S. markets, purchasing government and corporate securities as well as making loans to households and firms. As concerns about the financial system in Europe have mounted, many European banks have faced a rise in the cost and decline in the availability of dollar funding. Difficulty acquiring dollar funding by European and other financial institutions may ultimately make it harder and more costly for U.S. households and businesses to get loans. Moreover, these disruptions could spill over into the market for borrowing and lending in U.S. dollars more generally, raising the cost of funding for U.S. financial institutions. Although the breadth and size of all of these effects on the U.S. economy are difficult to gauge, the situation in Europe poses a significant risk to U.S. economic activity and bears close watching. Swap Lines with Other Central BanksTo address these potential risks to the United States, the Federal Reserve agreed with the European Central Bank (ECB) and the central banks of Canada, Japan, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom to revise, extend, and expand its swap lines with these institutions.1These actions were described in a joint announcement by the Federal Reserve and the other central banks on November 30. The measures were motivated by the need to ease strains in global financial markets, which, if left unchecked, could impair the supply of credit to households and businesses in the United States and impede our economic recovery. At present, such strains are particularly evident in Europe, and these actions were designed to help prevent disruptions in financial markets there from spilling over to the U.S. economy. Three steps were described in the November 30 announcement. First, we reduced the pricing of drawings on the dollar liquidity swap lines. The previous pricing had been at a spread of 100 basis points over the overnight index swap rate.2We reduced that spread to 50 basis points. The lower cost to the ECB and other foreign central banks will enable them to reduce the cost of the dollar loans they provide to financial institutions in their jurisdictions. Reducing these costs should help alleviate pressures in U.S. money markets generated by foreign financial institutions, strengthen the liquidity positions of European and other foreign institutions, and boost confidence at a time of considerable strains in international financial markets. Through all of these channels, the action should help support the continued supply of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Second, we extended the authorization for these lines through February 1, 2013. The previous authorization had been through August 1, 2012. This extension demonstrates that central banks are prepared to work together for a sustained period, if needed, to support global liquidity conditions. Third, we agreed to establish, as a precautionary measure, swap lines in the currencies of the other central banks participating in the announcement. (The Federal Reserve had established similar lines in April 2009, but they were not drawn upon and were allowed to expire in February 2010.) Once such lines are set up, the Federal Reserve could, if needed, activate one or more of these lines and draw foreign currencies. With such access to foreign currency funds, the Federal Reserve could provide euros, Canadian dollars, Japanese yen, Swiss francs, or British pounds to U.S. financial institutions on a secured basis, much as the foreign central banks provide dollars to institutions in their jurisdictions now. U.S. financial institutions are not experiencing any foreign currency liquidity pressures at present, but we judged it prudent to make arrangements to offer such liquidity should the need arise in the future. I would like to emphasize that information on the swap lines is fully disclosed on the Federal Reserve's website--through the weekly balance sheet release and other materials--and information on swap transactions each week is provided on the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.3 I also want to underscore that these swap agreements are safe from the perspective of the Federal Reserve and the U.S. taxpayer: The Federal Reserve has not lost a penny on any of the swap line transactions since these lines were established in 2007, even during the most intense period of activity at the end of 2008. Moreover, at the maturity of each swap transaction, the Federal Reserve receives the dollars it provided plus a fee. These fees have added roughly $6 billion to overall earnings on Federal Reserve operations over the past five years, thereby increasing the amount the Federal Reserve has returned to taxpayers. ConclusionThe implementation of the changes in swap arrangements I have discussed has had some positive effects on dollar funding markets. On the announcement of the changes, several measures of the cost of dollar funding declined. Moreover, at the auctions of three-month dollar funding conducted by our foreign central bank counterparties the following week, the amount of dollars provided escalated substantially. That being said, I would underscore that ultimately, the easing of strains in U.S. and global financial markets will require concerted action on the part of European authorities as they follow through on their announcement last week and take new steps, as needed, to address their fiscal and financial difficulties. The situation in Europe is continuously evolving. Thus, we are closely monitoring events in the region and their spillovers to the U.S. economy and financial system. Thank you again for inviting me to appear before you today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 1.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "Coordinated Central Bank Action to Address Pressures in Global Money Markets," press release, November 30.Return to text 2.The dollar overnight index swap rate is the fixed rate that one party agrees to pay in exchange for the average of the overnight federal funds rates over the life of the swap. As such, it is a measure of the average federal funds rate expected over the term of the swap.Return to text 3.For each week's Federal Reserve balance sheet, seewww.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41. For other relevant information and materials on the Federal Reserve's website, seewww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_liquidityswaps.htm. For weekly information on the Federal Reserve's swap transactions with other central banks, seewww.newyorkfed.org/markets/fxswap/fxswap.cfm. Finally, for copies of the agreements between the Federal Reserve and other central banks, as well as other information, seewww.newyorkfed.org/markets/liquidity_swap.html.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's implementation of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act). The Federal Reserve's Approach to Dodd-Frank ImplementationNeedless to say, implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act has been, and continues to be, a formidable task. At the Federal Reserve, hundreds of staff members are contributing to Dodd-Frank projects. We have issued 29 final rules, public notices, and reports already and we have another 13 rules underway. All told, we expect the Board will issue approximately 60 sets of rules and formal guidelines as part of its implementation efforts. We are working diligently to complete the remaining rules. The challenge arises from the sheer number of studies, rules, and other implementation tasks the Act requires the Federal Reserve to produce in a relatively short period of time. Moreover, much of the work involves the more time-consuming process of joint rulemakings or coordination with other agencies, all of which are facing similar demands. For all the variation and complexity in our Dodd-Frank implementation responsibilities, we have several unifying goals. First and foremost, we want to get it right. This means implementing the statute faithfully, in a manner that maximizes financial stability and other social benefits at the least cost to credit availability and economic growth. To achieve this balance, we have assembled interdisciplinary teams for our significant rulemakings, bringing together economists, supervisors, legal staff, and other specialists to help develop sensible policy alternatives and to help avoid unintended consequences. Second, in addition to a thorough internal analytic process, we also are committed to soliciting and considering the comments of others. We are, of course, consulting extensively with other financial regulatory agencies, both bilaterally and through the Financial Stability Oversight Council. The interagency consultation process has included staff discussions during the initial policy development stage, sharing of draft studies and regulatory text in the interim phases, and dialogue among agency principals in the advanced stages of several rulemakings. Along with the other agencies testifying today, we have gone well beyond the formal consultation requirements of Dodd-Frank. Members of the Board, as well as staff at senior levels, have regular meetings with their counterparts at other agencies to discuss implementation issues of common interest. Consultations at multiple levels and across agencies help to improve the consistency of regulation across the banking industry and reduce the potential for overlapping regulatory requirements. In addition, these consultations help highlight the interaction among different rules under development by these agencies, as well as the interplay between proposed policy alternatives and existing regulations. We are also trying to make our rulemaking process as fair and transparent as possible, with ample opportunity for the public to comment. During the proposal stage, we specifically seek comment from the public on the costs and benefits of our proposed approach, as well as on alternative approaches to our proposal. We believe strongly that public participation in the rulemaking process improves our ability to identify and resolve issues raised by our regulatory proposals. We generally provide the public a minimum of 60 days to comment on all significant rulemaking proposals, with longer periods permitted for especially complex or significant proposals. Federal Reserve staff have participated in more than 300 meetings with outside parties and their representatives, including community and consumer groups. To promote transparency in the rulemaking process, we include in the public record a memorandum describing the attendees and subjects covered in any meetings involving non-governmental participants at which Dodd-Frank rulemakings are discussed. These summaries are posted on the Federal Reserve Board's website on a weekly basis, as are updates on Board rulemakings and other Dodd-Frank initiatives. Third, in drafting regulations, we have made special efforts to identify and, to the degree possible consistent with statutory requirements, minimize the regulatory burden on smaller entities. We conduct an assessment that takes appropriate account of the potential impact a rule may have on small businesses, small governmental jurisdictions, and small organizations affected by the rule, in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act. We have paid particular attention to reducing the regulatory burden on community banking organizations. For example, the Federal Reserve has established community depository institution advisory councils at each of the 12 Federal Reserve banks. These councils gather input from community depository organizations on ways to reduce regulatory burden and improve the efficiency of our supervision, and also collect information about the economy from the perspective of community organizations throughout the nation. A representative from each of these 12 advisory councils serves on a national Community Depository Institution Advisory Council that meets semiannually with the Board of Governors to bring together the ideas of all the advisory groups. The Board of Governors has also established a subcommittee of our regulatory and supervisory oversight committee for the express purpose of reviewing all regulatory matters from the perspective of community depository organizations. These reviews are intended to find ways to reduce the burden on community depository organizations arising from our regulatory policies without reducing the effectiveness of those policies in improving the safety and soundness of depository organizations of all sizes. Fourth, we are working to complete our Dodd-Frank projects as quickly as possible while meeting the three objectives already stated. There is obviously considerable value in providing as much clarity as possible as soon as possible to financial markets and the public about the post-crisis financial regulatory landscape. Capital Regulation after Dodd-FrankThe breadth of Dodd-Frank's provisions reflects in part that the pre-crisis regulatory regime had been insufficiently attentive to a variety of risks from a variety of sources. But we should not forget that strong capital requirements remain the most supple form of prudential regulation, because they can provide a buffer against bank losses from any source. To put it simply, the best way to avoid another TARP is for our large regulated institutions to have adequate capital buffers, reflecting the damage that would be done to the financial system were such institutions to fail. Implicitly, passage of Dodd-Frank was a criticism of the specific features of capital regulation that prevailed during the pre-crisis period. Basel I capital requirements relied almost exclusively on capital ratios that were snapshots of balance sheets and thus frequently a lagging indicator of a bank's condition. The kind of capital that qualified for regulatory purposes was not uniformly reliable as a buffer against losses. Moreover, capital requirements were set solely with reference to the balance sheet of each firm individually, with little attention to the economy-wide impact of financial stress at large institutions. And, most fundamentally, capital requirements had simply been too low, in general and with respect to the risk-weightings of certain assets. Strong capital requirements must be at the center of the post-crisis period regulatory regime. The Federal Reserve is integrating the specific capital-related provisions of Dodd-Frank into its overall capital program. That program has three basic components: improving capital regulation at the level of individual firms; introducing a macroprudential or system-wide element to capital regulation; and conducting regular stress testing and capital planning. I will discuss each of the three areas briefly. The first component is to improve the traditional, firm-based approach to capital regulation. This work is mostly related to standards developed in cooperation with other supervisors in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, but there is also a Dodd-Frank element. The "Collins amendment" in Dodd-Frank provided a safeguard against declines in minimum capital requirements in a capital regime based on bank internal modeling. The so-called Basel 2.5 agreement strengthened the market risk capital requirements of Basel II. Basel III upgraded the quality of regulatory capital, increased the quantity of minimum capital requirements, created a capital conservation buffer, and introduced an international leverage ratio requirement. In the coming months the banking agencies will be jointly proposing regulations consistent with Basel 2.5 and Basel III. The second component of our capital program is to introduce a macroprudential element to capital regulation. Section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act mandated that the Board establish enhanced risk-based capital standards for large bank holding companies. This mandate complements the Basel Committee's effort to develop a framework for assessing a capital surcharge on the largest, most interconnected banking organizations based on their global systemic importance. Both the Dodd-Frank provision and the Basel systemic surcharge framework are motivated by the fact that the failure of a systemically important firm would have dramatically greater negative consequences on the financial system and the economy than the failure of other firms. In addition, stricter capital requirements on systemically important firms should help offset any funding advantage these firms derive from their perceived status as too-big-to-fail and provide an incentive for such firms to reduce their systemic footprint. Of course, Dodd-Frank requires the Federal Reserve to impose more stringent capital requirements on all bank holding companies with assets of $50 billion or more, not just the U.S. firms that will appear on the Basel Committee's list of global systemic banks. No decision has yet been made as to whether the more stringent capital requirement to be applied to large U.S. banking firms that are not on the eventual list of global systemic banks will be in the form of a quantitative surcharge. However, analysis of the systemic footprints of these other U.S. bank holding companies suggests that even if surcharges were to apply, their amounts would be quite modest, at least based on the current characteristics of these bank holding companies. The third component of the Federal Reserve's capital program is to establish regular, firm-specific stress testing and capital planning. Dodd-Frank creates two kinds of stress-testing requirements. First, it mandates that the Federal Reserve Board conduct annual stress tests on all bank holding companies with $50 billion or more in assets to determine whether they have the capital needed to absorb losses in baseline, adverse, and severely adverse economic conditions. Second, it requires both these companies and certain other regulated financial firms with between $10 billion and $50 billion in assets to conduct internal stress tests. We will be implementing the specific stress-testing requirements of Dodd-Frank beginning later in 2012. However, in the interim we are using a modified form of stress testing as part of the annual capital planning process we have established for large bank holding companies. Last month we announced the parameters and process for this year's capital review, which will be completed in March, at which time the results of the stress test will be publicly reported for the 19 largest firms. ConclusionFor all the work that has already gone into implementing Dodd-Frank, both at the Federal Reserve and at the other regulatory agencies, there is still considerable work to do. Final regulations implementing some of the Act's most important provisions, such as the "living will" requirement and the Collins amendment, are now in place. Measures to implement other prominent provisions, such as the Volcker rule, have been proposed, but are not yet in final form. Still others, such as the section 165 requirements, have not yet been proposed. Whether completing work on proposed regulations, or moving forward with those yet to be proposed, the Federal Reserve will continue to pursue the four goals I noted earlier. Thank you very much for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have for me.