Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencyNational Credit Union AdministrationFarm Credit Administration Washington--The federal agencies that supervise banks, thrifts, and credit unions, and the Farm Credit System, today published guidance that updates theInteragency Questions and Answers Regarding Flood Insurancethat were most recently published on July 21, 2009 at 74 FR 35914-35947. The guidance finalizes two questions and answers that had been previously proposed. The first relates to insurable value. The second relates to force placement of flood insurance. The agencies withdrew another question regarding insurable value. The agencies request comment on three additional proposed updates to questions and answers relating to force placement of flood insurance. Two answers have been significantly and substantively changed. The third change, regarding force placement of flood insurance, revises a previously finalized Question and Answer for consistency with the proposed changes. It is the intention of the agencies that, after public comment has been received and considered and the guidance has been adopted in final form, the agencies will issue a final update to the 2009Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Flood Insurance. The final update will continue to supplement other guidance or interpretations issued by the agencies and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The agencies invite comment on the proposed changes to theInteragency Questions and Answers Regarding Flood Insuranceand, more generally, on other issues and concerns regarding compliance with the federal flood insurance statutes and regulations. Comments are due 45 days after publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Media Contacts:
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the annual indexing of the reserve requirement exemption amount and of the low reserve tranche for 2012. These amounts are used in the calculation of reserve requirements of depository institutions. The Board also announced the annual indexing of the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit that will be used to determine deposit reporting panels effective 2012. All depository institutions must hold a percentage of certain types of deposits as reserves in the form of vault cash, as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or as a deposit in a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). Depository institutions must also regularly submit deposit reports of their deposits and other reservable liabilities. For net transaction accounts in 2012, the first $11.5 million, up from $10.7 million in 2011, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $11.5 million up to and including $71.0 million, up from $58.8 million in 2011. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts in excess of $71.0 million. These annual adjustments, known as the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment, are based on growth in net transaction accounts and total reservable liabilities, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 2010 and June 30, 2011. For depository institutions that report weekly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment will apply to the 14-day reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, November 29, 2011, and the corresponding 14-day reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, December 29, 2011. For depository institutions that report quarterly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment will apply to the seven-day reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, December 20, 2011, and the corresponding seven-day reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, January 19, 2012. The Board also announced changes in two other amounts, the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit, that are used to determine the frequency with which depository institutions must submit deposit reports. The attached Federal Register notice contains a description of the new boundaries for deposit reporting that will be effective in 2012. The Board's notice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C. Chairman Casey, Vice Chairman Brady, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to discuss the economic outlook and recent monetary policy actions. It has been three years since the beginning of the most intense phase of the financial crisis in the late summer and fall of 2008, and more than two years since the economic recovery began in June 2009. There have been some positive developments: The functioning of financial markets and the banking system in the United States has improved significantly. Manufacturing production in the United States has risen nearly 15 percent since its trough, driven substantially by growth in exports; indeed, the U.S. trade deficit has been notably lower recently than it was before the crisis, reflecting in part the improved competitiveness of U.S. goods and services. Business investment in equipment and software has continued to expand, and productivity gains in some industries have been impressive. Nevertheless, it is clear that, overall, the recovery from the crisis has been much less robust than we had hoped. Recent revisions of government economic data show the recession as having been even deeper, and the recovery weaker, than previously estimated; indeed, by the second quarter of this year--the latest quarter for which official estimates are available--aggregate output in the United States still had not returned to the level that it had attained before the crisis. Slow economic growth has in turn led to slow rates of increase in jobs and household incomes. The pattern of sluggish growth was particularly evident in the first half of this year, with real gross domestic product (GDP) estimated to have increased at an average annual rate of less than 1 percent. Some of this weakness can be attributed to temporary factors. Notably, earlier this year, political unrest in the Middle East and North Africa, strong growth in emerging market economies, and other developments contributed to significant increases in the prices of oil and other commodities, which damped consumer purchasing power and spending; and the disaster in Japan disrupted global supply chains and production, particularly in the automobile industry. With commodity prices having come off their highs and manufacturers' problems with supply chains well along toward resolution, growth in the second half of the year seems likely to be more rapid than in the first half. However, the incoming data suggest that other, more persistent factors also continue to restrain the pace of recovery. Consequently, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) now expects a somewhat slower pace of economic growth over coming quarters than it did at the time of the June meeting, when Committee participants most recently submitted economic forecasts. Consumer behavior has both reflected and contributed to the slow pace of recovery. Households have been very cautious in their spending decisions, as declines in house prices and in the values of financial assets have reduced household wealth, and many families continue to struggle with high debt burdens or reduced access to credit. Probably the most significant factor depressing consumer confidence, however, has been the poor performance of the job market. Over the summer, private payrolls rose by only about 100,000 jobs per month on average--half of the rate posted earlier in the year.1Meanwhile, state and local governments have continued to shed jobs, as they have been doing for more than two years. With these weak gains in employment, the unemployment rate has held close to 9 percent since early this year. Moreover, recent indicators, including new claims for unemployment insurance and surveys of hiring plans, point to the likelihood of more sluggish job growth in the period ahead. Other sectors of the economy are also contributing to the slower-than-expected rate of expansion. The housing sector has been a significant driver of recovery from most recessions in the United States since World War II. This time, however, a number of factors--including the overhang of distressed and foreclosed properties, tight credit conditions for builders and potential homebuyers, and the large number of "underwater" mortgages (on which homeowners owe more than their homes are worth)--have left the rate of new home construction at only about one-third of its average level in recent decades. In the financial sphere, as I noted, banking and financial conditions in the United States have improved significantly since the depths of the crisis. Nonetheless, financial stresses persist. Credit remains tight for many households, small businesses, and residential and commercial builders, in part because weaker balance sheets and income prospects have increased the perceived credit risk of many potential borrowers. We have also recently seen bouts of elevated volatility and risk aversion in financial markets, partly in reaction to fiscal concerns both here and abroad. Domestically, the controversy during the summer regarding the raising of the federal debt ceiling and the downgrade of the U.S. long-term credit rating by one of the major rating agencies contributed to the financial turbulence that occurred around that time. Outside the United States, concerns about sovereign debt in Greece and other euro-zone countries, as well as about the sovereign debt exposures of the European banking system, have been a significant source of stress in global financial markets. European leaders are strongly committed to addressing these issues, but the need to obtain agreement among a large number of countries to put in place necessary backstops and to address the sources of the fiscal problems has slowed the process of finding solutions. It is difficult to judge how much these financial strains have affected U.S. economic activity thus far, but there seems little doubt that they have hurt household and business confidence, and that they pose ongoing risks to growth. Another factor likely to weigh on the U.S. recovery is the increasing drag being exerted by the government sector. Notably, state and local governments continue to tighten their belts by cutting spending and employment in the face of ongoing budgetary pressures, while the future course of federal fiscal policies remains quite uncertain. To be sure, fiscal policymakers face a complex situation. I would submit that, in setting tax and spending policies for now and the future, policymakers should consider at least four key objectives. One crucial objective is to achieve long-run fiscal sustainability. The federal budget is clearly not on a sustainable path at present. The Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction, formed as part of the Budget Control Act, is charged with achieving $1.5 trillion in additional deficit reduction over the next 10 years on top of the spending caps enacted this summer. Accomplishing that goal would be a substantial step; however, more will be needed to achieve fiscal sustainability. A second important objective is to avoid fiscal actions that could impede the ongoing economic recovery. These first two objectives are certainly not incompatible, as putting in place a credible plan for reducing future deficits over the longer term does not preclude attending to the implications of fiscal choices for the recovery in the near term. Third, fiscal policy should aim to promote long-term growth and economic opportunity. As a nation, we need to think carefully about how federal spending priorities and the design of the tax code affect the productivity and vitality of our economy in the longer term. Fourth, there is evident need to improve the process for making long-term budget decisions, to create greater predictability and clarity, while avoiding disruptions to the financial markets and the economy. In sum, the nation faces difficult and fundamental fiscal choices, which cannot be safely or responsibly postponed. Returning to the discussion of the economic outlook, let me turn now to the prospects for inflation. Prices of many commodities, notably oil, increased sharply earlier this year, as I noted, leading to higher retail gasoline and food prices. In addition, producers of other goods and services were able to pass through some of their higher input costs to their customers. Separately, the global supply disruptions associated with the disaster in Japan put upward pressure on prices of motor vehicles. As a result of these influences, inflation picked up during the first half of this year; over that period, the price index for personal consumption expenditures rose at an annual rate of about 3â1/2 percent, compared with an average of less than 1-1/2 percent over the preceding two years. As the FOMC anticipated, however, inflation has begun to moderate as these transitory influences wane. In particular, the prices of oil and many other commodities have either leveled off or have come down from their highs, and the step-up in automobile production has started to reduce pressures on the prices of cars and light trucks. Importantly, the higher rate of inflation experienced so far this year does not appear to have become ingrained in the economy. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable according to surveys of households and economic forecasters, and the five-year-forward measure of inflation compensation derived from yields on nominal and inflation-protected Treasury securities suggests that inflation expectations among investors may have moved lower recently. In addition to the stability of longer-term inflation expectations, the substantial amount of resource slack in U.S. labor and product markets should continue to restrain inflationary pressures. In view of the deterioration in the economic outlook over the summer and the subdued inflation picture over the medium run, the FOMC has taken several steps recently to provide additional policy accommodation. At the August meeting, the Committee provided greater clarity about its outlook for the level of short-term interest rates by noting that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. And at our meeting in September, the Committee announced that it intends to increase the average maturity of the securities in the Federal Reserve's portfolio. Specifically, it intends to purchase, by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less, leaving the size of our balance sheet approximately unchanged. This maturity extension program should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make broader financial conditions more supportive of economic growth than they would otherwise have been. The Committee also announced in September that it will begin reinvesting principal payments on its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities rather than in longer-term Treasury securities. By helping to support mortgage markets, this action too should contribute to a stronger economic recovery. The Committee will continue to closely monitor economic developments and is prepared to take further action as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. Monetary policy can be a powerful tool, but it is not a panacea for the problems currently faced by the U.S. economy. Fostering healthy growth and job creation is a shared responsibility of all economic policymakers, in close cooperation with the private sector. Fiscal policy is of critical importance, as I have noted today, but a wide range of other policies--pertaining to labor markets, housing, trade, taxation, and regulation, for example--also have important roles to play. For our part, we at the Federal Reserve will continue to work to help create an environment that provides the greatest possible economic opportunity for all Americans. 1.The figure of 100,000 private jobs per month adjusts for the effects of the two-week strike by communications workers at Verizon, which held down measured payrolls in August.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the approval of a notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Westpac Banking Corporation, Sydney, Australia, to engage in certain nonbanking activities in the United States through the acquisition of all the voting shares of JOHCM (USA) General Partner Inc., Wilmington, Delaware, and its foreign parent company, J O Hambro Capital Management Limited, London, England. Attached is the Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board onThursday announced its approval of the proposal by Banco do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul S.A., Port Alegre, Brazil, to establish a branch in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday appointed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) as receiver for Community Banks of Colorado, of Greenwood Village, Colorado, a state-chartered bank and member of the Federal Reserve System. As of June 30, the bank had approximately $1.4 billion in assets. The appointment was made after the Federal Reserve Board determined that the bank had been "critically undercapitalized" since July 29, and appointment of the FDIC as receiver was necessary to carry out the purpose of the Prompt Corrective Action statute to reduce long-term loss to the FDIC's deposit insurance fund. The Prompt Corrective Action statute required the Federal Reserve, as the bank's federal supervisor, to appoint the FDIC as receiver not later than 90 days after the bank became critically undercapitalized, or to take other supervisory action, with the FDIC's concurrence, that would cause the least possible long-term loss to the deposit insurance fund. Pursuant to statute, the Federal Reserve also consulted with the Colorado State Banking Commissioner. Customers with questions can call the FDIC at 800-405-1439. The phone number will be operational this evening until 9 p.m., MDT; on Saturday from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m., MDT; on Sunday from noon to 6 p.m., MDT; and thereafter from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., MDT. Customers can also go towww.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/commbanksco.htmlfor more information. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the approval of fee schedules, effective January 3, 2012, for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to depository institutions (priced services). The Board has also approved maintaining the current earnings credit rate on clearing balances. The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 100.8 percent of their priced services costs in 2012. Overall, the price level for Reserve Bank priced services will increase about 4 percent in 2012 from 2011. The effective average fee paid to collect checks using the Reserve Banks' Check 21 services is expected to increase 1 percent, while the effective average fee to return a check electronically will decrease approximately 16 percent. In addition, the aggregate effective fees for the Reserve Banks' FedACH®service, Fedwire®Funds and National Settlement Services, and Fedwire®Securities Service will increase nearly 5 percent. In addition, the Board approved modest changes to electronic access fees. The 2011 fee schedule for each of the priced services, except the check service, is included in the attached Federal Register notice. Fee schedules for all priced services will be available on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial services website at FRBservices.org. Lastly, the Board approved the 2012 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) of $29.9 million for Reserve Bank priced services. The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and profits that would have been earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve establish fees to recover the costs of providing priced services, including the PSAF, over the long run, to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector service providers. The Board's notice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the approval of a final rule to implement the resolution plan requirement in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The final rule requires bank holding companies with assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial firms designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for supervision by the Board to annually submit resolution plans to the Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Each plan will describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution in bankruptcy during times of financial distress. A resolution plan must include a strategic analysis of the plan's components, a description of the range of specific actions the company proposes to take in resolution, and a description of the company's organizational structure, material entities, interconnections and interdependencies, and management information systems. Under the final rule, companies will submit their initial resolution plans on a staggered basis. The first group of companies, generally those with $250 billion or more in non-bank assets, must submit their initial plans on or before July 1, 2012; the second group, generally those with $100 billion or more, but less than $250 billion, in total non-bank assets, must submit their initial plans on or before July 1, 2013; and the remaining companies, generally those subject to the rule with less than $100 billion in total non-bank assets, must submit their initial plans on or before December 31, 2013. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Anchor Commercial Bank (PDF), Juno Beach, FloridaPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated October 11, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Border Capital Group, Inc. (PDF), McAllen, TexasWritten Agreement dated October 20, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Porter Bancorp, Inc., (PDF)Louisville, KentuckyWritten Agreement dated September 21, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Tennessee Valley Financial Holdings, Inc., Oak Ridge, TennesseeWritten Agreement dated September 26, 2011 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: State Bank Financial, La Crosse, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated September 13, 2010Terminated September 27, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Fox River Valley Bancorp, Inc. (PDF), Appleton, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated October 21, 2011 Liberty Bancorp and Liberty Bank (PDF), both of South San Francisco, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated October 25, 2011 Parkway Bancorp, Inc. (PDF), Harwood Heights, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated October 21, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday requested public comment on a proposed regulation implementing the so-called "Volcker Rule" requirements of section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Section 619 generally contains two prohibitions. First, it prohibits insured depository institutions, bank holding companies, and their subsidiaries or affiliates (banking entities) from engaging in short-term proprietary trading of any security, derivative, and certain other financial instruments for a banking entity's own account, subject to certain exemptions. Second, it prohibits owning, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with, a hedge fund or private equity fund, subject to certain exemptions. The act also prohibits banking entities from engaging in an exempted transaction or activity if it would involve or result in a material conflict of interest between the banking entity and its clients, customers, or counterparties, or that would result in a material exposure to high-risk assets or trading strategies, in each case as defined by the rule. The act similarly prohibits banking entities from engaging in an exempted transaction or activity if it would pose a threat to the safety and soundness of the banking entity or to the financial stability of the United States. The proposal, which was developed jointly with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, clarifies the scope of the act's prohibitions and, consistent with statutory authority, provides certain exemptions to these prohibitions. It is anticipated these agencies will issue a comparable proposal today or in the near future. Transactions in certain instruments, including obligations of the U.S. government or a U.S. government agency, the government-sponsored enterprises, and state and local governments, are exempt from the statute's prohibitions. Consistent with the statute, other activities exempted include market making, underwriting, and risk-mitigating hedging. The statute also permits banking entities to organize, offer, and invest in a hedge fund or private equity fund subject to a number of conditions. The proposed rule would require banking entities that engage in these activities to establish an internal compliance program that is designed to ensure and monitor compliance with the statute's prohibitions and restrictions, and implementing regulations. The proposed rule provides commentary intended to assist banking entities in distinguishing permitted market making-related activities from prohibited proprietary trading activities. The proposal also requires banking entities with significant trading operations to report to the appropriate federal supervisory agency certain quantitative measurements designed to assist the federal supervisory agencies and banking entities in identifying prohibited proprietary trading in the context of certain exempt activities and identifying high-risk assets or trading strategies. It also includes a number of elements intended to reduce the burden of the proposal on smaller, less-complex banking entities. For example, the proposal limits the extent to which smaller banking entities are required to report quantitative measurements. Comments on the proposal will be received through January 13, 2012. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday requested comment on proposed rules intended to simplify the administration of reserve requirements and reduce administrative and operational costs for both depository institutions and Reserve Banks. The proposals do not affect the stance of monetary policy. The proposed simplifications to Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) are: In connection with the proposed elimination of the contractual clearing balance program, the Board is requesting comment on several issues related to the methodology used for the Private Sector Adjustment Factor that is part of the pricing of Federal Reserve Bank services. Proposed amendments to Regulation J (Collection of Checks and Other Items by Federal Reserve Banks and Funds Transfers through Fedwire) would eliminate references in Regulation J to "as-of adjustments," consistent with the proposed amendments to Regulation D, and make clarifications about the handling of checks and funds transfers sent to the Federal Reserve Banks. Comments on the proposal must be submitted within 60 days from the date of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Registernotice Regulation J Federal Registernotice Regulation D For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin At the Maryland State Bar Association Advanced Real Property Institute, Columbia, Maryland Good morning. It's a great pleasure to be with you, and I want to thank the Real Property section for inviting me to speak at the Advanced Real Property Institute. I have been immersed at the Federal Reserve in economic analysis, but my first professional language is the law, so it's a special treat to be before this audience of lawyers today where I can speak in my native tongue. I'm also excited to be with you this morning because I began my time as commissioner of financial regulation for the state of Maryland in the heat of the financial crisis, and I am keenly aware that Maryland's lawyers came together in a show of massive pro bono strength to help homeowners confronting unprecedented numbers of foreclosures in the state. I want to recognize the impressive, timely, and trend-setting work that was performed during the foreclosure crisis here in Maryland. This work continues in various ways, including most recently the announcement that the state of Maryland will be participating in the launch of HOPE Loan Port, the country's first web-based foreclosure mediation portal. Lawyers in Maryland consistently have been on the forefront in supporting mediation systems to resolve issues between homeowners and servicers. During my first week as a Federal Reserve governor, the set of mortgage servicing problems and inequities related to robo-signing hit the national news. While many were surprised by the news, this is something that we had been dealing with here in Maryland more than three years ago; as many of you know from having worked on these issues, we had identified serious servicing problems as early as 2008 in Maryland, had analyzed them quite extensively, and had crafted some effective legal, administrative, and legislative early responses. Being rather dismayed that the federal folks believed this to be a new problem, and concerned that problems with servicing nationwide would hinder the revival of the housing market and our recovery from recession, I gave a speech advocating a series of measures at the national and state levels to contain the damage to homeowners in November 2010. To my dismay, here we are in 2011, with a recovery that is still being dragged down by serious housing problems that will require not just economic talent--but, significantly, legal talent--to address. I want to talk this morning about a couple of those legal challenges. Of course, these remarks are intended to express my own views, and they do not necessarily reflect the opinions of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Housing Market ConditionsSix years after house prices first began to fall, we are still dealing with the aftermath of the housing bubble. Nationally, house prices have fallen by nearly one-third since their peak in the first quarter of 2006, and total homeowners' equity in the United States has shrunk by more than one-half--a loss of more than $7 trillion. This is a shocking and enormous decline. The drop in house prices has had far-reaching effects on families and the economy, in part because so many American families--nearly 70 percent--own their homes.1In contrast, only about one-half of American families hold any stocks, either directly or through accounts such as Individual Retirement Accounts, 401(k)s, or mutual funds.2The fall in house prices has caused families to cut back on their spending and has prevented families from using their home equity to fund education expenses or start small businesses. An estimated 3 million families are not able to refinance their mortgages at today's historically low interest rates because they are underwater on their mortgages.3And many borrowers have lost their homes to foreclosure: More than 4 percent of all mortgages in the United States were in foreclosure, and an additional 3 percent or so were delinquent by 90 days or more in the second quarter of this year. Initially, when I was commissioner of financial regulation, foreclosures were concentrated among borrowers with subprime mortgages. But today, because of the magnitude of the economic downturn and the high level of unemployment, the typical borrower in foreclosure has a prime or Federal Housing Administration mortgage. As all of you know, the drop in house prices has put considerable pressure on the legal system. Of course, the huge wave of foreclosures has strained and sometimes overwhelmed the courts, particularly in states with judicial foreclosure processes. But in a deeper sense, the standard contracts that govern mortgage lending, servicing, and securitization did not account for a potential collapse of this magnitude in the housing sector. As the bubble expanded, securitization contracts did not provide enough incentive to discourage shoddy underwriting practices. In the aftermath, the inadequacies of servicing contracts have contributed to the agonizingly slow pace of mortgage modifications and repeated breakdowns in the foreclosure process. Prior to the crisis, the nation's mortgage finance system developed into an extensive set of specialized industry players with a complex set of linkages operating not just at the lender and borrower level, but also with an extensive secondary market that was intended to diffuse risk. All of these relationships were governed by contracts. The promissory note, for example, lays out the terms under which the borrower will repay the loan, while the mortgage reflects the lender's security interest in the property. But there are also contracts between the borrower and third parties and between the lender and third parties. For example, the borrower likely will enter agreements for title, flood, or private mortgage insurance, while the lender may enter an agreement with another institution to service the loan. Add mortgage securitization to the mix, and the number of contractual relationships snowballs. For a private-label securitization, a crucial contract is the pooling and servicing agreement, or PSA, which specifies matters such as the characteristics of the mortgages in the pool, how these mortgages will be serviced, and how the money generated from the loans will be distributed to investors. At nearly every linkage of our mortgage finance system there is a contractual relationship, and at nearly every contractual linkage there has been legal challenge and litigation. For example, let's just zero in on one such contractual relationship and examine how the legal structure set forth in this relationship has held up. First, let's look at the provisions that govern mortgage servicing, and second, the provisions that lay out the representations and warranties about the features and underwriting quality of the loans included in the securitization. Both sets of provisions exist in the contract that governs the securitization, the PSA. Mortgage ServicingThe problems in mortgage servicing have been well documented. For example, the federal banking regulators found significant problems when we looked at mortgage servicing and foreclosure processing at 14 federally regulated mortgage servicers, which collectively represent more than two-thirds of all servicing volume nationally. These problems include critical weaknesses in servicers' foreclosure governance processes, foreclosure document preparation processes, and oversight and monitoring of third-party law firms and other vendors. These problems indicate the existence of unsafe and unsound banking practices and violations of federal and state laws, as well as demonstrated patterns of misconduct and negligence on the part of servicers. Individual consumers have been harmed by this negligence, including the negligence of law firms. In addition, the imperative for servicers to fix their systems, review past decisions, and put in place the internal systems and controls that they should have had all along has impeded the repair of the overall housing market. The burden of addressing these issues of repair, review, and implementation of systems and controls rests with the mortgage servicers, their parent financial institutions, and the law firms that mishandled the foreclosures. But what do the terms of the PSA, which is the standard contract governing this work, require in this context? The standard servicing contract provides disincentives for servicers to act in the best interests of investors and borrowers. This misalignment of incentives has more profound consequences when defaults are high. Under the standard contract, servicers receive a flat fee per loan that they service, usually 1/4 to 1/2 percent of the unpaid loan balance annually, depending on the type of loan. The flat fee is considerably more than is required to service a performing loan and considerably less than is required to service a delinquent loan. The expectation is that, on average, the fee will cover the servicer's expenses. Servicers are also reimbursed for some expenses, such as the cost of a title search when pursuing a foreclosure, but generally not for unanticipated overhead or labor costs. The PSA aligns the incentives of borrowers, servicers, and investors reasonably well when mortgage defaults are low. Under normal circumstances, mortgage servicing is profitable. A servicer primarily processes mortgage payments and minimizes labor and overhead costs by harnessing economies of scale and automating the process as much as possible. The PSA does not perform nearly as well under stressed circumstances. When mortgage delinquencies are high, mortgage servicing is not profitable, and servicers may feel extra pressure to cut costs as much as possible. In addition, servicers may not be properly motivated to perform loan modifications even when such modifications are in the best interests of borrowers and investors. Servicer compensation is not generally tied to the performance of the loan, and in most cases a servicer receives no extra payment for preventing a default. Further, loan modifications are labor intensive, and this extra labor cost is not reimbursed under the contract. Instead, the PSA provides for the reimbursement of some foreclosure expenses. Other language in the contract also does little to encourage loan modifications, particularly in the case of securitized mortgages. Many PSAs provide minimal guidance about modifications beyond specifying that servicers should apply "usual and normal" servicing standards or the same standards that they apply to the loans held in portfolio. With such vague guidance, servicers assert that they are worried about litigation risk if they employ servicing approaches that have not been widely adopted throughout the industry. Furthermore, even when the PSAs provide guidance about loan modifications, it can differ widely across PSAs, often preventing servicers from designing a uniform modification program for their entire portfolio. To borrow from the title of a popular marital advice column, Can this contract be saved? I think the answer is no--at least not in its current form. This contract might have been adequate if servicers had followed the age-old advice and used their profits from the fat years when defaults were low in order to build their capacity for lean years when defaults were high. But in practice, this does not appear to have happened--and perhaps even the most knowing servicer a few years ago might not have anticipated the subsequent level of mortgage defaults. Given that failure, it is imperative to reconsider the compensation structure so that servicers have adequate incentives to perform payment processing efficiently on performing mortgages, and to perform effective loss mitigation on delinquent loans. After the compensation structure is reconsidered, the PSAs need to be amended or renegotiated in order to facilitate more workouts. Finally, PSAs should clarify the situations in which loan modifications and other mitigation strategies should be pursued. One tool that could aid in providing such clarity, and has received substantial attention over the last few years, is the net present value model. Requiring servicers to take mitigative actions that are net-present-value positive to the investor could encourage the fair and consistent treatment of borrowers. Investors also need tools that will allow them to better monitor servicer performance and take action accordingly. These tools should be developed and described in the contract. Currently, metrics that allow investors to measure servicers' execution are not widely available. Such metrics could include customer satisfaction ratings, delinquency and cure rates, the average time that a homeowner waits on the phone to talk with the servicer, and servicer error rates. Indeed, one can even imagine the development of a uniform servicer scorecard. To be meaningful, the ability to transfer servicing from low-performing servicers to high-performing ones would have to be enhanced. The creation of common back-office systems across servicers would make transfer less prone to error and less costly, and any contractual or legal barriers would need to be reduced to allow investors to "fire" a low-performing servicer. A new contractual regime designed along these lines would represent a significant change from the existing world of servicing, but it could help create a system in which servicers compete on the quality of their performance and are more accountable to both investors and consumers. Representations and WarrantiesI turn next to the problem of representations and warranties contained in the PSAs. Underwriting standards declined dramatically in the middle part of the previous decade as the housing bubble approached its peak. For example, the median combined loan-to-value ratio on subprime mortgages originated for home purchases rose from 90 percent in 2003 to 100 percent in 2005--meaning that more than one-half of borrowers who purchased homes with subprime mortgages put no money down. The share of mortgages in which borrowers did not document fully their income or assets also increased. In addition, the number of mortgages that defaulted in the first year after origination--commonly considered a gauge of poor underwriting--rose appreciably as the bubble approached its peak.4 The "originate to distribute" model of loan origination may have contributed to this decline in underwriting standards. Under this model, brokers or lenders sell the loan to a third party, typically a securitizer, who then issues securities collateralized by mortgage loans to investors. This model technically describes securities guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac as well as private-label securities sponsored by financial institutions such as commercial or investment banks, but problems were more acute in the private-label market. Although the private-label originate-to-distribute model may have worked adequately at first, this discipline eroded as the securitization boom progressed. Originators and securitizers were generally able to complete securitization transactions while retaining very little or no economic stake in the performance of the loan after the sale, although some of these securities did ultimately make their way back onto the balance sheets of certain financial conglomerates, much to their dismay. As a result, originators and securitizers had an increasing incentive to weaken underwriting standards in order to increase the volume of loan origination, and thereby the volume of securitizations. As securitization developed and became more prominent as a source of financing for mortgage lending, representations and warranties were one of the main tools market participants relied on to align incentives among originators and securitizers on the one hand and investors on the other. These provisions describe the underwriting standards and other matters with respect to the assets that are the subject of the securitization. The originator, in principle, is required to refund at par (less payments received) the value of the loan should it violate the originator's representations and warranties or in some cases, should it default within a specified time from origination. In practice, however, representations and warranties did not function as intended. First, as in the case of servicing, contracts in private-label mortgage securitizations varied considerably from deal to deal, and there was no consistent language or standard for representations and warranties. Therefore, a poorly underwritten mortgage loan could breach the representations and warranties of one deal's contract but not be a violation of representations and warranties in another very similar deal; this discrepancy would only be apparent following a careful reading and nuanced comparison of the differences in drafting between the two contracts. Given the volume of transactions investors were considering, it is not surprising that they may not have conducted a thorough analysis of the different risks each set of representations and warranties presented. Second, the lack of standardization of representations and warranties gives rise to greater opportunity for parties in a failed securitization transaction to argue over the interpretation of contract terms, increasing legal uncertainty and making effective resolution of investor claims more difficult. Finally, in order to enforce their representations and warranties, investors may need to band together in groups representing 25 percent or more of the voting rights in order to make certain demands upon the securitization trustee. Investors may be dispersed and have difficulty coordinating their actions. The flaws in the representations and warranties provisions of the PSAs appear to be widely recognized. For example, many key players in the securitization industry have worked through Project RESTART, an initiative of the American Securitization Forum (ASF), to create an industry standard for representations and warranties that covers prudent practices and is commonly understood by all market participants.5The ASF has also published model principles for repurchasing mortgage loans that breach representation warranties to provide a standard industry PSA enforcement mechanism.6I believe that these are useful developments and should promote greater consistency in governing contracts of mortgage securitizations in the future, thereby facilitating investor monitoring of underwriting standards and setting common expectations for resolution of breaches of representations and warranties when they occur. Nevertheless, standard representations and warranties, no matter how well drafted, are unlikely on their own, or even in combination with a well-constructed enforcement standard, to go far enough to resolve the crucial problems of misaligned incentives and disparities in access to information in the securitization process. During lending and asset booms, there is a temptation for market participants to collectively allow underwriting standards to weaken in order to meet a market demand for increased lending. When a crisis then occurs, bankruptcies of originators and securitizers of mortgages may prevent investors in practice from obtaining restitution for breaches of representations and warranties. Thus, other contractual mechanisms are also required to promote a healthy and properly aligned securitization market. For instance, comprehensive disclosures about the mortgage loans being securitized are vital to ensure that investors are able to conduct meaningful due diligence prior to making a decision to invest in a securitization. They are also vital to investors' ongoing monitoring of the servicing and administration of securitization transactions. The work of the Securities and Exchange Commission to revise securitization disclosures is particularly important and should significantly contribute to improving the flow of information in securitization markets.7 ConclusionThe period since the onset of the financial crisis has been described as one of the worst economic episodes since the Great Depression, which was another time of tremendous strain on the housing market. House prices declined about 30 percent from peak to trough, and the homeownership rate, as recorded by the decennial census, fell from 48 percent in 1930 to 44 percent in 1940. Nonfarm mortgage foreclosures reached a thousand per day in 1933, and, in fact, foreclosures were so widespread that 28 states imposed foreclosure moratoriums. Mortgage lending was disrupted, and private mortgage insurance companies and private mortgage securitization collapsed. One factor in the upheaval in mortgage lending was the mortgage contract. Before the Great Depression, the long-term fully amortized contract had not yet been widely adopted. Instead, one common contract featured a short maturity, generally five years or less, and often did not call for any regular payments on the principal. A borrower was likely to default at the end of the loan term if he was not able to roll over the loan or obtain a new loan to pay off the existing balance. This contract also made it difficult to assess the health of financial institutions, as lenders booked the loans as short‑term exposures when the risk was actually much longer term. One contemporary source called the contract "a menace."8 After the Great Depression, fully amortizing loans with maturities of 15 years or longer became the standard. Federal policy appears to have been a key factor in this transition. First, the Home Owners' Loan Corporation--a sort of precursor to today's Making Home Affordable program--purchased distressed mortgages and modified them into loans that amortized for 15 years or longer.9Second, the newly created Federal Housing Administration sold insurance on 20-year fully amortizing loans. Third, savings and loans with new federal charters were required to make fully amortizing loans except when state law forbade it. The challenge for us today, as I see it, is to emulate our predecessors from the 1930s who dealt with a comparable crisis. We need to consider our current array of mortgage contracts with a dispassionate eye and open mind. If the contracts today are not working‑-and the evidence seems clear to me that, along some dimensions, they are not--we as lawyers should be working on ways to improve them. Without such improvements you may not be serving your clients, and from the perspective of the macroeconomy, none of us will be contributing to a reconstruction of the legal framework in the crucial context of mortgage finance. Lawyers have a singular responsibility and exceptional ability to help rebuild this framework, and I urge you to consider how you can contribute to the effort of renegotiating these relationships and how the terms of such a renegotiation might become memorialized in contracts. This is a massive challenge for lawyers who practice in the field of mortgage finance and your country needs you to tackle it with the same vigor and energy that you have brought to other legal challenges in this housing crisis. Cicero said that "the safety of the people should be the highest law." Our people will not be financially safe until we re-examine and re-set the terms that define relationships in the housing market. So we have a serious challenge ahead of us. It's a challenge that I have confidence we can meet with your help. Thank you, and I'm happy to take your questions and hear your comments. 1. See U.S. Census Bureau, "Housing Vacancies and Homeownership (CPS/HVS)," webpage.Return to text 2. See Brian K. Bucks, Arthur B. Kennickell, Traci L. Mach, and Kevin B. Moore (2009), "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 95 (February), pp. A1-A55.Return to text 3. This calculation is a Board staff estimate of the number of borrowers with fixed-rate mortgages with an interest rate of 4.75 or higher and a loan-to-value ratio greater than 100 percent.Return to text 4. See Christopher Mayer, Karen Pence, and Shane Sherlund (2009), "The Rise in Mortgage Defaults,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 23 (Winter), pp. 27-50.Return to text 5. For model representations and warranties, see American Securitization Forum (2009), "ASF Project RESTART: ASF Model RMBS Representations and Warranties (PDF)," paper, December 15.Return to text 6. For model repurchase principles, see American Securitization Forum (2011), "ASF Project RESTART: ASF Model RMBS Repurchase Principles Release (PDF)," press release, August 30.Return to text 7. See Disclosure of Asset-Backed Securities Required by Section 943 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, 76 Fed. Reg. 4489 (Jan. 26, 2011) (to be codified at 17 C.F.R. pts. 229, 232, 240, and 249). In addition, the risk retention requirements of section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act are also important to a comprehensive effort to align incentives in the securitization markets in order to promote sound underwriting. By requiring securitizers to retain a share of the economic risk in the mortgages they securitize from the outset of the transaction, the requirement creates incentives for securitizers to better monitor the credit quality of assets they securitize and ultimately discourages unsafe and unsound underwriting practices by originators.Return to text 8. See Morton Bodfish and A.D. Theobald (1938),Savings and Loan Principles(New York: Prentice-Hall), p. 175.Return to text 9. See Jonathan D. Rose (2011), "The Incredible HOLC? Mortgage Relief during the Great Depression,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 43 (6), pp. 1073-107.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from August 22 through September 19, 2011. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 20-21, 2011. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 20-21, 2011:PDF|HTML
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 56th Economic Conference, Boston, Massachusetts The financial crisis of 2008 and 2009, together with the associated deep recession, was a historic event--historic in the sense that its severity and economic consequences were enormous, but also in the sense that, as the papers at this conference document, the crisis seems certain to have profound and long-lasting effects on our economy, our society, and our politics. More subtle, but of possibly great importance in the long run, will be the effects of the crisis on intellectual frameworks, including the ways in which economists analyze macroeconomic and financial phenomena. In particular, the crisis has already influenced the theory and practice of modern central banking and no doubt will continue to do so. Although it is too early to know the full implications of recent events for central bank doctrine and operations, I thought it would be worthwhile today to highlight and put into context some of the changes, as well as the continuities, that are already evident. My remarks will focus on how central banks responded to recent challenges related to the conduct of both monetary policy and the promotion of financial stability and how, as a result of that experience, the analysis and execution of these two key functions may change. The Monetary Policy FrameworkDuring the two decades preceding the crisis, central bankers and academics achieved a substantial degree of consensus on the intellectual and institutional framework for monetary policy. This consensus policy framework was characterized by a strong commitment to medium-term price stability and a high degree of transparency about central banks' policy objectives and economic forecasts. The adoption of this approach helped central banks anchor longer-term inflation expectations, which in turn increased the effective scope of monetary policy to stabilize output and employment in the short run. This broad framework is often called flexible inflation targeting, as it combines commitment to a medium-run inflation objective with the flexibility to respond to economic shocks as needed to moderate deviations of output from its potential, or "full employment," level. The combination of short-run policy flexibility with the discipline imposed by the medium-term inflation target has also been characterized as a framework of "constrained discretion." Many central banks in both advanced and emerging market economies consider themselves to be inflation targeters, prominent examples including those in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Although they differ somewhat in the details of their policy strategies, policy tools, and communication practices, today virtually all inflation-targeting central banks interpret their mandate flexibly--that is, they treat the stabilization of employment and output in the short term as an important policy objective even as they seek to hit their inflation targets over the medium term. Several other major central banks, such as the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank, do not label themselves as inflation targeters; however, they have incorporated key features of that framework, including a numerical definition of price stability, a central role for communications about the economic outlook, and a willingness to accommodate short-run economic stabilization objectives so long as these objectives do not jeopardize the primary goal of price stability. How does the Federal Reserve fit into this range of policy frameworks? The Federal Reserve is accountable to the Congress for two objectives--maximum employment and price stability, on an equal footing--and it does not have a formal, numerical inflation target. But, as a practical matter, the Federal Reserve's policy framework has many of the elements of flexible inflation targeting. In particular, like flexible inflation targeters, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is committed to stabilizing inflation over the medium run while retaining the flexibility to help offset cyclical fluctuations in economic activity and employment. Also, like the formal inflation targeters, over time the Federal Reserve has become much more transparent about its outlook, objectives, and policy strategy. For example, since early 2009, the Federal Reserve's "Summary of Economic Projections" has included the FOMC's longer-run projections, which represent Committee participants' assessments of the rates to which economic growth, unemployment, and inflation will converge over time. These projections are conditioned on the assumptions of appropriate monetary policy and no further shocks to the economy; consequently, the longer-run projections for inflation in particular can be interpreted as indicating the rate of inflation that FOMC participants judge to be most consistent, over time, with the Federal Reserve's mandate to foster maximum employment and stable prices. These longer-run inflation projections are thus analogous to targets although, importantly, they represent the Committee participants' individual assessments of the mandate-consistent inflation rate, not a formal inflation goal of the Committee as a whole.1 To what extent, if at all, has the pre-crisis consensus framework for monetary policy been changed by recent events? In part because they recognized the benefits of continuity and familiarity during a period of upheaval, central banks generally retained their established approaches to monetary policy during the crisis; and, in many respects, the existing frameworks proved effective. Notably, well-anchored longer-term inflation expectations moderated both inflation and deflation risks, as price-setters and market participants remained confident in the ability of central banks to keep inflation near target in the medium term. The medium-term focus of flexible inflation targeting also offered central banks latitude to cushion the effects of the financial shocks on output and employment in the face of transitory swings in inflation. In particular, they were able to avoid significant policy tightening in mid-2008 and early 2011, when sharp increases in commodity prices temporarily drove headline inflation rates above target levels. Finally, for central banks with policy rates near the zero lower bound, influencing the public's expectations about future policy actions became a critical tool, as I will discuss further shortly. The commitment to a policy framework that is transparent about objectives and forecasts was helpful, in many instances, in managing those expectations and thus in making monetary policy both more predictable and more effective during the past few years than it might otherwise have been. However, the recent experience did raise at least one important question about the flexible inflation-targeting framework--namely, that although that framework had helped produce a long period of macroeconomic stability, it ultimately, by itself, was not enough to ensure financial stability. Some observers have argued that this failure should lead to modifications, or even a replacement, of the inflation targeting approach. For example, since financial excesses tend to develop over a relatively longer time frame and can have significant effects on inflation when they ultimately unwind, it has been suggested that monetary policy should be conducted with reference to a longer horizon to take appropriate account of financial stability concerns.2 My guess is that the current framework for monetary policy--with innovations, no doubt, to further improve the ability of central banks to communicate with the public--will remain the standard approach, as its benefits in terms of macroeconomic stabilization have been demonstrated. However, central banks are also heeding the broader lesson, that the maintenance of financial stability is an equally critical responsibility. Central banks certainly did not ignore issues of financial stability in the decades before the recent crisis, but financial stability policy was often viewed as the junior partner to monetary policy. One of the most important legacies of the crisis will be the restoration of financial stability policy to co-equal status with monetary policy. Monetary Policy ToolsWhile central banks may have left their monetary policy frameworks largely unchanged through the Great Recession, they have considerably widened their set of tools for implementing those frameworks. Following the crisis and the downturn in the global economy that started in 2008, central banks responded with a forceful application of their usual policy tools, most prominently sharp reductions in short-term interest rates. Then, as policy rates approached the zero lower bound, central banks began to employ an increasingly wide range of less conventional tools, including forward policy guidance and operations to alter the scale and composition of their balance sheets. Forward guidance about the future path of policy rates, already used before the crisis, took on greater importance as policy rates neared zero. A prominent example was the Bank of Canada's commitment in April 2009 to keep its policy rate unchanged at 1/4percent until the end of the second quarter of 2010, depending on the outlook for inflation.3This commitment was successful in clarifying for market participants the bank's views on the likely path of policy rates and appears to have helped reduce longer-term interest rates, thus providing additional policy accommodation. In 2010, the Bank of Japan, which faced ongoing deflation in consumer prices, also used conditional forward guidance, saying that "The Bank will maintain the virtually zero interest rate policy until it judges, on the basis of the ‘understanding of medium- to long-term price stability,' that price stability is in sight, on condition that no problem will be identified in examining risk factors, including the accumulation of financial imbalances."4 Some central banks provide forward guidance directly by releasing forecasts or projections of their policy rate. This practice had already been adopted by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (in 1997), the Norges Bank (in 2005), and the Swedish Riksbank (in 2007). Each of these central banks used those projections during the financial crisis to indicate that they were likely to keep rates at low levels for at least a year. In the United States, the FOMC introduced language in its March 2009 statement indicating that it anticipated rates to remain at low levels for an "extended period," and at its August 2011 meeting the Committee elaborated by indicating that it anticipated rates would remain low at least through mid-2013.5The FOMC continues to explore ways to further increase transparency about its forecasts and policy plans. In addition to forward guidance about short-term rates, a number of central banks have also used changes in the size and composition of their balance sheets as tools of monetary policy. In particular, the Federal Reserve has both greatly increased its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities and broadened its portfolio to include agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities. Its goal in doing so was to provide additional monetary accommodation by putting downward pressure on longer-term Treasury and agency yields while inducing investors to shift their portfolios toward alternative assets such as corporate bonds and equities. These actions also served to improve the functioning of some stressed financial markets, especially in 2008 and 2009, through the provision of market liquidity. Other central banks have also used their balance sheets more actively than before the crisis, with some differences in their motivations and emphasis, in part reflecting differing financial structures across countries. For example, the Bank of England has used large-scale purchases of medium- and long-term government securities as its preferred tool for providing additional stimulus; it expanded the size of its asset purchase program earlier this month out of concern about possible slowing of domestic and global economic growth. The Bank of Japan has acquired a wide range of assets, including government and corporate bonds, commercial paper, exchange-traded equity funds, and equity issued by real estate investment corporations. The ECB purchased privately issued covered bonds between July 2009 and June 2010 to improve liquidity in a key market segment; it recently announced plans to resume such purchases in November. The ECB has also bought the sovereign bonds of some vulnerable euro-area countries, "to ensure depth and liquidity in those market segments which are dysfunctional," although the monetary effects of these purchases have been sterilized through offsetting operations.6 In most cases, the use of balance sheet policies for macroeconomic stabilization purposes has reflected the constraints on more-conventional policies as short-term nominal interest rates reach very low levels. In more normal times, when short-term policy rates are not constrained, I expect that balance sheet policies will be rarely used. By contrast, forward guidance and other forms of communication about policy can be valuable even when the zero lower bound is not relevant, and I expect to see increasing use of such tools in the future. Financial Stability PolicyEven as central banks were innovative in the operation of their monetary policies, they were forced to be equally innovative in restoring and maintaining financial stability. Serving as a lender of last resort--standing ready in a crisis to lend to solvent but illiquid financial institutions that have adequate collateral--is, of course, a traditional function of central banks. Indeed, the need for an institution that could serve this function was a primary motivation for the creation of the Federal Reserve in 1913. The Federal Reserve's discount window is an example of a facility that operates in normal times to provide very short-term liquidity to depository institutions. Most other central banks have facilities with similar features that are generally aimed at banks that find themselves with temporary liquidity needs. During the crisis, as short-term funding markets failed to function normally, central banks around the world acted forcefully to channel liquidity to institutions and markets by lengthening the terms of their lending, increasing the range of collateral accepted, and expanding the set of counterparties with which they would undertake operations. To help stabilize the financial system and facilitate the flow of credit to households and businesses, the Federal Reserve responded to the dislocations in funding and securitization markets by dramatically increasing the amount of term funding that it provided to banks, establishing new lending facilities for nonbanks, and providing funding to support the operation of key markets. Elsewhere, including Canada, the euro area, and the United Kingdom, central banks introduced similar facilities or expanded existing facilities to boost the provision of liquidity in their local currencies. The types of facilities have varied across countries commensurate with differences in financial systems. In the euro area, where the banking sector plays a relatively large role in financial intermediation, the ECB focused on increasing liquidity to banks. Similarly, the Bank of England sought to improve banks' liquidity positions by allowing them to exchange illiquid mortgage-backed securities for U.K. treasury bills for up to three years. One of the lessons of the crisis was that financial markets have become so globalized that it may no longer be sufficient for central banks to offer liquidity in their own currency; financial institutions may face liquidity shortages in other currencies as well. For that reason, the Federal Reserve established bilateral currency swap agreements with 14 foreign central banks during the financial crisis. The swap facilities have allowed these central banks to borrow dollars from the Federal Reserve to lend to banks in their jurisdictions, which has served to ease conditions in dollar funding markets globally. Similarly, the ECB established bilateral swap lines with several other central banks in Europe to exchange euros for their respective currencies. As lender of last resort, a central bank works to contain episodes of financial instability; but recent events have shown the importance of anticipating and defusing threats to financial stabilitybeforethey can inflict damage on the financial system and the economy. In particular, the crisis illustrated some important benefits of involving central banks in financial supervision. Among these benefits are the facilitation of close and effective information sharing between supervisors and the providers of backstop liquidity, especially during crises; the ability to exploit the substantial overlap of expertise in the making of monetary policy and financial stability policy; and the usefulness of the information supervisors gather about economic and financial conditions for monetary policy. Appreciation of these benefits is leading to larger roles for central banks in financial supervision. For example, the Bank of England received expanded powers and responsibilities for financial stability with the establishment of a prudential regulator as a subsidiary of the bank and the creation of a separate Financial Policy Committee within the bank that will identify, monitor, and take action to reduce systemic risks. In the euro area, the newly created European Systemic Risk Board, which is chaired by the president of the ECB and includes the governors of all European Union central banks, draws heavily on central bank expertise, including analytical, statistical, and administrative support from the ECB. In the United States, the Federal Reserve has reoriented its existing supervisory activities to incorporate a broader systemic focus; it also has been assigned new responsibilities for financial stability, including supervisory authority over nonbank financial institutions that are designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council and new backup authorities for systemically critical financial market utilities. The Integration of Monetary Policy and Financial Stability PoliciesAs I noted earlier, in the decades prior to the crisis, monetary policy had come to be viewed as the principal function of central banks; their role in preserving financial stability was not ignored, but it was downplayed to some extent. The financial crisis has changed all that. Policies to enhance financial stability and monetary policy are now seen as co-equal responsibilities of central banks. How should these two critical functions fit together? At an institutional level, as I have already suggested, the two functions are highly complementary. Monetary policy, financial supervision, and lender-of-last-resort policies all benefit from the sharing of information and expertise. At the Federal Reserve, for example, macroeconomists help design stress-test scenarios used by bank supervisors, while supervisors provide information about credit conditions to macroeconomic forecasters. Threats to financial stability, and their potential implications for the economy, are thoroughly discussed at meetings of the FOMC. An important debate for the future concerns the extent to which it is useful for central banks to try to make a clear distinction between their monetary and financial stability responsibilities, including designating a separate set of policy tools for each objective. For example, throughout the crisis the ECB has maintained its "separation principle" under which it orients changes in its policy interest rate toward achieving price stability and focuses its unconventional liquidity and balance sheet measures toward addressing dysfunctional markets. The idea that policy is more effective when separate tools are dedicated to separate objectives is consistent with the principle known to economists as the Tinbergen rule.7 In practice, the distinction between macroeconomic and financial stability objectives will always be blurred to some extent, given the powerful interactions between financial and economic conditions. For example, monetary policy actions that improve the economic outlook also tend to improve the conditions of financial firms; likewise, actions to support the normal functioning of financial institutions and markets can help achieve the central bank's monetary policy objectives by improving credit flows and enhancing monetary policy transmission. Still, the debate about whether it is possible to dedicate specific policy tools to the macroeconomic and financial stability objectives is a useful one that raises some important practical questions. A leading example is the question of whether monetary policy should "lean against" movements in asset prices or credit aggregates in an effort to promote financial stability. In my view, the issue is not whether central bankers should ignore possible financial imbalances--they should not--but, rather, what "the right tool for the job" is to respond to such imbalances.8 The evolving consensus, which is by no means settled, is that monetary policy is too blunt a tool to be routinely used to address possible financial imbalances; instead, monetary policy should remain focused on macroeconomic objectives, while more-targeted microprudential and macroprudential tools should be used to address developing risks to financial stability, such as excessive credit growth. Prudential tools can be structural or cyclical in nature. Examples of structural prudential tools are measures to ensure adequate levels of capital and liquidity in the banking sector or to increase the resiliency of the financial infrastructure. Examples of cyclical prudential tools include varying caps on loan-to-value ratios on mortgages, as Korea and Hong Kong have done; dynamic provisioning for losses by banks, as employed in Spain; time-varying margin and haircut rules; and countercyclical capital requirements, as have been set out in BaselIII. In principle, structural and cyclical prudential tools could both damp the buildup of imbalances and bolster the resilience of the financial sector to a decline in asset prices by increasing its capacity to absorb losses. The diverse tools of financial regulation and supervision, together with appropriate monitoring of the financial system, should be, I believe, the first line of defense against the threat of financial instability. However, the effectiveness of such targeted policies in practice is not yet proven, so the possibility that monetary policy could be used directly to support financial stability goals, at least on the margin, should not be ruled out. ConclusionThe financial crisis of 2008 and 2009 will leave a lasting imprint on the theory and practice of central banking. With respect to monetary policy, the basic principles of flexible inflation targeting--the commitment to a medium-term inflation objective, the flexibility to address deviations from full employment, and an emphasis on communication and transparency--seem destined to survive. However, following a much older tradition of central banking, the crisis has forcefully reminded us that the responsibility of central banks to protect financial stability is at least as important as the responsibility to use monetary policy effectively in the pursuit of macroeconomic objectives. An evolving consensus holds that central banks can dedicate separate toolkits to achieving their financial stability and macroeconomic objectives, but this consensus must be viewed as provisional. Certainly, those toolkits appear to be much better stocked today than before the crisis: monetary policy tools that can be brought to bear if necessary include the management of the central bank's balance sheet and, to a greater extent than in the past, communication about future policies. Financial stability policy encompasses, as the first line of defense at least, a range of microprudential and macroprudential tools, both structural and varying over the cycle, supported by enhanced monitoring and analysis of potential risks to systemic stability. Clearly, understanding and applying the lessons of the crisis will take some time yet; both theorists and practitioners of central banking have their work cut out for them. 1.In a similar vein, since 2006 the Bank of Japan has provided the range of individual policy board members' understanding of the inflation rate consistent with price stability. That understanding is reviewed annually.Return to text 2.For example, Charles Bean of the Bank of England has suggested that "taking on board the possible risks posed by cumulating financial imbalances may require a shift in the rhetoric of inflation targeters towards the longer term." See page 70 of Charles Bean (2003), "Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary Policy: Are Inflation Targets Enough?" inAsset Prices and Monetary Policy, proceedings of a conference sponsored by the Reserve Bank of Australia (New South Wales, Australia: RBA, Aug. 18-19), pp. 48-76.Return to text 3.See Bank of Canada (2009), "Bank of Canada lowers overnight rate target by 1/4 percentage point to 1/4 per cent and, conditional on the inflation outlook, commits to hold current policy rate until the end of the second quarter of 2010," press release, April 21.Return to text 4.See Bank of Japan (2010), "Comprehensive Monetary Easing," press release, October 5.Return to text 5.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "FOMC Statement," press release, March 18; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9.Return to text 6.See European Central Bank (2010), "ECB Decides on Measures to Address Severe Tensions in Financial Markets," press release, May 10.Return to text 7.The Tinbergen rule states that if the number of policy targets surpasses the number of instruments, then some targets may not be met. See Jan Tinbergen (1952),On the Theory of Economic Policy(Amsterdam: North-Holland).Return to text 8.See Ben S. Bernanke (2002), "Asset-Price ‘Bubbles' and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the New York Chapter of the National Association for Business Economics, New York, N.Y., October 15.Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the 2011 Virginia Beach Financial Planning Day, Virginia Beach, Virginia Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here in my hometown of Virginia Beach and to welcome all of you to Financial Planning Day. I am proud to see our city recognizes that helping families plan for a more secure financial future is good for citizens and, at the same time, it makes the economic base of the entire city stronger. I am also pleased, and more than a little impressed, to see so many of you taking time out of your busy lives to focus on this important topic. I hope you find, as I have, that the time you invest in this endeavor yields a lifetime of personal and financial dividends. Knowledge is power, and I submit that financial knowledge is also security. Importance of Financial Planning to the Federal ReserveYou might wonder why a Federal Reserve Board Governor was invited to speak about individual household financial planning. That's a fair question given that the Federal Reserve System's structure was designed by Congress to give it a broad perspective on the U.S. economy. Most of the Fed's actions are indeed focused on the whole economy. But the relationship between your personal financial interests and the interests of the national economy is more closely aligned than you might think. Let me explain. There is, in fact, a direct relationship between household financial stability and the stability of the U.S. economy. As building blocks of the economy, the financial health of each household contributes to the financial health of the country as a whole. Thus, the Federal Reserve has an inherent interest in the financial stability and strength of individual households, whose spending, saving, and investing significantly impact economic growth. Financially stable families also make the economy run more smoothly as these families face less economic risk and have more economic mobility. Ultimately, financially secure households are the backbone of a strong domestic economy. Indeed, the condition of household finances is a key factor in the sluggish pace of recovery that we are seeing today. In the run-up to the financial crisis, households became increasingly over-leveraged, as the amount of debt from mortgages, credit cards, student loans, and other liabilities outpaced income. Between 2001 and 2007, the household debt-to-income ratio skyrocketed, increasing by more than it had in the prior 45 years.1And both household debt-to-income and household debt-to-assets ratios reached their highest points since 1950. Beginning in 2008, in the face of rising unemployment and falling home values, households reduced spending and increased saving. Although many households have suffered tremendous financial hardship, in the aggregate, U.S. consumers have moved from a near-zero savings rate in 2005 to a savings rate that is currently running around 5 percent. In addition, household debt levels have contracted notably: Mortgage debt and consumer debt have declined 7 percent and 5 percent, respectively, since mid-2008. This decline partly reflects the weakness in the economy: Tight underwriting standards have damped new loan originations, and a sizeable amount of debt has been discharged through bankruptcies or foreclosures. But households also appear to have a greater aversion to debt than in the past, and a renewed interest in paying down debt more aggressively. Because of smaller debt balances and lower interest rates, the share of aggregate household income devoted to debt payments is at its lowest level since 1994. Going forward, as income and asset values recover, these improvements in the aggregate household position should be felt by more and more U.S. households. The statistics may show that the consumer sector of our economy is improving, but I know that financial instability remains a reality for many families and I am quite aware of the difficult questions and painful decisions many of them face every day. Questions like: How can I plan for my children's higher education, my own retirement, and even emergency situations when I'm struggling with today's expenses? Yet, today, that type of planning is even more important, as is gaining a basic understanding of savings, investing, and financing options for these life events. More and more often, Americans are finding they have to be active in ensuring their financial security. But as they wade into financial decisionmaking, they are faced with more complex decisions and numerous and complicated financial products from which to choose. In fact, Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke has said, "Buying a home, saving for retirement or for children's education or even effectively managing the family budget now requires more financial sophistication than ever before."2 He has also said that financially literate consumers "make the financial marketplace work better, and they are better-informed citizens as well." To that end, the Federal Reserve System has made financial literacy a top priority. Well-informed, financially educated consumers are in a better position to improve their economic security and well-being. In turn, these financially secure families are also better able to contribute to thriving communities and thereby further foster community economic development. And, as these communities thrive, the marketplace as a whole becomes more effective and efficient.3Clearly, life-long financial education and the ready availability of decisionmaking tools and assistance are essential to this process. This process also makes clear why the City of Virginia Beach and the Federal Reserve share an interest in your economic well-being. So let me now set the stage for the day with some basic financial planning suggestions and information about Federal Reserve resources that you might use as you develop and implement your own financial plans. Create a Personal Financial PlanYour attendance here today shows that you already recognize the importance of the first recommendation I will offer:Create a personal financial plan. Having a financial plan or strategy will help you to achieve your financial goals and increase your likelihood of being financially healthy in the long run. I stress that you are wise to make your financial decisions with an eye toward achieving long-term goals. This will help you become more financially secure and satisfied. Living in the moment puts you at greater financial risk and leaves you with a more limited selection of financial products. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas offers a popular financial planning publication,Building Wealth. In it, individuals and families seeking help to develop a plan for building personal wealth will find an overview of personal asset-building strategies that includes setting financial goals, budgeting, saving and investing, managing debt, and understanding credit reports and credit scores. The Dallas Fed makesBuilding Wealthavailable online in both English and Spanish, and has created an interactive version of the publication, making it usable as a personal finance education resource for schools, nonprofit community organizations, and financial services providers.4 Another valuable online resource is the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco'sGuide to Financial Literacy.This free publication explains what level of financial education is appropriate for a variety of age groups, offers guidance for consumers making key financial decisions at different stages of life, and includes a compendium of financial education resources that address these needs.5 Saving is ImportantAs you develop a financial plan, I offer my second recommendation:Saving is important, and you're going to need to increase your savings to manage your financial lives successfully. American families rely on savings and investments to achieve a secure retirement, save for their children's education, buy homes, start businesses, manage financial emergencies, and pass on wealth and opportunities to the next generation. This not only makes financial sense, but there's a growing body of evidence that families with savings and assets generally do better in life than those without in terms of social, behavioral, educational, and economic outcomes. I am aware that during tough economic times, saving is a challenge for people at all stages of life. Starting salaries for recent college graduates have declined, which means that young Americans who are employed have fewer resources for saving and investing than previous generations. On the other end of the spectrum, many older workers are delaying retirement because they have insufficient assets to fund their retirement. Even more troubling is research showing that many consumers who should be saving for retirement have been forced to take hardship withdrawals from their 401(k) plans. According to an analysis by Vanguard, hardship withdrawals increased by 49 percent between 2005 and 2010.6 The increasing use of retirement savings for other purposes is particularly problematic now that employers have increasingly shifted the responsibility for saving for retirement toward individual employees. Having a secure retirement is a high priority and a significant long-term goal for many Americans, so it is especially important that they have an understanding of the level of resources they will need in retirement and the investment options available to them. Despite these recent trends, most people have the ability to save if they plan accordingly. One way to establish and maintain regular savings is through automation. Think about your own 401(k). At one point, perhaps when you were hired, you made one decision to save, and the rest was done for you--automatic payroll deductions, investments, statements, etc. Automatic payroll deductions can also be established to build general savings, savings for college, and other critical pre-retirement assets. Experiments with automatic savings programs like "Auto401(k)s," the "Save More Tomorrow" concept, and "AutoSave" have generated encouraging results. In addition to tax-advantaged and automatic savings programs, there are a number of targeted savings initiatives that can help families save. For example, low-income residents of Virginia are eligible to participate in the Virginia Individual Development Accounts (VIDA) Program, which matches $2 for every $1 saved in a VIDA account. Like other individual development accounts (IDA), this program encourages low-income individuals to save for specific needs by matching the contributions of the account holder. In the case of VIDA, the combined savings can be used for the purchase of a first home, to start a business, or to finance higher education. Similar in concept to the IDA, a new child development account (CDA) is being piloted for a small number of third and fourth graders in Alexandria, Virginia that can be used later in life to further the child's education, to purchase a home, or to capitalize a small business. Under the Child$ave program, contributions to the account can be made from any private source with businesses encouraged to establish accounts bearing their name, such as, "Jonathan Swift, a Safeway Scholar." And this type of initiative is popping up all over the country. In San Francisco, the "Kindergarten to College" initiative sets up college savings accounts for all of the city's kindergartners. In Oklahoma, the "SEED for Oklahoma Kids" experiment establishes an account at the birth of a child and "seeds" each account with $1,000. On an annual basis, eligible families can earn matching funds for their contributions to a parallel account they open within the state's tax-advantaged College Savings Plan. There is some evidence that financial knowledge is theresultof regular saving, rather than the source. So these types of programs offer children and adults the opportunity to manage their own account, thereby fostering financial education while encouraging saving. Create an Emergency FundMy third recommendation is tocreate an emergency fundin addition to your longer-term savings and investments. These frightening statistics demonstrate why: Nearly half of all Americans consider themselves financially fragile, meaning that they would "probably" (22.2 percent) or "certainly" (27.9 percent) be unable to come up with $2,000 in 30 days to cope with a financial emergency.7Similarly, almost half of all Americans report having trouble making ends meet.8Almost half of all households surveyed in the 2009 Survey of Consumer Finances had less than $3,000 in liquid savings, and 20 percent had less than $3,000 in broader savings.9Finally, in a recent survey on the effects of unemployment and the recession, 70 percent of workers reported withdrawing funds saved in college and retirement accounts for present day needs, likely leading to a significant loss of wealth in future years.10 These circumstances emphasize the importance of unrestricted savings, or savings that can be used for emergencies or precautionary purposes. Cobbling together even a minimum amount of emergency savings can have a significant impact, especially among lower-income households. In fact, the Consumer Federation of America found that low-income families with $500 in emergency savings had better financial outcomes than moderate-income families with lower savings. In addition, recent research found that households that are "liquid-asset poor" are two to three times more likely than those with liquid assets to experience "material hardship" after a job loss, health emergency, death in the family, or other adverse event.11 Clearly, emergency savings are important for households at every income level. For some, a tax refund or tax credit is a possible source of emergency funds. The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis has a user-friendly publication titled,You've Earned It! What the Earned Income Tax Credit Can Do for You.12This booklet explains how the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) works and who qualifies for the credit. Millions of low-income, working Americans are unaware that they are eligible for thousands of dollars in tax credits. Receiving a windfall such as the EITC is the perfect opportunity to establish savings that would be available for unexpected expenses. And thanks to the IRS form 8888, which has been around just a couple of years now, you can send your EITC refund directly and automatically to up to three different accounts. Manage Your DebtMy final suggestion is tomanage your debt.Loans are an excellent way to use future income to pay for an important purchase today, such as a car, an education, or a home. But before taking out a loan--a student loan, for example--you should ask yourself three questions. First, does the value of the purchase justify the payments you will have to make? Education is one of the best investments you can make, but think about whether the extra earnings from a particular course of study will enable you to earn enough to make loan payments in the future. Furthermore, when preparing to manage student debt, consider the full breadth of expenses--room and board, books and supplies, etc.--that you will incur to determine the total amount you will need to borrow. According to the American Council on Education, half of all graduates in 2004 used credit cards for school expenses.13You want to avoid having to do that. The second question is closely related: Will you be able to make the payments on the loan even if everything doesn't go as you plan or if payments are higher in the future? Consider the highest payment you will potentially face rather than just the initial payment. And finally, ask yourself if you have found the best loan for you. Ask lenders questions, read the information they give you, and make sure you know everything about the terms of your loan. And shop around for the best deal. In addition to thinking carefully about the initial loan decision, it is important to periodically re-evaluate your debt position. Sometimes the best way to invest your new savings is to pay down high-cost debt. Another way to save money is to refinance your mortgage into lower interest rates. Through the government's "Home Affordable Refinance Program," borrowers with mortgages through Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac can refinance their loans even if they owe more than the home's current value. Interest rates and mortgage underwriting are changing continually so I urge you to investigate this option on a regular basis. If you are unable to refinance your debt due to credit problems or if you are struggling to make payments, I encourage you to work with a non-profit housing counselor or debt counselor to identify possible solutions. ConclusionIt has been my pleasure to share my thoughts with you on this important topic. As you plan for your financial future, please keep in mind that planning is a process. You have taken the important first step in this process simply by being here to learn more about tools and resources available to help you and your family. But putting those tools to use is not necessarily easy. I know from first-hand experience that understanding the basics of nutrition doesn't make it any easier to stay on a diet. But I also know from experience that making a plan and sticking to it brings real success whether in the form of a healthier lifestyle or in the form of a more secure financial future. And as I said at the outset, as we all work to improve our individual financial stability, we will ultimately build a stronger economy. I wish you all great success. 1.Pence, Karen M. 2011. "Comment on `Financially Fragile Households: Evidence and Implications.' " Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Spring: 141-145.Return to text 2.Seehttp://dallasfed.org/ca/wealth/pdfs/wealth.pdf(PDF).Return to text 3.Marianne Hilgert, Jeanne Hogarth, and Sondra Beverly (2003), "Household Financial Management: The Connection between Knowledge and Behavior," Federal Reserve Bulletin.Return to text 4.Building Wealthcan be found atwww.dallasfed.org/ca/wealth/index.cfm.Return to text 5.TheGuide to Financial Literacy Resourcecan be found atwww.frbsf.org/community/webresources/bankersguide.pdf(PDF).Return to text 6.Stephen Utkus and Jean Young (2011), "The Great Recession and 401(k) Plan Participant Behavior," Vanguard Research.Return to text 7.Annamaria Lusardi, Daniel Schneider, and Peter Tufano (2011), "Financially Fragile Households: Evidence and Implications (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution , Spring).Return to text 8.Annamaria Lusardi (2011), "Americans' Financial Capability (PDF)," report prepared for the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission.Return to text 9.Bricker, Bucks, Kennickell, Mach and Moore, "Surveying the Aftermath of the Storm: Changes in Family Finances from 2007 to 2009."Return to text 10.Debbie Borie-Holtz, D., Carl Van Horn, and Cliff Zukin (2010), "No End in Sight: The Agony of Prolonged Unemployment (PDF)," New Brunswick, NJ: John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development, Rutgers University, May 2010.Return to text 11.Signe-Mary McKernan, Caroline Ratcliffe, and Katie Vinopal (2009), "Do Assets Help Families Cope with Adverse Events? (PDF)" The Urban Institute.Return to text 12.You've Earned It! What the Earned Income Tax Credit Can Do for Youcan be found atwww.stlouisfed.org/community_development/assets/pdf/EITC-brochure.pdf(PDF).Return to text 13.American Council on Education, June 2005.Return to text
Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the 2011 Annual Meeting of the Financial Management Association International, Denver, Colorado For more than 40 years, the Financial Management Association International has promoted the advancement of knowledge about financial decisionmaking and its dissemination to practitioners worldwide. The association's efforts benefit not only private-sector participants in financial markets, but also policymakers in central banks and governments who strive to ensure that the financial system works effectively to support global economic growth. As one of the many beneficiaries of the association's work, I am honored to receive this year's Outstanding Financial Executive Award. My comments today will focus on recent economic and financial market developments, along with their implications for the outlook and for economic policy. I will begin by pointing out that, although the U.S. economy continues to grow, the recovery has been proceeding at a disappointingly slow pace. Moreover, slow growth leaves the economy vulnerable to downside shocks, such as the potential for adverse developments in global financial markets. I then will discuss ways that monetary policy and fiscal policy can support the economic recovery and address these risks to the expansion. Let me note at the outset that these remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. The U.S. Economic OutlookSince the middle of 2009, the U.S. economy has been recovering from the most severe recession and financial crisis to afflict our country since the Great Depression. Certainly, conditions have improved in a number of ways during these past two years: Output growth has resumed, and private-sector employment has risen about 2-1/2 million since payrolls troughed in early 2010. Industrial production has generally advanced solidly, business investment in equipment and software continues to rise briskly, and U.S. exports have grown at a robust pace. In addition, financial market functioning is much better than in the depths of the crisis; the quantity and quality of capital and the size of liquidity buffers in the banking system have improved significantly; nonfinancial business balance sheets are mostly in solid shape; and credit conditions, although still tight, have eased somewhat for many businesses and households. Despite these improvements, the pace of the economic recovery has been less vigorous than any of us would have desired and than most forecasters had anticipated. Indeed, recent revisions of economic data by the Commerce Department's Bureau of Economic Analysis indicate that the recession was deeper, and the recovery weaker, than previously estimated. Since the beginning of the recovery in the third quarter of 2009 through the second quarter of this year, the most recent quarter for which an estimate is available, real gross domestic product (GDP) expanded at an average annual rate of about 2-1/2 percent, a slower pace than during the first two years of most U.S. recoveries in the past half-century. As a consequence, aggregate output in the second quarter still had not reached its peak level just prior to the recession. Not surprisingly, the unemployment rate has declined only 1 percentage point from its high of about 10 percent near the end of 2009, and the number of jobs in the private sector remains more than 6 million below the peak level reached in early 2008. The fraction of those now jobless who have been without work for six months or more stands at a very high level. And, in addition to those officially unemployed, many individuals are involuntarily working part time or have dropped out of the labor force entirely. U.S. economic growth was particularly anemic in the first half of this year, when real GDP rose at an average annual rate of less than 1 percent. Two factors, both largely transitory, played a notable role in depressing growth and in boosting inflation during the first half of the year. First, sharp increases in the prices of oil and other commodities eroded the purchasing power of households' incomes, thus restraining their spending. Gasoline and food prices surged, and a portion of producers' higher input costs were passed through to the prices of a wide range of consumer goods and services. Second, the production and sale of motor vehicles declined sharply because of disruptions in global supply chains in the aftermath of the disastrous earthquake and tsunami that struck Japan last March. These supply disruptions also limited the availability of some popular models, placing upward pressure on motor vehicle prices. Fortunately, commodity prices have come down from their earlier peaks, which should ease pressures on consumer prices and, in turn, lessen strains on household budgets. Automotive supply chain disruptions have also diminished in recent months, resulting in a rebound of both the production and sales of new motor vehicles. Partly for these reasons, it looks likely that economic growth in the second half of this year will be noticeably stronger, and inflation more moderate, than in the first half. Unfortunately, however, a range of other, more persistent factors also appear to be restraining the recovery. Moreover, financial market conditions have deteriorated, on net, in recent months, intensifying some of the headwinds facing the economy. Persistent Restraints on the Economic RecoveryThe average pace of consumer spending during the past several quarters has been weaker than can be explained by the transitory factors that I just mentioned. High levels of unemployment and underemployment, slow gains in wages, and declines in the values of both homes and financial assets have weighed on household spending. Households appear to have made some progress in deleveraging, but many still face elevated debt burdens and reduced access to credit. Moreover, consumer sentiment dropped markedly over the summer and has remained low since then, reflecting households' concerns about the broader economy as well as their own financial situations. Weak consumer spending, unsurprisingly, increases concerns among businesses about the prospects for sustained growth in the demand for their products and services. As a consequence, many businesses have been reluctant to significantly expand their payrolls. Indeed, the average pace of hiring during the past several months has been quite a bit slower than earlier in the year. As a result, the unemployment rate has continued to hover in the vicinity of 9 percent since early this year. Furthermore, recent surveys have shown some deterioration in firms' hiring plans, and new claims for unemployment insurance by workers who have been laid off remain relatively high. Such indicators are consistent with job gains remaining tepid in the coming months. A sharp downturn in housing was at the core of the recent recession, and this sector continues to weigh on the recovery. Robust increases in housing activity have helped spur recoveries from most U.S. recessions in the past 50 years. This time, in contrast, residential construction remains depressed by a large inventory of foreclosed and distressed properties, tight credit conditions for construction loans and mortgages, concerns about further declines in home prices, and the substantial number of homeowners whose mortgage balances exceed the values of their homes. As a result, new home construction currently is at only about one-third of its average pace in recent decades. In the government sector, with ongoing pressures on their budgets, state and local governments have continued to shrink their payrolls and reduce their spending on construction projects. Moreover, the boost to the economy from earlier stimulus policies by the federal government has begun to wind down, and, absent further actions by the Congress and the Administration, federal fiscal policy will also restrain the pace of the recovery in the year ahead. Of course, it is unclear how the future path for fiscal policy will evolve--a topic I will return to later--and the uncertainty surrounding both the federal budget process and the future course of fiscal policy appears to have weighed on household and business confidence of late. I noted earlier that the recovery has benefited from rising exports, largely reflecting strong foreign economic growth. But since the spring, the pace of underlying economic growth in many foreign economies has slowed. Economic activity has decelerated particularly sharply in Europe because of the intensification of fiscal and financial stress in the euro area. The substantial reductions in government spending and increases in taxes that some countries have had to put in place to address their fiscal problems also have weighed on the pace of economic activity in the region. In addition, economic growth in many emerging market economies also looks to be moderating. Over the past two years, emerging market economies generally have been expanding at a faster rate than the more advanced economies, which has helped boost the overall pace of the global recovery. The recent step-down in the rate of expansion in many of these economies likely reflects less demand for their exports from Europe and the United States. Financial Markets and InstitutionsTurning to financial markets, I noted that conditions have improved since the depths of the crisis, but obvious strains remain, some of which have intensified in recent months. Since the early summer, financial markets have been experiencing an unusual amount of volatility, and investors have pulled back from risky assets on balance. The result has been lower equity prices, wider risk spreads on corporate bonds and many other debt instruments, and greater pressures on financial institutions. At the same time, heightened demand for safe assets has put downward pressure on Treasury yields and boosted the foreign exchange value of the dollar. These developments partly reflect the response by investors to news about the U.S. outlook that has, on net, fallen short of their expectations, as well as a recognition that growth is slowing elsewhere in the global economy. But they also reflect anxiety in financial markets about the fiscal problems in Greece and other euro-zone countries, along with greater sensitivity to the exposures of the European banking system to troubled sovereign debt. European leaders are strongly committed to addressing these issues and have begun to make some progress on them, but the need to obtain agreement among a large number of euro-zone countries to be able to put in place necessary backstops, as well as difficulties involved in addressing the fiscal imbalances in some of these countries, has slowed the process of developing and implementing solutions. At this time, it is difficult to know just how much these developments in global financial markets have affected U.S. economic activity thus far. But, looking forward, particularly worrisome is the possibility that U.S. financial institutions facing earnings or funding pressures, in part as a result of the problems in Europe, could cut back on lending, tighten credit terms, or attempt to delever by rapidly selling off assets. Indeed, recent surveys suggest that the trend we had been seeing of increased availability of credit and easing of terms among dealers may have been interrupted. A significant deterioration of the U.S. economic outlook, of course, would place financial institutions under additional stress. The potential for such adverse financial developments to derail the recovery creates, in my view, significant downside risks to the outlook. InflationBefore turning to economic policy, let me briefly discuss the outlook for inflation. Inflation picked up significantly over the first half of this year, with the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rising at an annual rate of about 3-1/2 percent--a pace that is well above the level of 2 percent or a little less that most Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants consider consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate for price stability and maximum employment. In contrast, PCE inflation averaged less than 1-1/2 percent over the preceding two years. As I noted at the outset, the recent surge in inflation, in my view, reflected to a substantial degree the sharp increases earlier this year in the prices of oil and other commodities and the effect of the Japanese tragedy on auto production and prices. In the statement following our most recent meeting in September, the FOMC indicated that it anticipates that inflation will moderate over coming quarters, settling at levels at or below those consistent with our dual mandate as the effects of these supply-side shocks on prices continue to wane. Importantly, I see little indication that the higher rate of inflation experienced so far this year has become ingrained in the economy. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable according to surveys, and market-based measures of inflation compensation are still subdued; measures derived from yields of Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) suggest that expected inflation over the next five years currently is around 1-3/4 percent. The substantial amount of resource slack that is projected to remain in U.S. labor and product markets over the next several years, coupled with sustained growth in productivity, should continue to restrain the growth in labor costs, helping to contain inflationary pressures. In fact, there is a risk that disinflationary pressures could intensify if the recovery faltered. Indeed, based on imputations from TIPS prices, market participants' assessments of the odds of outright deflation have risen significantly in recent months. Monetary PolicySince the onset of the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has employed a wide array of policy tools to foster our statutory objectives of maximum employment and price stability. In particular, with conventional policy having pushed short-term nominal interest rates close to zero, the FOMC--like a number of other major central banks around the world--has provided additional monetary accommodation by modifying our forward policy guidance and by adjusting our securities holdings. Forward Policy GuidanceThe conventional tool of U.S. monetary policy is to make adjustments to the target for the federal funds rate. That target, which stood at 5-1/4 percent as of mid-2007, was subsequently brought down to a range of 0 to 1/4 percent, and the effective federal funds rate has been maintained in that range since December 2008. Since that time, the FOMC has provided forward guidance about the anticipated future path of the federal funds rate. For example, in each meeting statement from March 2009 through June 2011, the Committee indicated our expectation that economic conditions "are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period."1At our August meeting, the Committee decided to provide more-specific information about the likely time horizon by substituting the phrase "at least through mid-2013" for the phrase "for an extended period."2This clarification appears to have reduced market uncertainty about the Committee's current policy expectations. The Committee's guidance refers to a specific calendar date, which could be periodically revised by the Committee if appropriate. However, it is explicitly framed as contingent on economic conditions, including "low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run."3Importantly, it is not stated as an unconditional commitment to a specific course for the federal funds rate. Market participants are naturally interested in gaining greater insight into how shifts in the economic outlook would affect the likely timing and pace of policy firming. As noted in the minutes of the August and September FOMC meetings, the Committee has discussed possible approaches to enhance its forward guidance along these lines--that is, to provide greater insight concerning its "reaction function."4 One potentially promising way to clarify the dependence of policy on economic conditions would be for the FOMC to frame the forward guidance in terms of specific numerical thresholds for unemployment and inflation. Such an approach was discussed by my colleague Charles Evans, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, in a recent speech.5Evans suggested that the FOMC could indicate its intention to continue holding the federal funds rate close to zero as long as the unemployment rate exceeds a given threshold, conditional on the medium-term inflation outlook remaining at or below a specified level.6Such an approach could be helpful in facilitating public understanding of how various possible shifts in the economic outlook would be likely to affect the anticipated timing of policy firming. For example, if there were a further downward revision of the economic outlook, investors would recognize that the conditions for policy firming would not be reached until a later date and hence would have a more concrete basis for extending the time period during which they expect the federal funds rate to remain near zero. The approach of numerically specifying the values of unemployment and inflation that could prompt policy tightening is not without potential pitfalls, however. For example, such thresholds could potentially be misunderstood as conveying the Committee's longer-run objectives rather than the conditions surrounding the likely onset of policy firming. Thus, in addition to giving careful consideration to this particular approach, it seems sensible to explore other potential enhancements to FOMC communications--a topic to which I will return shortly. Securities Holdings by the Federal ReserveThe FOMC has also provided monetary accommodation by modifying the size and composition of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. In particular, during 2009 and early 2010, the Federal Reserve purchased about $1.4 trillion in agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and agency debt securities and about $300 billion in longer-term Treasury securities. Last November, the Committee initiated an additional $600 billion in purchases of longer-term Treasury securities, and those transactions were completed at the end of June. At our recent September meeting, the FOMC announced that we intend to extend the average maturity of our securities holdings over coming months by selling $400 billion of short-term Treasury securities and purchasing an equivalent amount of long-term Treasury securities. This maturity extension program should exert downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make broader financial conditions more accommodative, thereby supporting a stronger economic recovery. At that meeting, we also decided that the principal payments from our holdings of agency securities will now be reinvested in agency MBS rather than in Treasury securities; this step was taken to support mortgage markets. Both of these decisions will affect the composition of our securities holdings without affecting the overall size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet or the level of reserve balances of depository institutions. Nonetheless, it is worth noting that the scale of the maturity extension program is necessarily limited by the amount of our holdings of shorter-term securities; furthermore, purchasing a very large proportion of the outstanding stock of longer-term Treasury securities could potentially have adverse effects on market functioning. Thus, securities purchases across a wide spectrum of maturities might become appropriate if evolving economic conditions called for significantly greater monetary accommodation. Monetary Policy CommunicationsIn recent years the FOMC has taken a number of significant steps to enhance the clarity of our communications about our longer-run objectives, our medium-term outlook, and our policy strategy. Transparency is an essential aspect of conducting monetary policy in a democratic society: The central bank is accountable to the public and hence needs to strive to explain its decisions as clearly as possible. Indeed, I believe that the Federal Reserve qualifies as one of the most transparent central banks in the world. Moreover, clear communications play an integral role in facilitating the effectiveness of monetary policy actions. Expectations play a critical role in the decisions of forward-looking households and businesses about how much to spend, work, hire, and invest, and their decisions are more likely to be consistent with the objectives of the central bank if they are based on a solid understanding of the shocks affecting the economy and the likely monetary policy response. When financial market participants understand how a central bank is likely to react to incoming information, asset prices should adjust in ways that anticipate the central bank's expected policy actions, enhancing the monetary policy transmission mechanism and thereby supporting the central bank's attainment of its objectives. Finally, good communication can help anchor the public's long-term inflation expectations, which can, in turn, greatly improve the scope for monetary policy to counteract departures of resource utilization from its sustainable level. Four times a year the FOMC publishes the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which conveys information about Committee participants' economic outlook for the next several calendar years and over the longer run. The SEP includes projections of real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, the PCE inflation rate, and the "core" inflation rate for PCE excluding food and energy. Since last spring, the Chairman has been conducting a news conference in conjunction with each release of the projections to help explain the FOMC's policy decisions in the context of our economic outlook. The longer-run projections in the SEP convey Committee participants' individual assessments of the rates of economic growth, unemployment, and inflation to which the economy would be expected to converge under appropriate policy and in the absence of further shocks. The longer-run inflation projections indicate that most Committee participants judge inflation of 2 percent or a bit less to be most consistent with our statutory mandate. In the latest projections, participants' estimates for the longer-run normal rate of unemployment had a range of 5 to 6 percent--well below the current unemployment rate of 9.1 percent and hence underscoring the degree to which the economy remains quite far from its balanced-growth path. Of course, there is always room for further improvement, and therefore the Committee continues to explore ways of enhancing the clarity of our communications. For example, as noted in the minutes of our September meeting, we have been discussing potential approaches for providing more information--perhaps through the SEP--regarding our longer-run objectives, the factors that influence our policy decisions, and our views on the likely evolution of monetary policy.7 Fiscal PolicyTurning now to fiscal policy, since the onset of the recent recession and financial crisis, the federal budget deficit has widened significantly. As a result, federal debt held by the public has increased relative to our national income to a level not seen in the past half-century. These budget developments have reflected both the weak economy, which has depressed revenues and pushed up expenditures, and the fiscal stimulus that was implemented to help ease the recession and support the recovery. So long as the economy continues to recover, the deficit should narrow over the next several years as a growing economy boosts revenues and reduces expenditures and as the policies put in place to provide economic stimulus continue to wind down. Even so, the federal budget is on an unsustainable path over the longer run, in large part because of the aging of the U.S. population and fast-rising health-care costs. If current policy settings are maintained, the ratio of federal debt held by the public to national income would continue to rise in coming decades. It is crucial that the federal budget be put on a sustainable long-run trajectory, and we should not postpone charting that course. A failure to put in place a credible plan to address our long-run budget imbalance would expose the United States to serious economic costs and risks in the long term and possibly sooner. Timely enactment of a plan to eliminate future unsustainable budget gaps will make it easier for individuals and businesses to prepare for and adjust to the changes. In addition, the sooner our longer-term budget problems are addressed, the less wrenching the adjustment will have to be and the more control that policymakers--rather than market forces or international creditors--will have over the timing, size, and composition of the necessary adjustments. At the same time, it is important to recognize that too much fiscal tightening in the near term could harm the economic recovery. Significant near-term reductions in federal spending or large increases in taxes would impose an additional drag on the economy at a time when aggregate demand is already weak. We need, and I believe we have scope for, an approach to fiscal policy that puts in place a well-timed and credible plan to bring deficits down to sustainable levels over the medium and long terms while also addressing the economy's short-term needs. I do not underestimate the difficulty of crafting a strategy for our fiscal policy that appropriately balances short-run needs with long-run considerations, but doing so would provide important benefits to the U.S. economy. ConclusionIn summary, the Federal Reserve has taken forceful actions to promote its objectives of maximum employment and stable prices, and we strive to communicate as clearly as possible our longer-run objectives as well as our medium-term outlook and policy strategy. Although U.S. economic growth was particularly slow during the first half of this year, I expect that the pace of recovery will pick up over coming quarters and that unemployment will resume a gradual decline toward its longer-run sustainable rate; moreover, I anticipate that the medium-term outlook for inflation will remain subdued. Nonetheless, there are significant downside risks. Therefore, the FOMC will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information, and we are prepared to employ our tools as appropriate to foster a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. 1. See, for example, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "FOMC Statement," press release, March 18.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9.Return to text 3. See, for example, Board of Governors, "FOMC Statement," in note 2.Return to text 4. The minutes of the August and September 2011 FOMC meetings are available on the Board'swebsite.Return to text 5. Charles L. Evans (2011), "The Fed's Dual Mandate Responsibilities and Challenges Facing U.S. Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the European Economics and Financial Centre, London, September 7.Return to text 6. For example, if such thresholds were specified to be broadly consistent with professional forecasters' projections for unemployment and inflation in mid- to late 2013, this approach might essentially reinforce current expectations that policy firming is likely to commence around that time. Alternatively, as Evans (2011) has noted, some additional monetary accommodation could be provided by specifying a modestly lower unemployment threshold and a slightly higher medium-term inflation threshold, thereby leading forecasters to push back their assessments of the onset of policy firming.Return to text 7. A subcommittee on communication, chaired by Governor Yellen and composed of Presidents Evans and Plosser and Governor Raskin, is reviewing additional ways to enhance the effectiveness of communications with the public about monetary policy.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the World Leaders Forum, Columbia University, New York, New York I appreciate the opportunity to be at Columbia this evening to discuss the American economy and, in particular, the employment situation.1Mindful of the trend of public discourse toward hyperbole, I hesitated in deciding whether to characterize that situation as a crisis. But it is hard to justify characterizing in any less urgent fashion the circumstances of the nearly 30 million Americans who are officially unemployed, out of the labor force but wanting jobs, or involuntarily working only part time. This situation reflects acute problems in labor markets, created by the financial crisis and the recession that followed. But we also confront chronic labor market problems. In my remarks this evening, I will outline both sets of problems. In my observations on policy responses, however, I will concentrate on the acute problems--in part to join the debate on their origins, in part because they call for the most immediate response, and in part because they are most relevant to my monetary policy responsibilities as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) of the Federal Reserve. That said, I hope you will not think the chronic problems any less important for the briefer treatment they receive tonight. Most of what I have to say can be summarized in three points. First, the acute problems are largely, though not completely, the result of a shortfall of aggregate demand following the financial crisis and recession. As such, they can be addressed through measures designed to increase total investment and consumption spending in the economy. Second, because the recession arose from a financial crisis, which itself followed a buildup of asset bubbles and unsustainable debt in important areas such as housing, the policies likely to be most effective at increasing aggregate demand may be somewhat different from those associated with a more typical recession and, even so, are not likely to work as quickly. Third, if labor market conditions remain this unfavorable for a long period, the problems I have described as acute could transform into another chronic problem. I refer not just to the despair and desperation that workers and their families must feel as weeks of unemployment stretch into months and even years, which alone should be enough to elicit a policy response, but also to what occurs when the ranks of the unemployed remain so great for so long--the erosion of skills and labor market attachment may affect the productive capacity of the economy as a whole. The State of the Labor Market TodayLet me start with some basic statistics that summarize the current state of the labor market. The most familiar of these is the unemployment rate, which, except for a couple of months earlier this year, has been at or above 9 percent since mid-2009. This is only the second time since the Great Depression that the jobless rate has been so high, and it is the first time since the 1930s that it has been so high for so long. Unemployment rates are exceptionally elevated for certain subgroups of the population: Nearly 15 percent for workers without a high school education, 16 percent among African Americans, about 25 percent among all teenagers, and nearly 50 percent for African American teenagers. Even among college graduates, whose unemployment rate is much lower than that of the population as a whole, the rate has doubled since the onset of the recession. As familiar as the unemployment rate is, both as a measure of economic slack and as an indicator of the pain experienced by American households, it does not tell the whole story. About 9 million workers who would like a full-time job can find only part-time work. Millions of others are working at jobs for which they are likely overqualified and earning less than in their previous jobs. Meanwhile, another 6 million people who are not officially counted among the unemployed say that they would like a job but have stopped looking for one, in many cases because they have become discouraged by the poor state of the job market. This effect can also be seen in the labor force participation rate, which has dropped sharply since 2007. The proportion of the U.S. population that is employed now stands at about 58 percent, the lowest level since 1983. Finally, more than 6 million workers--nearly one-half of all the unemployed--have been jobless for more than six months. The long-term unemployment rate is by far the highest it has been since data on the duration of unemployment began to be collected in 1948. Even more dispiriting than this snapshot of the employment picture is that there is so little momentum toward improvements in labor market conditions. The level of payroll employment fell by nearly 9 million during and just after the recession. To date, only about one-fourth that number of jobs has been restored. The pace of job growth in recent quarters has been barely enough to absorb the increase in the labor force and wholly insufficient to produce meaningful declines in unemployment. The number of new claims for unemployment insurance suggests only modest gains in employment in coming months, while measures of job vacancies seem to have turned down. Longer-Term Concerns for the U.S. Labor MarketPersistent employment weakness during an economic recovery, even such a tepid one, raises the important question of whether it is symptomatic of longer-run changes in the labor market. Indeed, in some respects the recent weakness resembles the "jobless" recoveries that followed the 1990 and 2001 recessions. In both of those episodes, job growth remained weak well after the downturn in real gross domestic product (GDP) ended, and the unemployment rate continued to rise, though from lower levels than we have today. One might reasonably ask if these similarities suggest that structural changes have placed the labor market on a permanently lower growth path. A first response is that there are important differences between this recovery and the recoveries that followed those earlier recessions. In particular, some explanations offered for the weak labor market recovery following the past two recessions are clearly not relevant today. Both the 1990 and 2001 recessions were relatively shallow downturns. This factor may have allowed more of the employment adjustment to occur through attrition, which can be spread over a longer period than layoffs. And both of those recessions followed long expansions, which may have permitted a buildup of productive inefficiencies that gave businesses scope to increase output in the subsequent recovery without expanding employment.2 That said, therearesome discouraging longer-term trends. Even before the recession, the labor market seemed to be on a slower trajectory than in previous decades. Between the business cycle peak in early 2001 and the peak in late 2007, the number of payroll jobs rose an average of only about 0.6 percent per year, compared with job growth of 1.8 percent per year in both the 1980s and 1990s. Similarly, the labor force participation rate and the percentage of the population employed each peaked around 2000 and have been on a downtrend path since then. It is true that a good part of this change can be accounted for by demographic factors--notably, lower population growth, the aging of the baby boom, and the leveling off of participation rates among women. But other, more disquieting factors are also at work. Two tendencies in particular suggest that the U.S. labor market has lost some of the dynamism that had long contributed to its resilience. First, it is apparent that job reallocation--that is, the sum of the jobs created at some businesses and lost in others--has been in secular decline since the late 1990s. It may seem counterintuitive to include lost jobs in a measure of labor market health, and on its own it is obviously not such an indicator. But when combined with new jobs, it forms part of the dynamic of job reallocation, an important part of the "creative destruction" that contributes to long-run economic growth--for example, as jobs shift from less-productive firms to more-productive ones. Second, the amount of employee movement across jobs has fallen over time. Specifically, the rate at which workers move from one firm to another has declined. So has the rate at which workers quit jobs, an indication of the degree to which they believe there are better jobs available for them. In what may be a related trend, geographic mobility across counties and states has decreased.3 Longer-term patterns in the types of jobs being created have also contributed to a widening gap in wages and income between the richest and poorest Americans. Adjusting for inflation, earnings for a worker in the middle of the wage distribution have risen about 10 percent since 1980, while earnings for a highly paid worker at the 90th percentile of the wage distribution have risen more than 30 percent during the same period. Earnings for workers near the low end of the distribution--those around the 10th percentile--have risen only about 5 percent after taking inflation into account. Thus, as has been widely observed, the gains from economic growth over the past three decades have disproportionately accrued to the highest wage earners. To some degree, growing wage inequality reflects rising returns to education. Since 1980, the average wage for college graduates has increased from about one and a half times the average wage for workers with only a high school degree to about two times their wage. The good news is that this rise has encouraged more young Americans to enroll in college. The fraction of 18- and 19-year-old high school graduates who are enrolled in college rose from around 50 percent in 1980 to nearly 70 percent today. Even the good news must be qualified, however, since half this rise took place in the 1980s, and the pace of increase has slowed since then. The bad news is that less-educated adults with significant work experience and younger, inexperienced adults who are ill prepared for, or unable to afford, college may be increasingly excluded from future economic gains. This widening inequality has been described as the result of a broader trend toward "occupational polarization."4This theory posits that the diffusion of computer-related technologies, the related automation of routine work, and an increased capability for firms to move their activities offshore have combined to concentrate job creation in the poles of either high-skill, high-wage employment or low-skill, low-wage work. The high-skill occupations increasingly require at least a bachelor's degree. Demand has shifted away from traditional middle-class occupations. The kinds of workers who would have been employed in a traditional manufacturing or administrative job now often end up in lower-paying jobs. Younger workers have historically filled many of the lower-paying service-sector jobs that are now more likely to be taken by less-educated adults. Thus, occupational polarization may be responsible for some of the rapid decline in employment and labor force participation among young people over the past decade. While part of this decline is likely attributable to the pursuit of additional education, employment and participation rates have also fallen for those youth who are not attending school, suggesting that education-related explanations are not the whole story. Indeed, research by the Federal Reserve Board's staff has found that greater crowding-out from adults can account for much of the decline in youth participation.5This crowding-out may have undesirable long-term consequences for the current generation of younger adults, as some research finds that poor job opportunities early in one's working life can lead to lower employment and wage rates in the future.6 The Aggregate Demand ShortfallTo this point, I have portrayed a labor market still disabled by the trauma of the financial crisis and the recession that followed, but also beset by chronic maladies whose symptoms predate the crisis. In considering the nature and magnitude of appropriate policy responses, an important question is the extent to which the current high level of unemployment reflects a shortfall in aggregate demand rather than additional structural problems arising from the recession. If the high level of unemployment is predominantly structural in origin, then the increase in aggregate demand intended by various monetary and fiscal policies would presumably be of limited efficacy. Although structural problems likely account for some of the high jobless rate, I believe the evidence points to aggregate demand as clearly the more important explanation. On its face, the sheer magnitude of the decline in the number of jobs during the recession, the speed of the increase in unemployment, and the halting nature of the economic recovery together create a fairly strong presumption that insufficient aggregate demand is the most significant factor. Moreover, one thing that the current episode has in common with the previous two "jobless" recoveries is a slow rebound in aggregate economic activity. Over the first eight quarters of all three recoveries, real GDP grew at an average annual rate of 3 percent or less, compared, for example, with more than 5 percent in the two years following the 1975 and 1982 recessions. Even taking into account differences in trends across time, the slower pace of overall economic growth following recent recessions is striking. Various arguments have been advanced in an effort to rebut the presumption that an aggregate demand shortfall accounts for much or most of the increased unemployment. The most common argument is that the deep recession created serious difficulties in matching available workers to available jobs, resulting in a big increase in structural unemployment. The mismatches in question could develop for a number of reasons. First, some have suggested that the traditional willingness of American workers to move from weaker labor markets to stronger ones has been impeded by the sharp decline in residential property prices and especially by the large number of mortgages that are now greater than the values of the properties securing them. But research to date suggests that such "house lock" has probably not had more than a small effect on structural unemployment thus far.7As noted earlier, migration rates have been falling for some time. But the declines during the recession have not been larger for homeowners than for renters. Nor has migration declined more in areas where workers are more likely to have underwater mortgages because of particularly large declines in housing prices. A second factor, the one most often cited in support of the structural unemployment hypothesis, is skills mismatch. While it is quite plausible that certain features of the current labor market reflect some skills mismatch contributing to a rise in structural unemployment during the recession, closer examination reveals that they explain less of this increase than might first appear. One such labor market feature is the sharp reduction in employment in sectors related to the housing bubble, such as residential construction and some parts of financial services. The contention is that the skills of workers in these sectors do not readily transfer to other sectors, and thus they will have a particularly difficult time finding new jobs. But in every recession, certain industries and occupations are hit particularly hard, resulting in significant permanent job losses. Yet previous recessions do not seem to have been accompanied by notable increases in structural unemployment. Thus, those who believe the mismatch problem specifically created by the recession--as distinguished from more-secular trends--is either more prevalent or more persistent now than in the past would need to identify some additional source of rigidity that has further hampered labor market adjustment. Some have also pointed to the high level of long-term unemployment as evidence that mismatch is a major factor keeping the unemployment rate high. The claim is that those without the skills sought by employers will take longer, on average, to find new employment. However, the data do not back this claim, at least to date. If high unemployment durations were the result of mismatch, the probability of finding a new job should have declined proportionately more for the long-term unemployed than for the recently unemployed. In fact, reemployment probabilities during the recession fell by similar amounts for all durations of unemployment and have edged up by similar increments in the recovery. Again, this pattern is more consistent with weak aggregate demand being the most important cause of high unemployment. Another argument for the structural unemployment hypothesis is that the relationship between job vacancies and unemployment has recently changed. Generally, job vacancies bear an inverse relationship to the unemployment rate; that is, when the unemployment rate is low, vacancies are relatively plentiful, and when unemployment is high, vacancies are scarce. The pattern of these changes over time has been plotted on what is commonly referred to as the Beveridge curve. A stylized interpretation is that movements along the downward-sloping Beveridge curve are generally caused by changes in aggregate demand. Persistent shifts of the curve closer to, or further away from, the vertical and horizontal axes may reflect structural changes in the labor market. Much has been made of the fact that the Beveridge curve appears to have shifted out in the past couple of years. The argument is that the shift reflects an increase in job mismatch, with the vacancies going unfilled because of structural reasons such as lack of geographic mobility or appropriate skills. I think far too much has been made of this argument. In the first place, the Bureau of Labor Statistics data series from which the Beveridge curve is constructed began only in 2000. Researchers at the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and San Francisco used other data sources to draw what we might call "approximate Beveridge curves" for the post-World War II period.8They found that, during and immediately after the serious recessions from 1973 to '75 and from 1981 to '82, the curve also shifted out noticeably, but in both cases it shifted back inward during the recovery. Why this occurred is not so clear. The big increase in job loss during the recession is probably a factor, as sharp increases in layoffs overwhelm the matching process. It may also be that during serious downturns, more workers who would have given up looking for a job continue to look in order to qualify for extended and emergency unemployment benefits, or that employers take longer to fill vacancies when the labor market is weak.9 An analysis by Federal Reserve Board economists that decomposes the shift in the Beveridge curve into its various components does point to some increase in structural unemployment related to a reduction in the efficiency with which unemployed workers are matched to vacant jobs--that is, mismatch.10However, the estimated increase is fairly modest--on the order of 1 percentage point--relative to the total increase in the unemployment rate experienced in recent years. The remainder appears mainly related to the delays in filling open positions that I mentioned a moment ago. Economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York conducted a broader study of the mismatch issue. By examining imbalances between the occupations, industries, and geographic locations in which vacancies are concentrated and those in which unemployment is concentrated, they constructed an index of potential mismatch. They, too, concluded that mismatches accounted for only a small amount of the increase in the unemployment rate during the recession--on the order of 3/4 to 1-1/2 percentage points.11 In sum, I do not think arguments suggesting that structural factors account for most of the increase in unemployment are persuasive, either individually or collectively. Our efforts to quantify the increase in structural unemployment since the onset of the recession find that it accounts for less than one-fourth of the difference between today's unemployment rate and that which prevailed in the pre-crisis years. Before leaving this subject, I want to mention a different version of the structural unemployment argument, which is the concern that high unemployment today will result in an increase in structural unemployment in the future--a form of the phenomenon known as hysteresis. The unusually long duration of unemployment spells and high fraction of the labor force unemployed for more than six months raise the prospect that the long-term unemployed will become progressively less employable as their skills, reputations, and networks deteriorate. That is, the distinction between cyclical and structural unemployment may begin to blur. In the aggregate, such effects could result in a persistently higher level of structural unemployment, a persistently lower rate of labor force participation, and a concomitant decline in the level of potential output of the entire economy. Whole cadres of workers, whether younger people leaving school at a time of high unemployment or older workers losing long-time jobs, might never regain the career trajectory on which they were headed. In the past, such effects do not appear to have been very significant in the United States, and there is little evidence that they have taken hold today. But the current unprecedented durations of unemployment may reduce the relevance of historical experience. Even if the rise in structural unemployment is relatively modest to date, the longer the labor market remains weak, the greater the risk that structural unemployment will become more of a problem. Of course, if anything, this possibility argues for more-aggressive policies to reduce unemployment sooner.12 Effective Policy ResponsesThe policy issues presented by today's labor market problems are challenging, to say the least. There is need, and ample room, for additional measures to increase aggregate demand in the near to medium term, particularly in light of the limited upside risks to inflation over the medium term. Unlike in the aftermath of the steep recessions of the mid-1970s and early 1980s, demand growth has not become sufficiently self-sustaining to produce the strong recovery that followed those earlier episodes. Of the nine quarters that have passed since positive GDP growth reappeared in the third quarter of 2009, the rate of growth was significantly above trend in only three--the fourth quarter of 2009 and the first two quarters of 2010. These quarters were probably the first to benefit significantly from the effects of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, passed earlier in 2009. Up until quite recently, the dominant metaphor one heard for the economy was that it was on its way to a healthy recovery but was hitting occasional "soft patches." This reading of the data always seemed to me quite optimistic. Now, I believe, nearly everyone has toned down their expectations. I think the better metaphor is of an economy slogging through the mud and occasionally hitting stretches of dry pavement, which may well have been associated with the peak effects of fiscal and monetary policy initiatives. The economy's difficulty in gaining traction is, of course, due in no small part to the continued high levels of unemployment and underemployment, which constrain demand through both direct effects on household income and indirect effects in sapping consumer confidence. Yet it seems quite likely that there is something at work beyond an adverse feedback loop involving personal consumption expenditures, investment, and employment. The obvious candidate for that additional factor is the high amount of debt--particularly household debt--that accumulated before the financial crisis. With the bursting of the housing bubble, debt levels that may have looked manageable to consumers who believed their homes were appreciating suddenly appeared burdensome as house prices declined. In some parts of the country, this decline was dizzyingly rapid. There has been some progress in working off or writing down some forms of debt, such as credit card balances. But housing continues to hang like an albatross around the necks of homeowners and the economy as a whole, with millions of underwater mortgages, a staggering inventory of foreclosed homes, and depressed levels of sales. What, then, are the policies best suited to increase aggregate demand? It must first be said that neither monetary nor fiscal policy will be able to fill the whole aggregate demand shortfall quickly. But appropriate policies could surely boost output and employment. There have also been suggestions that attempts to boost aggregate demand will be unsuccessful when the amount of debt overhang is significant. I agree that without more effective efforts to address the manifold problems affecting the housing market, there is a good chance that the recovery will lack strong momentum for some time to come. But aggregate demand policies are still important. For one thing, debts will surely be less burdensome as incomes rise. Moreover, the confluence of housing debt and aggregate demand problems suggests that particular attention should be paid to policies that could buttress aggregate demand while addressing at least some housing market problems. As you know, the FOMC has maintained the federal funds rate near zero for almost three years in response to the extraordinary economic and financial problems faced by the country. With short-term rates already about as low as they can go, the FOMC has also taken some unconventional measures to provide additional monetary accommodation. The combined effect of these monetary policies helped stabilize financial markets in 2009, hold deflation at bay in 2010, and support a modest recovery. But, in the absence of favorable developments in the coming months, there will be a strong case for additional measures. Some have argued that monetary policy should do no more, and that the political branches of government should adopt fiscal or other policies to encourage increased economic activity and job creation. I certainly do not disagree that well-conceived policies by other parts of the government could produce gains in employment, investment, and spending. But the absence of such policies cannot be an excuse for the Federal Reserve to ignore its own statutory mandate. The Federal Reserve Act requires that the FOMC promote the goals of maximum employment and stable prices. The statute does not qualify that mandate by saying that we should promote these goals only if all parts of the government--or, for that matter, the private sector--are acting just the way we think they should. In other words, we have to take the world as we find it and adjust our actions accordingly. Sometimes that will mean tighter monetary policy to offset the inflationary effects of other policies. Sometimes, as at present, it will mean more accommodative policies, even when we know that monetary policy alone cannot solve all the economy's problems. Within the FOMC and in the broader policy community, there has been considerable discussion of possible additional accommodative measures, from communication strategies such as forward guidance on the likely path of the federal funds rate to additional balance sheet operations. I believe we should move back up toward the top of the list of options the large-scale purchase of additional mortgage-backed securities (MBS), something the FOMC first did in November 2008 and then in greater amounts beginning in March 2009 in order to provide more support to mortgage lending and housing markets. In November 2010, when the FOMC initiated another large-scale asset purchase program, only U.S. Treasury securities were involved, in large part because of a desire to return, once the recovery was well established, as quickly as possible to a Federal Reserve balance sheet that did not contain other kinds of assets. A related concern of some was that the purchase of MBS was a form of credit allocation, rather than simply monetary policy that lowered long-term rates for all borrowers. For similar reasons, the proceeds of agency securities accumulated pursuant to the first large-scale asset purchase program were reinvested in Treasury securities rather than in other agency securities. At the September FOMC meeting, we changed our reinvestment policy so that the proceeds of maturing agency securities will now be reinvested in new MBS. Yields on longer-duration Treasury securities had trended down appreciably in the late summer in response to market demand, safe-haven flows, and diminishing expectations for growth. Even though nominal MBS rates had also declined somewhat, spreads to Treasury yields had, over the course of the year, widened noticeably. Since this announced change in reinvestment policy, spreads on lower-coupon MBS have narrowed, but they remain higher than they were early this year. A large-scale MBS purchase program has many of the benefits associated with purchases of longer-duration Treasury securities, such as inducing investors to shift to other assets, including bonds and equities. But it could also have more direct effects on the housing market. By increasing demand for MBS, such a program should reduce the effective yield on those MBS, which in turn should put downward pressure on mortgage rates. The aggregate demand effect should be felt not just in new home purchases, but also in the added purchasing power of existing homeowners who are able to refinance. Indeed, homeowners who refinance get the equivalent of a permanent tax cut.13Concerns about central banks making sectoral credit allocation decisions are understandable in general. But here we are talking about a widely traded instrument in a sector that appears, now more than ever, to be central to the slow pace of recovery. Now, I should note that the mortgage market is quite segmented. One relatively small group of borrowers has extremely good credit and funds for sizable down payments. That group can readily obtain a mortgage. The other, much larger group lacks one or both advantages, and it faces much greater hurdles in the mortgage market. So there is some chance that the principal effect of renewed MBS purchases would be to allow those in the first group who have already refinanced to do so once again or to buy a new home at a somewhat lower mortgage rate. These outcomes would be helpful, but the effectiveness of an MBS purchase program would be amplified, perhaps significantly, if certain nonmonetary policies were changed. Proposals for promoting refinancing have been made by many academics, policymakers, and policy analysts. Any proposals that could sensibly and effectively be implemented would increase the effect of an MBS purchase program. For example, action could be taken to bring the benefits of refinancing to underwater borrowers. In principle, borrowers with mortgages that are guaranteed by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) such as Fannie Mae and that have loan-to-value ratios of up to 125 percent can refinance through the Home Affordable Refinance Program. In practice, though, numerous obstacles have kept the program from helping many potentially eligible borrowers. Underwater borrowers whose loans are not guaranteed by GSEs are essentially unable to refinance at all. Policy changes directed at this last, larger group of homeowners would have to be carefully designed so as not to transfer credit risk from private investors to the government, and could well require legislation. Needless to say, though, an MBS repurchase program will not cure all that ails the housing market, much less fill the whole aggregate demand shortfall. There is a host of other problems, including continuing issues in mortgage servicing, uncertainty as to when house prices will have bottomed out in local markets, ambiguity about the scope of putback risk for securitized mortgages, and the substantial part of the underwater mortgage problem that cannot be solved by refinancing. But I believe that MBS purchases are worth considering as a monetary policy option precisely because they carry the promise of addressing the feature of the current aggregate demand shortfall that differs from typical recessions and recoveries. ConclusionMany labor market problems took years to develop, and they will not be remedied quickly. The employment situation we hope for will require an extended commitment over many years. As I said earlier, I am not even going to try to do justice to the longer-term employment policy agenda. It is easy to echo the nearly universal call for improvements in education, innovation in retraining, and other more effective labor market policies. It is harder to specify what those policies are, much less how to fund them. But I do want to emphasize that the challenge is more than determining which education and training policies are both effective and affordable. The nation needs a model for economic growth that will generate innovation and productivity enhancements that will, in turn, generate the kinds of jobs for which we hope we are educating and training our people. For much of the past decade, the implicit growth model was too heavily dependent on the assumption of ever-rising home prices. Needless to say, that model did not work out so well. Elements of the needed model include a healthy macroeconomic environment and a well-functioning financial system. But there should also be a premium on measures that expand the growth potential of the country even as they support near-term economic activity. Even the acute problems reflected in today's grim employment picture cannot be reversed as quickly as in past recoveries, precisely because the recent recession arose from a financial crisis that was in turn the result of asset bubbles and high levels of unsustainable debt. But the fact that these problems cannot be solved quickly does not mean there is nothing to be done. Without more, the harm to the unemployed and their families continues, and the risks of longer-term harm increase--both to the unemployed and to the country as a whole. A shortfall of aggregate demand is the most important factor behind those dismal statistics. Particularly if we take account of the unusual nature of the current shortfall in fashioning policy responses, there is much that government policy--including monetary policy--can still do. 1.The views presented here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.William Wascher,Bruce Fallick,Christopher Nekarda, andChristopher Smithof the Board's staff provided substantial assistance over many months in the research for, and crafting of, these remarks.Return to text 2.See Michael W. L. Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin (2010), "The Labor Market in the Great Recession (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Spring), pp. 1-69.Return to text 3.To date, researchers have been hard-pressed to uncover an explanation for all these declines in worker mobility. See, for example, Andrea Bassanini and Pascal Marianna (2009), "Looking Inside the Perpetual-Motion Machine: Job and Worker Flows in OECD Countries (PDF)," IZA Discussion Paper Series 4452 (Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor, September). It may be that there are greater impediments to workers changing jobs (for example, job lock related to health insurance or pensions) or that workers have become more risk averse. In principle, these trends could also reflect improving efficiencies in the labor market, such as screening and hiring techniques that result in better matches between firms and workers, though this more benign explanation strikes me as less likely against the overall backdrop of labor markets in the past decade.Return to text 4.See, for example, David H. Autor, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney (2006), "The Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market,"American Economic Review,vol.96 (May), pp. 189-94; and David H. Autor (2010), "The Polarization of Job Opportunities in the U.S. Labor Market: Implications for Employment and Earnings (PDF)," white paper (Washington: Center for American Progress and The Hamilton Project, April).Return to text 5.See Christopher L. Smith (2011), "Polarization, Immigration, Education: What's Behind the Dramatic Decline in Youth Employment?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-41 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).Return to text 6.See, for example, Christopher Ruhm (1997), "Is High School Employment Consumption or Investment?"Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 15 (October), pp. 735-76; and Thomas A. Mroz and Timothy H. Savage (2006), "The Long-Term Effects of Youth Unemployment,"Journal of Human Resources,vol. 41 (Spring), pp. 259-93. For a dissenting view regarding the effect of high-school employment, see Joseph V. Hotz, Lixin Colin Xu, Marta Tienda, and Avner Ahituv (2002), "Are There Returns to the Wages of Young Men from Working While in School?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol.84 (May), pp. 221-36.Return to text 7.See Raven Molloy, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak (2011), "Internal Migration in the United States," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-30 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May).pdf.Return to text 8.See John Lindner and Murat Tasci (2010), "Has the Beveridge Curve Shifted?" Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,Economic Trends, August 10; and Robert Valletta and Katherine Kuang (2010), "Is Structural Unemployment on the Rise? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,FRBSF Economic Letter2010-34 (November 8).Return to text 9.On the effects of unemployment benefits, see Robert Valletta and Katherine Kuang (2010), "Extended Unemployment and UI Benefits (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,FRBSF Economic Letter2010‑12 (April 19). On the lag between job vacancies and hiring, see Steven J. Davis, R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger (2010), "The Establishment-Level Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring," NBER Working Paper Series 16265 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August).Return to text 10.See Regis Barnichon and Andrew Figura (2010), "What Drives Movements in the Unemployment Rate? A Decomposition of the Beveridge Curve," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-48 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).Return to text 11.See Ayşegül Şahin, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante (2011), "Measuring Mismatch in the U.S. Labor Market (PDF)," unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July.Return to text 12.Another line of argument is that the sluggish recovery in the labor market, and in the economy more generally, is a result of wage rigidity. According to this view, prospective workers are unwilling to accept wage rates low enough to induce businesses to hire and increase production. However, it is hard to see why this phenomenon would be any stronger now than in earlier recessions, when a greater fraction of the U.S. workforce was covered by collective-bargaining agreements. Moreover, there would seem to be little indication in the wage data to support the idea that wage rigidity is having a major influence on unemployment. Wage rates have decelerated across a broad range of industries and occupations, and unit labor costs have fallen sharply. A simple histogram of the distribution of nominal wage changes in recent years does show a spike at zero, indicating some resistance to reductions in nominal wage rates, but the spike does not seem particularly large relative to those in earlier recessions. In any case, because the difficulties suggested by this argument arise from the interaction between nominal wage rigidity and a deficiency of aggregate demand, the most straightforward way to overcome problems caused by nominal wage rigidity would be to expand aggregate demand.Return to text 13.Of course, the income gained by consumers is lost to the holders of the mortgages that are prepaid as homeowners refinance. But there are two reasons to believe that aggregate demand would increase. First, the marginal propensity to consume of the average homeowner is almost surely higher than that of the average holder of a mortgage-backed security. Second, to the extent that MBS are held by central banks or foreign investors, the decreased income would not translate into reduced spending.Return to text