Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencyOffice of Thrift Supervision The federal bank, thrift and credit union regulatory agencies, along with the Farm Credit Administration, announce that the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry will begin accepting federal registrations today. Under the Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act (S.A.F.E. Act) and the agencies' final rules, residential mortgage loan originators employed by banks, savings associations, credit unions, or Farm Credit System institutions must register with the registry, obtain a unique identifier from the registry, and maintain their registrations. Following expiration of the 180-day initial registration period on July 29, 2011, any employee of an agency-regulated institution who is subject to the registration requirements will be prohibited from originating residential mortgage loans without first meeting these requirements. The rules include an exception for mortgage loan originators that originated five or fewer mortgage loans during the previous 12 months and who have never been registered; they would not be required to complete the federal registration process. The registry announcement is being made by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Farm Credit Administration, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision. Further information regarding the registry and the registration process is available at the registry's website:http://mortgage.nationwidelicensingsystem.org/fedreg/Pages/default.aspx. A notice about the initial registration period will be published soon in theFederal Register.TheFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Conrad, Senator Sessions, and other members of the Committee, thank you for this opportunity to offer my views on current economic conditions, recent monetary policy actions, and issues related to the federal budget. The Economic OutlookThe economic recovery that began a year and a half ago is continuing, although, to date, at a pace that has been insufficient to reduce the rate of unemployment significantly.1The initial stages of the recovery, in the second half of 2009 and in early 2010, were largely attributable to the stabilization of the financial system, expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, and a powerful inventory cycle. Growth slowed somewhat this past spring as the impetus from fiscal policy and inventory building waned and as European sovereign debt problems led to increased volatility in financial markets. More recently, however, we have seen increased evidence that a self-sustaining recovery in consumer and business spending may be taking hold. In particular, real consumer spending rose at an annual rate of 2-1/2 percent in the third quarter of 2010, and the available indicators suggest that it likely expanded at a somewhat faster pace in the fourth quarter. Business investment in new equipment and software has grown robustly in recent quarters, albeit from a fairly low level, as firms replaced aging equipment and made investments that had been delayed during the downturn. However, the housing sector remains depressed, as the overhang of vacant houses continues to weigh heavily on both home prices and construction, and nonresidential construction is also quite weak. Overall, the pace of economic recovery seems likely to be moderately stronger in 2011 than it was in 2010. Although recent indicators of spending and production have generally been encouraging, conditions in the labor market have improved only modestly at best. After the loss of nearly 8-1/2 million jobs in 2008 and 2009, private payrolls expanded at an average of only about 100,000 per month in 2010--a pace barely enough to accommodate the normal increase in the labor force and, therefore, insufficient to materially reduce the unemployment rate.2On a more positive note, a number of indicators of job openings and hiring plans have looked stronger in recent months, and initial claims for unemployment insurance declined through November and December. Notwithstanding these hopeful signs, with output growth likely to be moderate in the next few quarters and employers reportedly still reluctant to add to payrolls, considerable time likely will be required before the unemployment rate has returned to a more normal level. Persistently high unemployment, by damping household income and confidence, could threaten the strength and sustainability of the recovery. Moreover, roughly 40 percent of the unemployed have been out of work for six months or more. Long-term unemployment not only imposes exceptional hardships on the jobless and their families, but it also erodes the skills of those workers and may inflict lasting damage on their employment and earnings prospects. Recent data show consumer price inflation continuing to trend downward. For the 12 months ending in November, prices for personal consumption expenditures rose 1.0 percent, and inflation excluding the relatively volatile food and energy components--which tends to be a better gauge of underlying inflation trends--was only 0.8 percent, down from 1.7 percent a year earlier and from about 2-1/2 percent in 2007, the year before the recession began. The downward trend in inflation over the past few years is no surprise, given the low rates of resource utilization that have prevailed over that time. Indeed, as a result of the weak job market, wage growth has slowed along with inflation; over the 12 months ending in November, average hourly earnings have risen only 1.6 percent. Despite the decline in inflation, long-run inflation expectations have remained stable; for example, the rate of inflation that households expect over the next 5 to 10 years, as measured by the Thompson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, has remained in a narrow range over the past few years. With inflation expectations stable, and with levels of resource utilization expected to remain low, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time. Monetary PolicyAlthough it is likely that economic growth will pick up this year and that the unemployment rate will decline somewhat, progress toward the Federal Reserve's statutory objectives of maximum employment and stable prices is expected to remain slow. The projections submitted by Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants in November showed that, notwithstanding forecasts of increased growth in 2011 and 2012, most participants expected the unemployment rate to be close to 8 percent two years from now. At this rate of improvement, it could take four to five more years for the job market to normalize fully. FOMC participants also projected inflation to be at historically low levels for some time. Very low rates of inflation raise several concerns: First, very low inflation increases the risk that new adverse shocks could push the economy into deflation, that is, a situation involving ongoing declines in prices. Experience shows that deflation induced by economic slack can lead to extended periods of poor economic performance; indeed, even a significant perceived risk of deflation may lead firms to be more cautious about investment and hiring. Second, with short-term nominal interest rates already close to zero, declines in actual and expected inflation increase, respectively, both the real cost of servicing existing debt and the expected real cost of new borrowing. By raising effective debt burdens and by inhibiting new household spending and business investment, higher real borrowing costs create a further drag on growth. Finally, it is important to recognize that periods of very low inflation generally involve very slow growth in nominal wages and incomes as well as in prices. (I have already alluded to the recent deceleration in average hourly earnings.) Thus, in circumstances like those we face now, very low inflation or deflation does not necessarily imply any increase in household purchasing power. Rather, because of the associated deterioration in economic performance, very low inflation or deflation arising from economic slack is generally linked with reductions rather than gains in living standards. In a situation in which unemployment is high and expected to remain so and inflation is unusually low, the FOMC would normally respond by reducing its target for the federal funds rate. However, the Federal Reserve's target for the federal funds rate has been close to zero since December 2008, leaving essentially no scope for further reductions. Consequently, for the past two years the FOMC has been using alternative tools to provide additional monetary accommodation. Notably, between December 2008 and March 2010, the FOMC purchased about $1.7 trillion in longer-term Treasury and agency-backed securities in the open market. The proceeds of these purchases ultimately find their way into the banking system, with the result that depository institutions now hold a high level of reserve balances with the Federal Reserve. Although longer-term securities purchases are a different tool for conducting monetary policy than the more familiar approach of managing the overnight interest rate, the goals and transmission mechanisms of the two approaches are similar. Conventional monetary policy works by changing market expectations for the future path of short-term interest rates, which, in turn, influences the current level of longer-term interest rates and other financial conditions. These changes in financial conditions then affect household and business spending. By contrast, securities purchases by the Federal Reserve put downward pressure directly on longer-term interest rates by reducing the stock of longer-term securities held by private investors.3These actions affect private-sector spending through the same channels as conventional monetary policy. In particular, the Federal Reserve's earlier program of asset purchases appeared to be successful in influencing longer-term interest rates, raising the prices of equities and other assets, and improving credit conditions more broadly, thereby helping stabilize the economy and support the recovery. In light of this experience, and with the economic outlook still unsatisfactory, late last summer the FOMC began to signal to financial markets that it was considering providing additional monetary policy accommodation by conducting further asset purchases. At its meeting in early November, the FOMC formally announced its intention to purchase an additional $600 billion in Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, about one-third of the value of securities purchased in its earlier programs. The FOMC also maintained its policy, adopted at its August meeting, of reinvesting principal received on the Federal Reserve's holdings of securities. The FOMC stated that it will review its asset purchase program regularly in light of incoming information and will adjust the program as needed to meet its objectives. Importantly, the Committee remains unwaveringly committed to price stability and, in particular, to maintaining inflation at a level consistent with the Federal Reserve's mandate from the Congress.4In that regard, it bears emphasizing that the Federal Reserve has all the tools it needs to ensure that it will be able to smoothly and effectively exit from this program at the appropriate time. Importantly, the Federal Reserve's ability to pay interest on reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve Banks will allow it to put upward pressure on short-term market interest rates and thus to tighten monetary policy when needed, even if bank reserves remain high. Moreover, the Fed has invested considerable effort in developing methods to drain or immobilize bank reserves as needed to facilitate the smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation when conditions warrant. If necessary, the Committee could also tighten policy by redeeming or selling securities on the open market. As I am appearing before the Budget Committee, it is worth emphasizing that the Fed's purchases of longer-term securities are not comparable to ordinary government spending. In executing these transactions, the Federal Reserve acquires financial assets, not goods and services. Ultimately, at the appropriate time, the Federal Reserve will normalize its balance sheet by selling these assets back into the market or by allowing them to mature. In the interim, the interest that the Federal Reserve earns from its securities holdings adds to the Fed's remittances to the Treasury; in 2009 and 2010, those remittances totaled about $120 billion. Fiscal PolicyFiscal policymakers also face a challenging policy environment. Our nation's fiscal position has deteriorated appreciably since the onset of the financial crisis and the recession. To a significant extent, this deterioration is the result of the effects of the weak economy on revenues and outlays, along with the actions that were taken to ease the recession and steady financial markets. In their planning for the near term, fiscal policymakers will need to continue to take into account the low level of economic activity and the still-fragile nature of the economic recovery. However, an important part of the federal budget deficit appears to be structural rather than cyclical; that is, the deficit is expected to remain unsustainably elevated even after economic conditions have returned to normal. For example, under the Congressional Budget Office's (CBO) so-called alternative fiscal scenario, which assumes that most of the tax cuts enacted in 2001 and 2003 are made permanent and that discretionary spending rises at the same rate as the gross domestic product (GDP), the deficit is projected to fall from its current level of about 9 percent of GDP to 5 percent of GDP by 2015, but then to rise to about 6-1/2 percent of GDP by the end of the decade. In subsequent years, the budget outlook is projected to deteriorate even more rapidly, as the aging of the population and continued growth in health spending boost federal outlays on entitlement programs. Under this scenario, federal debt held by the public is projected to reach 185 percent of the GDP by 2035, up from about 60 percent at the end of fiscal year 2010. The CBO projections, by design, ignore the adverse effects that such high debt and deficits would likely have on our economy. But if government debt and deficits were actually to grow at the pace envisioned in this scenario, the economic and financial effects would be severe. Diminishing confidence on the part of investors that deficits will be brought under control would likely lead to sharply rising interest rates on government debt and, potentially, to broader financial turmoil. Moreover, high rates of government borrowing would both drain funds away from private capital formation and increase our foreign indebtedness, with adverse long-run effects on U.S. output, incomes, and standards of living. It is widely understood that the federal government is on an unsustainable fiscal path. Yet, as a nation, we have done little to address this critical threat to our economy. Doing nothing will not be an option indefinitely; the longer we wait to act, the greater the risks and the more wrenching the inevitable changes to the budget will be. By contrast, the prompt adoption of a credible program to reduce future deficits would not only enhance economic growth and stability in the long run, but could also yield substantial near-term benefits in terms of lower long-term interest rates and increased consumer and business confidence. Plans recently put forward by the President's National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform and other prominent groups provide useful starting points for a much-needed national conversation about our medium- and long-term fiscal situation. Although these various proposals differ on many details, each gives a sobering perspective on the size of the problem and offers some potential solutions. Of course, economic growth is affected not only by the levels of taxes and spending, but also by their composition and structure. I hope that, in addressing our long-term fiscal challenges, the Congress will seek reforms to the government's tax policies and spending priorities that serve not only to reduce the deficit but also to enhance the long-term growth potential of our economy--for example, by encouraging investment in physical and human capital, by promoting research and development, by providing necessary public infrastructure, and by reducing disincentives to work and to save. We cannot grow out of our fiscal imbalances, but a more productive economy would ease the tradeoffs that we face. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 1. This testimony was submitted before this morning's employment report for December, which will provide an important update on the state of the labor market.Return to text 2. Average job gains for 2010 are through November.Return to text 3. More specifically, the Fed's purchases should tend to reduce term premiums, a component of the yield to longer-term securities. Longer-term interest rates are also influenced by market expectations of the future path for short-term interest rates, which in turn depend on the outlook for the economy and so for the target federal funds rate.Return to text 4. Most Committee participants judge that, in the longer term, inflation in the range of 2 percent or a bit less appropriately balances the risk that adverse economic shocks could tip the economy into deflation against the benefits of low and stable inflation. An inflation rate modestly above zero also reduces the probability that monetary policymakers will be constrained from easing policy when necessary by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. Many central banks around the world have come to similar quantitative judgments about the long-run level of inflation that best fosters growth and stability.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Boscobel Bancorp, Inc. and Community First Bank (107 KB PDF), both of Boscobel, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated December 23, 2010 Capital Commerce Bancorp, Inc. (48 KB PDF), Milwaukee, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated December 31, 2010 Foundation Bancorp, Inc. (47 KB PDF), Bellevue, WashingtonWritten Agreement dated December 23, 2010 Metropolitan Bank Holding Corporation (59 KB PDF), New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated January 4, 2011 Prairie Star Bancshares, Inc. (57 KB PDF), Olathe, KansasWritten Agreement dated December 22, 2010Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Community Central Bank Corporation (61 KB PDF), Mount Clemens, MichiganWritten Agreement dated January 19, 2011 Elgin Bancshares, Inc. (62 KB PDF), Elgin, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated January 19, 2011 Rocky Mountain Capital and Rocky Mountain Bank (166 KB PDF), both of Wilson, WyomingWritten Agreement dated January 20, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Virginia Business Bank (42 KB PDF), Richmond, VirginiaPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated January 24, 2011 Search Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board has named ten new members to its Consumer Advisory Council and designated a new Chair and Vice Chair of the Council for 2011. The Council advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters in the area of consumer financial services. The Council will hold its regular meetings in Washington, D.C., until the designated transfer date upon which certain consumer protection functions will be transferred from the Board to the new Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act. As of that date, the Board's Consumer Advisory Council will be dissolved. The Act authorizes the establishment of a Consumer Advisory Board to advise and consult with the Bureau on the exercise of its functions. Jim Park was designated Chair of the Council. Mr. Park is the chief executive officer (CEO) of New Vista Asset Management in San Diego, California, which provides community-focused real estate owned (REO) disposition services and works to turn foreclosures into affordable housing options for minority and low- and moderate-income families. Mary Tingerthal was designated Vice Chair of the Council. Ms. Tingerthal is the President of Capital Markets Companies for the Housing Partnership Network (HPN) in St. Paul, Minnesota. HPN is a business collaborative of nonprofit organizations that build and finance affordable housing and provide economic development opportunities for lower-income and working families. The ten new members of the Council are: Nancy AndrewsSan Francisco, California Nancy Andrews is the President and CEO of the Low Income Investment Fund (LIIF). LIIF is a $600 million Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) that has invested more than $900 million in community projects, including affordable housing, child-care facilities, and schools. Ms. Andrews's career spans 30 years in the community development field. Previously, she served as the Deputy Director of the Ford Foundation's Office of Program Related Investments; she also designed and launched the foundation's housing policy program. Following her tenure at the Ford Foundation, Ms. Andrews was the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of the International Water Management Institute, a World Bank-supported development organization. She has also been an independent consultant specializing in community development, social investment programs, financial analysis, and housing policy. She consulted for the Department of Housing and Urban Development to restructure its multi-family mortgage portfolio and for the Department of Treasury to establish the CDFI Fund. Ms. Andrews serves on numerous boards and committees of community development and environmental organizations, including the Housing Partnership Network, Center for Housing Policy Advisory Council, Bank of America's National Community Advisory Council, National Housing Law Project, and the Center for International Forestry Research. Barrett BurnsStamford, Connecticut Barrett Burns is the President and CEO of VantageScore Solutions LLC, whose generic credit scoring model was created by leveraging the collective experience of leading experts on credit data, credit risk modeling and analytics from the nation's three major credit reporting companies--Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. Mr. Burns has more than three decades of professional experience in risk and credit management. Previously, he was the Executive Vice President heading the National Private Banking Group of U.S. Trust and a member of both U.S. Trust's executive committee and the senior management team of its parent company, the Charles Schwab Corporation. He also served as Executive Vice President of Global Risk Management at Ford Motor Credit Company, where he was a member of the organization's management committee and senior personnel, treasury, and executive oversight committees. Earlier he held senior positions at the consumer and commercial finance unit of Bank One and spent more than a decade with Citibank, including a position as group credit officer for an international consumer banking division. He is a member of the board of the Homeownership Preservation Foundation and of the Corporate Board of Governors for the National Association of Hispanic Real Estate Professionals. Susan EhrlichHoffman Estates, Illinois Susan Ehrlich is President of Sears Financial Services, where she leads the development and growth of Sears-branded payments and financing products to serve the needs of Sears and Kmart U.S. customers. She has been recognized for introducing and expanding programs such as Layaway, Free Credit Score, and the Christmas Club Card to the company's portfolio of financial services products. She is overseeing the creation of the Kmart Financial Centers, which aim to provide in-store, lower-cost transactional money services such as check cashing, bill payment, money orders, and money transfers. Before joining Sears, she was Executive Vice President, Marketing Strategy and Planning, for Washington Mutual Card Services, where she was responsible for strategic planning and market research for the company's credit card business. During her career with Wamu Card Services (formerly Providian Financial), she was responsible for loyalty/brand development, new product development, business cards, prepaid cards, and website management. Previously, Ms. Ehrlich was a Senior Vice President of Portfolio Management at Citi Cards, where she was accountable for Citibank's high-risk credit card portfolio. She was named to U.S. Banker magazine's list of the "25 Most Powerful Women in Finance" for 2009 and 2010. Josh FuhrmanMinneapolis, Minnesota Josh Fuhrman is the Senior Vice President of Programs and Policy at the Homeownership Preservation Foundation (HPF), a national nonprofit dedicated to reducing foreclosures and preserving homeownership for American homeowners. HPF operates the Homeowner's HOPE Hotline, a free foreclosure prevention counseling service available 24 hours a day in more than 160 languages. Mr. Fuhrman is responsible for the day-to-day operations of the hotline, overseeing 600 counselors and 125 call center representatives who handle more than 5,000 calls from distressed homeowners daily. He also developed and directs a national program to assist homeowners who may be victims of foreclosure rescue scams. For 10 years, Mr. Fuhrman was the Director of Counseling for Auriton Solutions, a national nonprofit crisis-counseling agency and one of the original counseling partners for the Homeownership Preservation Foundation. He has an extensive background in business development and has a strong community involvement in housing and financial assistance. James GutierrezMountain View, California James Gutierrez, the CEO of Progreso Financiero, is a social entrepreneur and innovator in financial services serving unbanked and lower-income consumers. In 2005, he co-founded Progreso to bring micro-lending to the U.S. Hispanic community and use fair and responsible lending practices to help underbanked families build credit and achieve their economic dreams. Since 2006, Progreso has made more than 100,000 loans, has grown to more than 50 locations in California and Texas, and has been certified as a Community Development Financial Institution. Selected by BusinessWeek as one of America's most promising social entrepreneurs, Mr. Gutierrez has helped to pioneer new policies on financial empowerment for lower-income consumers. In 2010, he worked to pass a California law to increase access to affordable credit-building loans. He also helped co-found the Coalition of New Credit Models and serves on the Pew Trust's Working Group on Small Dollar Lending. He serves on the boards of the Silicon Valley Leadership Group, the Association for Enterprise Opportunity, the Latino Community Foundation, and Core Innovation Capital. Mr. Gutierrez enjoys helping other entrepreneurs and has invested in more than 15 start-up companies. In 2009, he was invited to the White House as a leading young entrepreneur and received the Entrepreneur of the Year Award from Hispanic-Net. Clinton GwinNashville, Tennessee Clinton Gwin is the President of Pathway Lending (formerly Southeast Community Capital), a CDFI providing financial products and coaching services to Tennessee businesses. Pathway Lending's mission is to increase access to capital for disadvantaged businesses that are unable to access traditional financing, focusing on low- and moderate-income communities. Mr. Gwin was responsible for the development of the Tennessee Rural Opportunity Fund, a partnership among the state of Tennessee, 23 banks, and Pathway Lending that lends capital to small businesses in rural communities. In 2010, Mr. Gwin led the creation of a $50 million loan fund to provide capital to commercial, industrial, and non-profit organizations to finance energy-efficiency improvements. He also led the development of the $25 million Tennessee Small Business Jobs Opportunity Fund to provide capital for job creation. Previously, Mr. Gwin was a Field Office Supervisor for the FDIC's Division of Compliance and Consumer Affairs. He is a member of the Advisory Board for the New Markets Tax Credit Program for SunTrust Bank and Pinnacle National Bank; a member of the board of Affordable Housing Resources, a regional non-profit; a member of Nashville's Affordable Housing Roundtable; and a founding member of Jump$tart Tennessee. Mike LongMadison, Wisconsin Mike Long is the Executive Vice President and Chief Credit Officer of the UW Credit Union in Madison, Wisconsin. He is responsible for the overall direction of the $1.2 billion credit union's lending division, including mortgage lending, student lending, consumer lending, and collection activities. Mr. Long is also the Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of CU Campus Resources, a wholly owned LLC of UW Credit Union focused on private student lending. He is a member of the Executive Committee of the Credit Union National Association (CUNA) Lending Council, where he chairs the Regulatory and Legislative Committee. In addition, he is a member of CUNA's Consumer Protection Subcommittee and serves on TransUnion's Credit Union Advisory Board. Mr. Long has served as a board member for the Twin Cities Archer-Doig Chapter of Minnesota Credit Union Network and has been active on several advisory boards related to credit union lending. Rashmi RanganNewark, Delaware Since 1994, Rashmi Rangan has served as the Executive Director of the Delaware Community Reinvestment Action Council (DCRAC), a consumer finance advocacy organization whose mission is to ensure equitable treatment and equal access to credit and capital for the underserved populations and communities throughout Delaware through advocacy, education, legislation, and outreach. DCRAC offers free credit, housing, and tax clinics and provides assistance with fair lending and fair housing issues. Ms. Rangan leads the organization's efforts to document consumers' vulnerability to predatory lending practices, to eliminate such lending practices, and to ensure that the needs of consumers are protected during the bank merger process by working with financial institutions and regulators. She is a board member of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, where she focuses on the reform of the Community Reinvestment Act legislation and regulation. She is also a member of the Foreclosure/Mortgage Fraud Prevention Task Force and the Fair Housing Task Force and has worked with the Hispanic Business Association to provide technical assistance to the organization and education to its members. Kevin SteinSan Francisco, California Kevin Stein is the Associate Director of the California Reinvestment Coalition (CRC), a statewide membership organization of more than 275 nonprofit organizations and public agencies that advocates with financial institutions for increased lending, investment, and financial services to low-income communities and communities of color. Mr. Stein works on banking and housing issues, including efforts to fight predatory mortgage lending and foreclosure through negotiation with banks, federal and state regulatory and legislative advocacy, public education, support for local initiatives, and research. He was the primary author of several CRC reports relating to subprime and predatory lending, foreclosures, loan modifications, access to credit, and the impact of bank practices and products on low-income communities and communities of color. Before joining CRC, he was Supervising Attorney at the East Palo Alto Community Law Project and Lecturer in Law at Stanford Law School. Prior to that, he conducted legal and policy analysis for HomeBase, a law and social policy center devoted to ending homelessness. Mr. Stein is on the board of the Mission Economic Development Agency, a nonprofit agency promoting economic justice for San Francisco's Latino community. He is also a member of the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators's Consumer Advisory Council. Jonathan ZinmanHanover, New Hampshire Jonathan Zinman is an Associate Professor of Economics at Dartmouth College. He joined the faculty in 2005 after working as a researcher at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. In addition to his work at Dartmouth, he is a Visiting Scholar at the Payment Cards Center at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, a member of the Behavioral Finance Forum, and a research associate of Innovations for Poverty Action and J-PAL. He is also a member of the Research Advisory Board member of stickk.com, a website that enables users to make commitment contracts in order to reach their personal goals, and a member of the new Sage/Sloan Foundations working group on behavioral economics and the regulation of retail financial markets. Mr. Zinman's research focuses on intertemporal choice and household finance. His work tests economic theories of how firms and consumers interact in markets, looking at the merits of incorporating features of psychology into economic models. Mr. Zinman applies his research by working with policymakers and financial institutions to develop innovations in retail financial markets. He works directly with institutions to develop and test innovations throughout the retail space that are both profitable for firms and beneficial to their clients. Council members whose terms continue in 2011 are: Maeve Elise Brown Executive Director Housing and Economic Rights Advocates Oakland, California Paula Bryant-Ellis Senior Vice President Community Development Banking Group BOK Financial Corp. Tulsa, Oklahoma Joanne Budde President and CEO Consumer Credit Counseling Service of San Francisco San Francisco, California John P. Carey Chief Administrative Officer Consumer Banking, North America Citigroup New York, New York Tino Diaz Managing Director and CEO CharisPros – Mortgage Center Miami, Florida Kerry Doi President and CEO Pacific Asian Consortium in Employment Los Angeles, California Betsy Flynn CEO, President and Chairman Community Financial Services Bank Benton, Kentucky Patricia Garcia Duarte President and CEO Neighborhood Housing Services of Phoenix Phoenix, Arizona Ira Goldstein Director, Policy Solutions The Reinvestment Fund Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Mike Griffin Senior Vice President KeyBank, N.A. Cleveland, Ohio Brian Hudson, Sr. Executive Director and CEO Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency Harrisburg, Pennsylvania Kirsten Keefe Senior Staff Attorney Empire Justice Center Albany, New York Larry B. Litton, Jr. President and CEO Litton Loan Servicing LP Houston, Texas Andy Navarrete Senior Vice President Chief Counsel – National Lending Capital One Financial Corporation McLean, Virginia Jim Park President and CEO New Vista Asset Management San Diego, California Dory Rand President Woodstock Institute Chicago, Illinois Phyllis Salowe-Kaye Executive Director New Jersey Citizen Action Newark, New Jersey Corey Stone Chair First Community Bank of New Haven New Haven, Connecticut Mary Tingerthal President, Capital Markets Companies Housing Partnership Network St. Paul, Minnesota Mark Wiseman Principal Assistant Attorney General, Consumer Protection Section Ohio Attorney General's Office Cleveland, Ohio
Lenders often consider a consumer's credit history or credit score when deciding whether, and at what cost, to extend credit. A new online Federal Reserve publication helps consumers better understand new notices they may receive from lenders when credit reports or credit scores affect a decision to grant credit. The publication, "What You Need To Know: New Rules about Credit Decisions and Notices," describes the types of notices consumer may receive and provides links to sample notices. It includes information about what consumers should do if they receive a notice, including instructions on how to dispute credit report errors. The notices are required by rules issued by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Trade Commission. The new rules, which took effect January 1, 2011, generally require a creditor to provide a consumer with a notice when, based on the consumer's credit report, the creditor provides credit to the consumer on terms that are less favorable than those provided to other consumers. Consumers who receive this "risk-based pricing" notice will be able to obtain a free credit report to check the report's accuracy. As an alternative to providing risk-based pricing notices, creditors can choose to provide consumers who apply for credit with a free credit score and information about their score. Today, most consumers must pay a fee to obtain their credit score.
The Federal Reserve on Tuesday announced the establishment of offices to promote diversity and inclusion at the Federal Reserve Board and at all 12 of the Federal Reserve Banks. The offices will build on the Federal Reserve System's long-standing efforts to promote equal employment opportunity and diversity, and will continue to work to foster diversity in procurement, with a focus on minority-owned and women-owned businesses. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act required that diversity and inclusion offices be established at certain federal agencies, including the Federal Reserve Board, and at the Federal Reserve Banks. In addition to promoting diversity at the Board and throughout the System, the Board's Office of Diversity and Inclusion will play an integral role in the development of standards to assess the diversity practices at entities regulated by the Federal Reserve as required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The heads of the diversity and inclusion offices are:
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December confirms that the economic recovery is continuing, though at a rate that has been insufficient to bring about a significant improvement in labor market conditions. Growth in household spending picked up late last year, but remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising, while investment in nonresidential structures is still weak. Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. The housing sector continues to be depressed. Although commodity prices have risen, longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable, and measures of underlying inflation have been trending downward. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. Although the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, progress toward its objectives has been disappointingly slow. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue expanding its holdings of securities as announced in November. In particular, the Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings and intends to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011. The Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information and will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Charles L. Evans; Richard W. Fisher; Narayana Kocherlakota; Charles I. Plosser; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Daniel K. Tarullo; Kevin M. Warsh; and Janet L. Yellen.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings on November 22 and December 13, 2010.The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesdayreleased the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 14, 2010. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily aremade available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published inthe Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained inthese minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the timeof the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 14, 2010:256 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced preliminary unaudited results indicating that the Reserve Banks provided for payments of approximately $78.4 billion of their estimated 2010 net income of $80.9 billion to the U.S. Treasury. This represents a $31.0 billion increase in payments to the U.S. Treasury over 2009 ($47.4 billion of $53.4 billion of net income). The increase was due primarily to increased interest income earned on securities holdings during 2010. Under the Board's policy, the residual earnings of each Federal Reserve Bank, after providing for the costs of operations, payment of dividends, and the amount necessary to equate surplus with capital paid-in, are distributed to the U.S. Treasury. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2010 net income was derived primarily from $76.2 billion in income on securities acquired through open market operations (federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgage-backed securities, U.S. Treasury securities, and GSE debt securities); $7.1 billion in net income from consolidated limited liability companies (LLCs), which were created in response to the financial crisis; $2.1 billion in interest income from credit extended to American International Group, Inc.; $1.3 billion of dividends on preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC; and $0.8 billion in interest income on loans extended under the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) and loans to depository institutions. Additional earnings were derived primarily from revenue of $0.6 billion from the provision of priced services to depository institutions. The Reserve Banks had interest expense of $2.7 billion on depository institutions' reserve balances and term deposits. Operating expenses of the Reserve Banks, net of amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Treasury and other entities for services the Reserve Banks provided as fiscal agents, totaled $4.3 billion in 2010. The Reserve Banks' operating expenses included assessments of $1.0 billion for Board expenditures and the cost of new currency. In 2010, statutory dividends totaled $1.6 billion and approximately $0.6 billion of net income was used to equate surplus to paid-in capital. The preliminary unaudited results include valuation adjustments as of September 30 for TALF loans and consolidated LLCs. The final results, which will be presented in the Reserve Banks' annual audited financial statements and the Board of Governors' Annual Report, will reflect valuation adjustments as of December 31. Chart: 2001-2010 Federal Reserve Distributions to the U.S. Treasury (41 KB PDF)
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Maryland Bankers Association First Friday Economic Outlook Forum, Baltimore, Maryland I am pleased to be here at the beginning of a new year to offer my assessment of recent economic developments and the economic outlook for 2011. I also plan to discuss the actions that the Federal Reserve has been taking to support the economic recovery. Before I begin, I want to emphasize that the views that I will be presenting are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Board of Governors. Recent Economic and Financial DevelopmentsIn the third quarter of 2009, the U.S. economy began to emerge from the deepest recession of the post-World War II period--one that had been precipitated by a severe financial crisis. Economic history teaches that such downturns typically are deeper, and that the pace of their subsequent recoveries is more moderate, than is the case for business cycles not associated with financial crises. Certainly, that has been the U.S. experience for the past year and a half: Real economic activity has been steadily recovering overall, but the speed and strength of the rebound have been restrained by significant financial headwinds. Perhaps the most telling measure of the modest pace of the economic recovery is the painfully slow improvement in the labor market. To be sure, we are seeing some signs of improvement in the data. Indicators of hiring and job openings have continued to rise in recent months, and, more recently, new claims for unemployment insurance have begun falling again. Still, 18 months into recovery, there are more than 7 million fewer jobs in the economy than there were just prior to the recession, and the unemployment rate remains stubbornly close to its peak. American families have not experienced such a prolonged and severe period of unemployment since the early 1980s. On a positive note, the recent news on production and spending offers some encouragement that the expansion may be gaining traction. Manufacturing production, which rebounded sharply during the first year of the recovery, has continued to expand at a solid rate in recent months. Importantly, while earlier gains in factory production were supported largely by the rebuilding of business inventories, the recent increases represent a strengthening in domestic demand for domestically produced goods. Moreover, with the recovery in economic activity abroad, exports have also been providing a boost to our manufacturing sector. Consumer spending, which rose at only a modest rate in the first year of the recovery, has strengthened in recent months. Personal consumption expenditures (PCE), adjusted for inflation, increased at an annual rate of 3-3/4 percent between June and November, with sales increasing across a relatively broad range of consumer goods and services. The pickup included an increase in purchases of autos and light trucks that, in turn, prompted automakers to increase their assembly schedules for early this year. And while we don't have December data yet, initial reports of holiday spending have been strong. Nonetheless, even with the recent pickup, consumer spending has not provided its usual cyclical boost to the recovery, as households have been restrained by the substantial loss of wealth they sustained during the financial crisis, persistently high unemployment, and reduced availability of credit. The good news is that some of these restraints have been easing: Rising stock prices have been helping rebuild household wealth, the ratio of debt to income has come down, and delinquency rates on consumer loans have been falling. The supply of consumer credit has also improved somewhat over the past year, although the terms and conditions for some types of consumer loans are still tight relative to historical norms. Business investment in equipment and software, which rebounded strongly early in the recovery, continued to post solid gains through the fall. The health of larger firms with access to capital markets has shown steady improvement over the past year. Operating earnings per share for S&P 500 firms have been rising, net debt financing by nonfinancial corporations has been increasing, and indicators of corporate credit quality have continued to improve. For these firms, the outlook appears positive: Recent surveys of purchasing managers across a range of manufacturing and nonmanufacturing firms indicated an increase in their plans for capital spending in the coming year. In contrast, for small businesses, the situation has been more difficult. Surveys of bank lending indicate that banks are no longer tightening credit terms for loans to small businesses, but interest rates on small business loans remain high relative to market rates, and outstanding volumes of small loans to businesses continue to decline. According to the latest survey by the National Federation of Independent Business, small business owners see some improvement in credit availability, but they still have not seen the pickup in sales that would trigger more investment. One area of continued stress is housing. After what looked to be a gradual recovery in new homebuilding during 2009 and early 2010, new single-family starts slumped again during the summer and remained depressed in recent months. Sales of new and existing homes are still at very low levels, and inventory remains high compared with the monthly pace of sales. House prices--even apart from sales of bank-owned properties--have been falling again, and many households appear to have lost confidence that prices will turn up anytime soon. Disturbing reports of foreclosure improprieties have heightened concerns about mortgage loan servicing and mortgage modifications and have created uncertainty about the pace and volume of foreclosure sales yet to come. Delinquency and default rates on existing mortgages seem to have peaked, but they remain at historically high rates. And while low mortgage interest rates have contributed to strong refinancing activity, many households are still unable to qualify for the loans with the most favorable terms due to depressed home values, reduced income, or weaker credit scores. The commercial real estate market is also still quite anemic. Even after almost three years of declining investment in office and commercial structures, vacancy rates are still elevated and property prices remain weak. Financing conditions for commercial real estate remain tight, and delinquency rates deteriorated further during the third quarter of 2010. That said, some modest signs of improvement have surfaced: After having declined for two years, prices of commercial real estate, although still volatile, have changed little, on net, since the spring, and the number of property sale transactions has increased recently. Also, issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities has turned up, albeit from a low level. State and local governments also continue to struggle. The federal fiscal stimulus of the past two years helped shore up this sector, but did not prevent significant cutbacks in services and employment that were associated with the steep decline in revenues sustained during the recession. In the second half of 2010, with some pickup in retail spending and moderate gains in taxable income, revenues began to firm and outlays by state and local governments appeared to stabilize. Nonetheless, these jurisdictions will continue to face significant pressures to satisfy balanced budget requirements and to rebuild their depleted reserve funds at the same time that federal stimulus grants are winding down. With the recovery proceeding at a moderate rate and the margin of economic slack quite wide, the underlying rate of inflation has been trending lower despite upward pressure from rising costs of energy and other commodities and rising prices of imported goods. In the 12 months ending in November, overall inflation in PCE prices was 1.0 percent, and the 12-month change in core PCE inflation, which excludes more-volatile food and energy costs, was just 0.8 percent. Both measures show that inflation has drifted lower over the preceding year, and that slowing appears to have been broadly based. Indeed, even after reviewing a number of measures of the underlying trend in inflation, I find it difficult to identify a single measure that doesn't show that inflation has drifted steadily lower. At the same time, longer-run inflation expectations still appear to be stable. The Economic OutlookAlthough the recovery continues to be uneven across sectors, recent economic and financial developments are broadly consistent with my forecast that the economic recovery will gain even more momentum and that the expansion will become sufficiently strong to gradually bring down the unemployment rate. Key elements of my forecast include further strengthening in consumer spending and business investment in equipment and software, both of which will receive additional support from the recently enacted tax package. Given the currently high level of resource slack and my projection for only a gradual reduction in unemployment, I expect that inflation will remain subdued. My forecast for continued growth in consumer spending is predicated on an assumption of ongoing recovery in wage and salary income that should accompany an expected pickup in hiring. In addition, household balance sheets should gradually strengthen as asset prices firm and continued deleveraging reduces household debt. As the recovery continues, businesses should become more confident about expanding--by both upgrading facilities and adding workers. To date, larger firms have contributed importantly to the recovery in business spending, and they seem well positioned for further investment. Over time, small businesses, which have been held back by the slow recovery in demand and greater difficulties in obtaining credit, should also become more able to increase their spending and expand their operations. Prospects for U.S. trade are generally favorable. Global economic activity rebounded rapidly during the initial stages of the recovery, buoyed by a bounceback in global trade and inventory restocking around the world. Activity abroad has slowed more recently and seems to be settling on a sustainable path that still should result in rising demand for U.S. exports. Barring any significant spillover from the financial turmoil in peripheral European countries, the expansion abroad should continue. In that regard, I should note that renewed concerns about fiscal strains and banking-sector problems in the euro-area periphery have recently contributed to increased volatility in financial markets, but, to date, we have not seen a widespread pullback. My outlook for the housing market and for commercial real estate is more cautious. A sustained recovery in income and jobs will be an important prerequisite for a recovery in the housing industry. But until the overhang of vacant homes is reduced significantly and home values begin to firm, new residential construction is likely to remain at low levels. Similarly, time will be required to absorb the currently large amount of vacant office and commercial space before construction in that sector begins to turn up noticeably. One important element of the outlook is my expectation that financial market functioning and lending conditions will continue to improve, providing additional support for a further pickup in consumer and business spending. During the financial crisis, banks reported on our quarterly survey an extraordinary tightening of their lending standards. To date, only a small part of that tightening appears to have been reversed. As banks continue to repair their balance sheets and develop greater confidence in the economic outlook, I anticipate that standards will improve further over coming quarters. Nonetheless, I expect loan volumes, especially real estate loan volumes, to recover only slowly as both borrowers and lenders proceed cautiously. One notable exception to my forecast for gradual improvement in financial markets is my expectation that residential mortgage markets could take a number of years to repair as policymakers and market participants grapple with the role of government in housing finance, adapt to changing regulation, and look for ways to better manage and price the risks associated with mortgage lending and servicing. Whatever the structure of housing finance is to become, the large overhang of problem loans and weak housing markets will necessitate a gradual transition. Based on all of these assumptions, I expect a gradual decline in unemployment this year and little change in the underlying rate of inflation. Monetary PolicyThe Congress has charged the Federal Reserve with two monetary policy objectives, known as our dual mandate--the achievement of maximum employment and price stability. As I noted earlier, the financial crisis and severe recession left the economy far below levels of resource utilization consistent with maximum sustained employment. And the wide margins of economic slack that have persisted have moved inflation below a level of 2 percent or a bit less, which is the rate that most FOMC participants see as consistent with our dual mandate. In light of these disappointing results, monetary policy continues to be focused on ensuring that the economic recovery is sufficiently strong to sustain noticeable progress toward our mandated objectives. I would like to take a few minutes to offer some perspectives on how monetary policy has been meeting this challenge. As you know, the Federal Reserve responded forcefully to the financial crisis by employing a range of measures and programs to provide badly needed liquidity to financial institutions and markets. At the same time, the FOMC used both standard and less-conventional forms of monetary policy to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability. The standard way in which the FOMC stimulates the economy is by reducing the target for the overnight federal funds rate and shaping expectations about future policy actions through the FOMC's statement and other communications. Such policy actions typically lead to lower interest rates and a broader easing of financial conditions that together boost business and household spending and net exports. However, after the FOMC lowered its target for the federal funds rate to near zero in December 2008, that conventional policy tool was essentially no longer available. To provide additional accommodation, between December 2008 and March 2010, the FOMC elected to purchase large amounts of longer-term Treasury, agency, and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Those purchases put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates generally and helped normalize the spread between mortgage rates and long-term Treasury rates, which had widened during the financial crisis. Reducing longer-term rates influences the economy in much the same way as lowering the expected path of short-term rates. For instance, the decline in longer-term rates lowers the cost and increases the availability of capital and credit, which in turn encourages business expansion. In the most recent episode, another important result of lower rates has been a reduction in debt service burdens from existing debt. Households in particular have significantly reduced mortgage payments through refinancing. And numerous small business owners have told me that they could not have survived the downturn without low rates. Economic activity picked up in early 2010, but by the time the FOMC met in August, the rate of growth seemed to be slowing and inflation continued to drift lower. In addition, lower mortgage rates were resulting in faster prepayment of mortgages underlying the agency MBS held by the Federal Reserve. To avoid the modest monetary tightening that would result from the Fed's gradually shrinking portfolio of agency MBS, the FOMC voted to reinvest all principal payments from agency debt and agency MBS in longer-term Treasury securities. The Committee also began a discussion about the strength of the recovery, the amount of slack in the economy, the likely path of inflation, and the appropriate action to provide additional monetary accommodation should such action be deemed necessary. In November, the FOMC judged that additional monetary policy stimulus was needed to support the economic recovery and help ensure that inflation, over time, returned to desired levels. To implement that stimulus, the Committee decided to expand its holdings of securities by purchasing an additional $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011. After considering the costs and benefits of the action and recognizing that taking no action would have its own risks, I believe that the expansion of securities holdings was worth implementing to support the economy and make the recovery more durable. I don't want to overpromise. This action is not a panacea. While it is still premature to judge the overall efficacy of the program, I believe that by exerting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, it has provided and will continue to provide support for a vulnerable recovery. At the same time, I believe the risks associated with this action are manageable, that we have the safeguards in place to monitor evolving conditions, and, most importantly, that we have the conviction to act when necessary. Based on our own research and that of others, evidence is accumulating that purchases of longer-term assets have been successful in exerting downward pressure on longer-term rates.1Consistent with research on the effects of asset purchases, between August, when Chairman Bernanke in a speech first publicly suggested the Federal Reserve might take additional action, and November, when the action was taken, longer-term Treasury rates fell as market participants priced in additional Fed purchases.2However, since the announcement of the decision to purchase longer-term Treasury securities, longer-term rates have actually increased. It might seem that the recent increase in rates contradicts the view that Fed asset purchases put downward pressure on rates. However, the logic behind this view works in both directions. If the market expects the Fed to respond to weak economic conditions by buying more assets, investors bid up the assets and rates fall. Conversely, if the market expects the economy to strengthen, investors ratchet back expectations for Fed purchases and reduce their bid for the assets, and rates rise. I believe that the current rise in rates is due to exactly this latter circumstance--a strengthening in market participants' outlook for the economy and a corresponding decrease in the market's expectation for future accommodation. One concern that has been raised about asset purchases is the resulting expansion of the Fed's balance sheet and the corresponding increase in reserves. For example, some observers have noted that an increase in reserve balances could lead to an increase in the money supply, which would in turn generate inflation pressures. Others have worried that elevated levels of reserve balances might make it difficult for the Federal Reserve to remove monetary accommodation at the appropriate time. While we will need to remain alert to economic developments, I am convinced that we can and will manage these risks. The monetary policy objective of asset purchases is to foster downward pressure on interest rates. But assets are "paid for" by crediting the reserve balances of banks, generating higher levels of reserve balances in the banking system. Reserves are relevant to the growth of the money supply because banks are required to hold a percentage of some types of deposits as reserves with the Federal Reserve. Thus, the total amount of reserves in the banking system acts to cap maximum reservable deposits. It is important to note that it is deposits, not reserve balances, that are included in the monetary aggregates used to measure the money supply. For example, M1 is made up of currency, traveler's checks, demand deposits, and other checkable deposits, while M2 is made up of M1 plus savings, small time deposits, and retail money market mutual funds. Moreover, the linkage between the level of reserve balances and the monetary aggregates in the current environment is quite weak. You were probably taught, as I was, that the broad monetary aggregates increase when reserve balances increase because the larger volume of reserves supports increased lending, which in turn leads to a larger volume of reservable deposits. While that argument might hold in normal circumstances, in the current environment excess reserves are many multiples of required reserves, and adding reserves is unlikely to spark a further increase in the volume of deposits. As a result, the textbook linkage between reserve balances, bank loans, and transaction deposits just is not operative at present. Fundamentally, the levels of M1 and M2 are determined by the strength of the economy and the preferences of businesses and consumers for money, which depend on the yields on monetary instruments and competing assets. Recent experience has again illustrated the difficulty in identifying a reliable relationship between reserve balances and the monetary aggregates. Even though Federal Reserve actions to fight the financial crisis and support the economic recovery added roughly $1 trillion to a base of about $43 billion in aggregate bank reserves, M1 and M2 rose at relatively moderate rates over the same period. Going one step further, I should note that the linkage between the monetary aggregates and either real economic activity or inflation has been very weak over recent decades. The lack of a reliable relationship between the monetary aggregates and the economy led the Federal Reserve to abandon M1 as a key policy instrument in the early 1980s and then to reduce the role of M2 as a policy instrument in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Indeed, in a 2006 speech about the historic use of monetary aggregates in setting Federal Reserve policy, Chairman Bernanke pointed out that, "in practice, the difficulty has been that, in the United States, deregulation, financial innovation, and other factors have led to recurrent instability in the relationships between various monetary aggregates and other nominal variables."3Still, my colleagues and I will be monitoring a wide range of financial and economic developments very closely--including the growth of the money supply, inflation, and many other financial and nonfinancial variables--and, based on a full assessment of those developments, the FOMC will withdraw monetary accommodation at the appropriate time. My view is that the elevated reserve balances would be inflationary only if they prevented the FOMC from effectively removing monetary accommodation by raising interest rates when the time comes to remove such accommodation, and I am convinced that that will not be the case. The FOMC has a number of tools at its disposal for raising interest rates. When appropriate, the Federal Reserve can put upward pressure on interest rates by raising the rate it pays on reserve balances. Moreover, we have developed new tools that will allow us to drain reserves if necessary. In particular, we can drain large volumes of reserves by replacing them with repurchase agreements and term deposits. Finally, we can always sell the securities we purchased. Such sales would not only drain reserves but would also put direct upward pressure on longer-term rates. ConclusionOverall, the recovery in economic activity to date has been uneven and has not been sufficient to reduce unemployment noticeably. But I am encouraged by signs that the recovery may have gained traction recently. And I believe that sustained gains in consumer spending and business investment and a further easing of credit conditions will reinforce each other, leading to greater confidence and improving the prospects for an extended expansion that, over time, will reduce unemployment to a level consistent with full employment. At the same time, I anticipate that inflation will remain subdued. Finally, I believe that the actions taken by the FOMC to support the economic recovery are appropriate, and I am confident in our commitment to monitor economic conditions and take action as needed. 1.See, for example, Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore (2011), "Did the Federal Reserve's MBS Purchase Program Lower Mortgage Rates?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-01 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January). Other papers include Stefania D'Amico and Thomas B. King (2010), "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-52 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September); Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2010), "Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?" Staff Report 441 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York,March); and James D. Hamilton and Jing (Cynthia) Wu (2010), "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," working paper (San Diego: University of California, San Diego, August (revised November)).Return to text 2.See Ben S. Bernanke (2010), "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26-28.Return to text 3.See Ben S. Bernanke (2006), "Monetary Aggregates and Monetary Policy at the Federal Reserve: A Historical Perspective," speech delivered at the Fourth ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, Germany, November 10.Return to text
Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the The Brimmer Policy Forum, Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, Denver, Colorado I am delighted to participate in this Brimmer Policy Forum, not least because this year marks the 45th anniversary of Andrew's appointment by President Johnson as a Governor of the Federal Reserve Board. Andrew's ongoing work in organizing this annual forum reflects his long-standing commitment to fostering economic analysis and public discourse on key policy issues. In my remarks today, I will discuss the rationale for the decision by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in November to initiate a new program of asset purchases, and I will address some frequently asked questions (FAQs) regarding the program's economic and financial effects both here and abroad.1The purpose of the new asset purchase program, like all of the monetary policy actions taken by the FOMC since the onset of the global financial crisis, is to fulfill our congressionally mandated objectives of promoting maximum employment and price stability. In pursuit of these goals, the FOMC brought the target federal funds rate down close to zero by late 2008; conducted large-scale purchases of longer-term securities during 2009 and early 2010; and, last summer, modified its reinvestment policy to keep the Federal Reserve's balance sheet from shrinking as mortgage-related securities matured or were redeemed. In early November, the Committee announced that it intends to purchase an additional $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities by the middle of this year. The Rationale for the Asset Purchase Program Macroeconomic ConditionsTo understand the rationale for our asset purchase program, it is helpful to review the evolution of macroeconomic conditions over the past several years. The National Bureau of Economic Research has dated the recession as having begun in December 2007, but the pace of economic contraction accelerated in the wake of the Lehman Brothers collapse in September 2008 and the ensuing disruption to global financial markets. As shown infigure 1, the unemployment rate rose from around 5 percent in the spring of 2008 to about 10 percent by the autumn of 2009 and has stayed well above 9 percent since then. Most observers, including myself, judge this level of unemployment to be much higher than levels consistent with full employment and stable inflation. For example, in a recent Survey of Professional Forecasters conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median estimate of the current level of structural unemployment--often referred to as the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU)--stood at about 5-3/4 percent, implying that the unemployment gap is nearly 4 percentage points. In addition, a historically large fraction of the unemployed have been out of a job for a very long time. For example, roughly 4 percentage points of today's unemployment rate reflects individuals who have been unemployed for half a year or more. Those who experience an extended period of unemployment face a risk of losing their ability to participate successfully in the workforce, lending additional urgency to the task of reviving the demand for labor. Such low rates of resource utilization are typically accompanied by falling inflation. And, indeed, as shown infigure 2, measures of inflation for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) have declined significantly since 2008. For the total PCE inflation rate, the underlying trend is obscured to some extent by large swings in energy prices. However, the downward trend is clearly evident from the evolution of core PCE inflation, which excludes the volatile prices of food and energy. The 12-month change in core PCE prices dropped from about 2-1/2 percent in mid-2008 to around 1‑1/2 percent in 2009 and declined further to less than 1 percent by late 2010.2 As inflation has trended downward, measures of underlying inflation have fallen somewhat below the levels of about 2 percent or a bit less that most Committee participants judge to be consistent, over the longer run, with the FOMC's dual mandate. In particular, a modest positive rate of inflation over time allows for a slightly higher average level of nominal interest rates, thereby creating more scope for the FOMC to respond to adverse shocks. A modest positive inflation rate also reduces the risk that such shocks could result in deflation, which can be associated with poor macroeconomic performance. Of course, if incoming information last autumn had been pointing to greater momentum in the prospects for economic growth or to a rapid escalation in inflation, then the case for further monetary policy easing might have seemed less pressing. However, such was not the case. The Federal Reserve publishes a Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) four times a year in conjunction with the FOMC minutes. As shown in the November SEP, most Committee participants anticipated that the economy would recover only gradually and projected that the unemployment rate would still be at around 8 percent at the end of 2012--an outlook that is shared by most outside forecasters. Similarly, Committee participants generally expected inflation to rise very gradually toward levels consistent with the Federal Reserve's mandate. Moreover, continuing downside risks to the outlook for economic activity and inflation strengthened the case for providing additional monetary policy accommodation, thereby reducing the risk of another downturn in economic activity or a further decline in inflation. The Design of the Asset Purchase ProgramIn weighing its policy options last autumn, the Committee gave careful consideration to the question of whether further purchases of longer-term Treasury securities were likely to be effective in fostering economic recovery and bringing inflation back up to levels judged to be consistent with the dual mandate.3In my judgment, both theoretical analysis and empirical evidence suggested that such purchases could provide effective stimulus by keeping longer-term interest rates lower than they would otherwise be. The underlying theory, in which asset prices are directly linked to the outstanding quantity of assets, dates back to the early 1950s.4For example, in preferred-habitat models, short- and long-term assets are imperfect substitutes in investors' portfolios, and the effect of arbitrageurs is limited by their risk aversion or by market frictions such as capital constraints. Consequently, the term structure of interest rates can be influenced by exogenous shocks in supply and demand at specific maturities. Purchases of longer-term securities by the central bank can be viewed as a shift in supply that tends to push up the prices and drive down the yields on those securities. In the context of such an analytical framework, the effect of an asset purchase program also depends on investors' perceptions of the future path of short-term interest rates as well as their perceptions of the timing and pace of the central bank's eventual unwinding of its asset purchases. Thus, central bank communication may play a key role in influencing the financial market response to such a program. Recent empirical work provides a rough gauge of the quantitative effects of longer-term securities purchases.5For example, event studies have investigated the short-term response of asset prices to announcements by the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England regarding their respective asset purchase programs. And regression analysis has been used to estimate statistical models that embed predictions from a specific theoretical framework. Table 1summarizes the response of selected financial variables on four dates associated with the Federal Reserve's first round of asset purchases. On November 25, 2008, the Federal Reserve announced that it would purchase up to $600 billion in agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and agency debt. On December 1, Chairman Bernanke provided further details in a speech.6On December 16, the program was formally launched by the FOMC.7On March 18, 2009, the FOMC announced that the program would be expanded by an additional $850 billion in purchases of agency MBS and agency debt and $300 billion in purchases of Treasury securities. As is evident from the table, these announcements were generally associated with a substantial decline in the 10-year Treasury yield and the yield on 10-year Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) as well as in rates on agency MBS and corporate debt. Turning now to the macroeconomic effects of the Federal Reserve's securities purchases, there are several distinct channels through which these purchases tend to influence aggregate demand, including a reduced cost of credit to consumers and businesses, a rise in asset prices that boosts household wealth and spending, and a moderate change in the foreign exchange value of the dollar that provides support to net exports. The quantitative magnitude of these effects can be gauged using a macroeconometric model such as FRB/US--one of the models developed and maintained by Board staff and used routinely in simulations of alternative economic scenarios. Figure 3depicts the results of such a simulation exercise, as reported in a recent research paper by four Federal Reserve System economists.8For illustrative purposes, the simulation imposes the assumption that the purchases of $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities are completed within about a year, that the elevated level of securities holdings is then maintained for about two years, and that the asset position is then unwound linearly over the following five years.9 This trajectory of securities holdings causes the 10-year Treasury yield to decline initially about 1/4 percentage point and then gradually return toward baseline over subsequent years. That path of longer-term Treasury yields leads to a significant pickup in real gross domestic product (GDP) growth relative to baseline and generates an increase in nonfarm payroll employment that amounts to roughly 700,000 jobs.10It should also be noted that this exercise is performed as a deterministic simulation and hence does not capture the potential benefits of the asset purchase program in mitigating downside risks to economic activity and inflation. I would also like to note that the same research paper analyzed the macroeconomic effects of the FOMC's full program of securities purchases, including the first round of purchases that was initiated in late 2008 and early 2009, the modification of the reinvestment policy that was announced last August, and the second round of purchases that was initiated in November. Those simulation results indicate that by 2012, the full program of securities purchases will have raised private payroll employment by about 3 million jobs. Moreover, the simulations suggest that inflation is currently a percentage point higher than would have been the case if the FOMC had never initiated a securities purchases, implying that, in the absence of such purchases, the economy would now be close to deflation.11 Addressing Some FAQs about the Asset Purchase Program Has the Program Been Effective in Promoting the Economic Recovery?Is the program actually proving effective? My short answer is yes.Table 2depicts financial market responses during three key phases in the rollout of the program: (1) August 10, 2010, when the FOMC announced that the Federal Reserve would begin reinvesting principal payments on agency MBS and agency debt by purchasing Treasury securities; (2) the period between August 11 and November 2; and (3) November 3, the date on which the FOMC meeting statement announced the commencement of the program. As shown in the table, the initiation of the securities purchase program at the November FOMC meeting occasioned only minimal market response. The reason is that it was largely anticipated by investors, having been the subject of extensive public discussions by Federal Reserve officials during late summer and early autumn. Importantly, as expectations of the program gradually became embedded in asset prices during late summer and early autumn, the 10-year TIPS yield dropped nearly 1/2 percentage point over the period between the August and November FOMC meetings; moreover, equity prices rose and corporate bond spreads narrowed. Over that period, of course, asset prices were also responding to economic news and some favorable corporate earnings reports, but the overall pattern of the financial market data bolstered my confidence in the effectiveness of the Federal Reserve's securities purchases in providing additional monetary policy accommodation. Indeed, market rates might well have backed up significantly following the November FOMC meeting if the Committee had decided not to move ahead with the program.12 As shown infigure 4, longer-term Treasury yields have risen substantially over the past couple of months since the FOMC initiated this round of asset purchases. I believe that this increase in Treasury yields likely reflects a number of significant factors, including incoming information suggesting a somewhat stronger economic outlook and the fiscal package that was announced by President Obama in early December and approved by the Congress about two weeks later; that package will not only support economic growth next year but will also increase the amount of federal debt issuance. Also, investors appear to have scaled back their expectations about the extent to which the FOMC will engage in further purchases beyond those already announced; however, the effect of that reassessment on market rates tends to bolster the view that the Federal Reserve's securities purchases do indeed affect yields in the direction indicated by analytical and empirical studies.13 Will the Asset Purchase Program Lead to Excessive Inflation?A concern voiced by some observers is that the asset purchase program will lead to excessive inflation. One rationale for this view is that the economy is currently operating with little slack--that is, an unemployment rate that is not far from the NAIRU. A second rationale is that asset purchases have ballooned the Fed's balance sheet and the supply of bank reserves. I will consider each argument in turn. Extent of slack in the economy.Some proponents of the view that the U.S. economy is operating close to the NAIRU point to an apparent outward shift in the Beveridge curve--the relationship between job vacancies and unemployment--as indicating an increase in the structural level of unemployment. In the simplest framework, movements along a downward sloping Beveridge curve are typically characterized as cyclical movements in labor market conditions, while persistent inward and outward shifts in the curve are frequently attributed to structural forces. As shown infigure 5, the Beveridge curve appears to have shifted out in recent years. However, the Beveridge curve can shift out for a variety of reasons, including some that are essentially cyclical in nature, so it is important to understand the sources of a shift to assess whether it represents persistent structural forces. There is some evidence suggesting that structural factors account for a portion of the Beveridge curve's outward shift. In particular, the shift may partly reflect a decline in the efficiency with which unemployed workers are matched to vacant jobs.14However, given that the apparent decline in matching efficiency coincided with a large reduction in job vacancies, the two developments may be related. In particular, weak labor demand may be causing the labor market to operate less efficiently than would typically be the case, and matching efficiency may return to normal as demand for workers improves. Indeed, historically, matching efficiency does appear to move back toward its long-run average over time.15That said, a persistently high level of long-term unemployment could lead to a significant increase in structural unemployment over time as individuals who are out of work for long periods face the erosion of their skills. However, such effects would take time to materialize and, in any event, would argue for aggressive policies to reduce unemployment promptly. Another portion of the recent outward shift in the Beveridge curve is likely due to increases in the maximum duration of unemployment benefits, which may have induced some unemployed workers to be more selective in the job offers they accept. However, recent research suggests that the increase in unemployment due to extended benefits is probably small relative to the overall increase in unemployment, and, regardless of its magnitude, the influence of extended unemployment benefits will disappear as the economy improves and extended benefits expire.16 Moreover, at least some of the recent outward shift in the Beveridge curve appears to reflect cyclical rather than structural influences. For example, vacancies typically adjust more quickly than unemployment to changes in labor demand, causing counterclockwise movements in vacancy-unemployment space that can look like shifts in the Beveridge curve. Indeed, as is evident from the figure, such counterclockwise movements have occurred in most previous recessions. Finally, it is worth emphasizing that most of the co-movement between unemployment and vacancies in recent years does not appear especially unusual. In particular, low vacancies and elevated layoffs--likely driven by weak labor demand--can account for much of the increase in unemployment that has occurred since mid-2008.17This observation is in accord with the recent behavior of inflation, which, as noted above, has trended down over the past three years, consistent with a decline in rates of resource utilization. Likewise, nominal wage growth has fallen noticeably over the past several years and remains quite low. In sum, while deficient labor demand may not be the only factor boosting unemployment currently, and while disentangling the various influences on unemployment is not straightforward, weak labor demand appears to be the predominant factor keeping the unemployment rate elevated. This weakness, in turn, implies that current resource utilization is likely well below normal levels, mitigating the risk that the policy stimulus from our asset purchase program will lead to excessive inflation. Inflation and bank reserves.A second reason that some observers worry that the Fed's asset purchase programs could raise inflation is that these programs have increased the quantity of bank reserves far above pre-crisis levels. I strongly agree with one aspect of this argument--the notion that an accommodative monetary policy left in place too long can cause inflation to rise to undesirable levels. This notion would be true regardless of the level of bank reserves and pertains as well in situations in which monetary policy is unconstrained by the zero bound on interest rates. Indeed, it is one reason why the Committee stated that it will review its asset purchase program regularly in light of incoming information and adjust the program as needed to meet its objectives. We recognize that the FOMC must withdraw monetary stimulus once the recovery has taken hold and the economy is improving at a healthy pace. Importantly, the Committee remains unwaveringly committed to price stability and does not seek inflation above the level of 2 percent or a bit less than that, which most FOMC participants see as consistent with the Federal Reserve's mandate. In contrast, I disagree with the notion that the large quantity of reserves resulting from our asset purchases poses some special barrier to removing policy stimulus when the right time comes. The FOMC will be able to increase short-term rates by raising the interest rate that we pay on excess reserves--currently 1/4 percent. That ability will allow us to manage short-term interest rates effectively and thus to tighten policy when needed, even if bank reserves remain high. Given the very high level of reserve balances, changes in the interest rate on reserves might not be fully reflected in the federal funds rate and other short-term market rates. In that event, the Federal Reserve can use tools it has developed and tested to drain or immobilize bank reserves, thereby enhancing our control over the federal funds rate. To build the capability to drain large quantities of reserves, the Federal Reserve has expanded the range of its counterparties for reverse repurchase operations beyond the primary dealers and has developed the infrastructure necessary to use agency MBS as collateral in such transactions. The Federal Reserve has also put in place a Term Deposit Facility through which it can offer deposits to member institutions that are roughly analogous to the certificates of deposit that these institutions offer to their customers. We have tested both of these tools by conducting several small-scale operations and have the ability to initiate them quickly if needed. The use of reverse repurchase operations and the Term Deposit Facility would allow the Federal Reserve to drain hundreds of billions of dollars of reserves from the banking system should conditions necessitate. We don't think that draining such large amounts of reserves will be necessary for a smooth exit, but it makes sense to be prepared, and hence we have followed this "belt and suspenders" approach. Finally, we can sell portions of our holdings of MBS, agency debt, and Treasury securities if we determine that doing so is an appropriate way of tightening financial conditions when the time comes. The redemption or sale of securities would have the effect of reducing the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet as well as further reducing the quantity of reserves in the banking system. Restoring the size and composition of the balance sheet to a more normal configuration is a longer-term objective of our policies. Any such sales would be at a gradual pace, would be clearly communicated to market participants, and would entail appropriate consideration of economic conditions. In short, the range of tools we have developed will permit us to raise short-term interest rates and drain large volumes of reserves when it becomes necessary to achieve the policy stance that fosters our macroeconomic objectives--including the objective of maintaining price stability. Will the Asset Purchase Program Result in Adverse Financial Imbalances?The Committee's intention in implementing asset purchases is to hold down the level of longer-term interest rates to make credit more affordable for businesses and households. A reasonable fear is that this process could go too far, encouraging potential borrowers to employ excessive leverage to take advantage of low financing costs and leading investors to accept less compensation for bearing risks as they seek to enhance their rates of return in an environment of very low yields. This concern deserves to be taken seriously, and the Federal Reserve is carefully monitoring financial indicators for signs of potential threats to financial stability. While there is no single metric we can use to assess these threats, standard financial market indicators do not currently signal significant excesses or imbalances in the United States. In the stock market, for example, price-to-earnings ratios, by some measures, remain below their averages over the past several decades, and other valuation measures also indicate that equity prices are not significantly out of alignment with past norms. In the real estate market, price-to-rent ratios for both residential and commercial real estate are now within a reasonable range of their long-run averages, in contrast to the severe misalignment that occurred prior to the crisis. Again, there is little sign here of imbalances relative to fundamentals, at least if history is used as a guide. In fixed-income markets, narrow risk spreads and risk premiums could be signs of excessive risk-taking by investors, and indeed spreads on corporate bonds have dropped dramatically since the financial crisis, as the economic outlook has improved and investor sentiment has picked up. Risk premiums on nonfinancial corporate bonds, as measured by forward spreads far in the future, are relatively low compared with historical norms, although other indicators for this market do not point to overvaluation. An alternative way to identify imbalances is to focus more directly on measuring credit flows and exposures to credit risk. Extraordinarily rapid credit growth may be a sign that financial institutions are taking greater risks onto their balance sheets. In recent months, nonfinancial corporations have issued large amounts of bonds and syndicated leveraged loans, and banks' provision of consumer credit has shown some signs of reviving. Nonetheless, a portion of the recent corporate issuance has been used to refinance existing debt, including leveraged loans; small business lending remains especially weak; and commercial and residential mortgage originations continue to shrink. Thus, there is little evidence that financial institutions are significantly expanding the level of credit and liquidity provided to households and businesses on net. Indeed, given the current very low level of interest rates and the continuation of the economic recovery, credit flows remain stubbornly sluggish. Of course, such aggregate measures provide only an imperfect picture of overall credit conditions. Another type of evidence comes from surveying market participants about their practices. For bank lending, we have the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, which provides information about changes in supply and demand for bank loans to businesses and households. Recent surveys have indicated that banks have only just begun to reverse the historically large tightening in standards and terms that they implemented in the aftermath of the crisis. In fact, considerably more easing of terms and standards will probably be required before lending conditions return to normal. To monitor leverage provided by dealers to financial market participants, last June the Federal Reserve launched the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms. This survey provides information on credit terms and availability of various forms of dealer-intermediated financing, including funding for securities positions and over-the-counter derivatives. The survey results suggest that over the past several months there has been some easing of terms applicable to financing for a range of counterparty types and many types of collateral, as well as an increase in demand from clients to fund most types of securities. These results indicate that the availability and use of leverage by nonbank financial institutions increased somewhat last year. Overall, a variety of indicators suggest that leverage generally remains well below the levels reached prior to the financial crisis, but these measures are worth watching closely, and the new survey reflects our strong commitment to developing additional tools for this purpose. The Federal Reserve is closely monitoring many indicators of financial conditions to better understand the implications of financial market developments for the economy as well as risks to the financial system itself. We are working with other regulators to make the financial system more robust and are attentive in our supervision to developments that may affect systemic risk. If evidence of financial imbalances were to develop, I believe that supervision and regulation should provide the first line of defense so that monetary policy can concentrate on its longstanding goals of price stability and maximum employment. That said, we cannot categorically rule out using monetary policy to address financial imbalances, given the damage that they can cause. Will the Asset Purchase Program Have Adverse Effects on Foreign Economies?My final FAQ relates to the concerns that some observers have expressed over the potential for the Federal Reserve's asset purchase program to have adverse effects on foreign economies. One specific concern is that these securities purchases might drive down the value of the U.S. dollar, thereby diverting demand from our trading partners. Although purchases of longer-term securities are a less conventional means of conducting monetary policy than the more familiar approach of managing short-term interest rates, the goals and transmission mechanisms are actually very similar, and there is nothing special about these asset purchases that would make them especially likely to weigh on the dollar. In fact, the evidence available to date suggests that the asset purchases have had only moderate effects on the foreign exchange value of the dollar. This point is illustrated intable 3, which reports the change in U.S. dollar exchange rates against four other currencies (the Canadian dollar, pound sterling, euro, and yen) on each of the four dates referred to in table 1. These movements in exchange rates are not particularly large when compared with the fluctuations that can occur in any given week or month. Indeed, as shown infigure 6, these exchange rate movements are very modest in the broader context of developments over the past several years. A related concern raised by some observers is that the Federal Reserve's asset purchases may induce excessive capital inflows to emerging market economies (EMEs)--inflows that in turn could put unwelcome upward pressure on the currencies of those EMEs and perhaps even contribute to asset price bubbles. As shown infigure 7, net private capital flows to Latin American and Asian EMEs (reported as a share of the aggregate GDP of those EMEs) were substantial in the second half of 2009 and the first half of 2010 but were not obviously outsized compared with levels prior to the crisis.18A similar pattern is evident infigure 8, which depicts the net inflows since 2007 into mutual funds investing in EME bonds and equities. In each case, the strong inflows over the past year or so reflect a recovery in the wake of the large outflows that occurred during the crisis. In fact, the stock of claims on EMEs has only returned to its pre-crisis trend. Accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies, including the Federal Reserve's asset purchases, have likely played some role in widening interest rate differentials and encouraging capital flows to EMEs. But this role should not be exaggerated. Other factors--including a reversal of the capital outflows from EMEs during the financial crisis and the EMEs' longer-term favorable growth prospects--likely have also been important. Moreover, it would be a mistake to portray these capital flows as an unmitigated negative for the EMEs. A rebalanced global economy in which EMEs depend more on domestic demand for their growth will likely involve ultimately stronger and more sustained capital flows to these economies. Finally, I would like to comment on the critique that our asset purchase program is meant to promote U.S. growth at the expense of other nations by depreciating the dollar and enhancing U.S. competitiveness. That argument ignores the fact that stimulating growth in the United States is also likely to boost our demand for foreign goods and promote growth abroad. This effect will provide an important offset to the other implication of U.S. monetary stimulus that I discussed earlier--that it may lead to moderate movements in the foreign exchange value of the dollar that tend to lower U.S. demand for foreign goods. Whether foreign demand is ultimately boosted or diminished by U.S. monetary policy depends on the relative sizes of these two effects and is ultimately an empirical question.19However, given the moderate exchange rate effects that we believe the Federal Reserve's asset purchases have had, it seems likely to me that, as seems to be the case with conventional monetary easing achieved by lowering interest rates, our decision to purchase assets will not hinder foreign growth. In particular, given the importance of the United States in the global economy, it is hard to believe that any foreign country would gain if our economy were to fall back into another recession. Over the longer term, the health and vitality of the global economy will depend importantly on the sustained, vigorous recovery in the United States that our asset purchase program is intended to support. ConclusionIn closing, let me reiterate that the program of asset purchases initiated by the Federal Open Market Committee in November is intended to support economic recovery from an exceptionally deep recession and to restore inflation to, but not above, levels that FOMC participants consider consistent with price stability. It will not be a panacea, butI believe it will be effective in fostering maximum employment and price stability. References Barnichon, Regis, and Andrew Figura (2010). "What Drives Movements in the Unemployment Rate? A Decomposition of the Beveridge Curve (399 KB PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-148. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Canova, Fabio (2005). "The Transmission of U.S. Shocks to Latin America,"Journal of Applied Econometrics,vol.20 (2), pp. 229-51. Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams (2011). "Have We Underestimated the Probability of Hitting the Zero Lower Bound? (568 KB PDF)" Working Paper 2011-01. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, January. Culbertson, John M. (1957). "The Term Structure of Interest Rates,"Quarterly Journalof Economics, vol. 71 (November), pp. 485-517. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2010). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-52, Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger (2010). "The Establishment-Level Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring," NBER Working Paper Series 16265. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2010). "Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?" Staff Report No.441. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March. Hamilton, James D., and Jing (Cynthia) Wu (2010). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment (467 KB PDF)," working paper. San Diego: University of California, San Diego, August (revised October). Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2010). "The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing (748 KB PDF)," Working Paper 393. London: Bank of England, July (revised August). Kaplan, Greg, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl (2010). "Interstate Migration Has Fallen Less than You Think: Consequences of Hot Deck Imputation in the Current Population Survey," NBER Working Paper Series 16536. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. Kim, Soyoung (2001). "International Transmission of U.S. Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence from VAR's,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 48 (October), pp. 339-72. Kuang, Katherine, and Rob Valleta (2010). "Extended Unemployment and UI Benefits," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,FRBSF Economic Letter, 2010-10, April 19. Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Sutch (1966). "Innovations in Interest Rate Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 56 (March), pp. 178-97. Tobin, James (1958). "Liquidity Preference as Behavior towards Risk,"Review of Economic Studies, vol.25 (February), pp. 65-86. Uribe, Martin, and Vivian Z. Yue (2006). "Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives Whom?"Journal of International Economics,vol. 69 (June), pp.6‑36. Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila (2009). "A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 15487. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. 1.These remarks solely reflect my own views and not necessarily those of any other member of the FOMC. I appreciate assistance from members of the Board staff--David Bowman, James Clouse, William English, Andrew Figura, Steven Kamin, Yuriy Kitsul, Andrew Levin, Fabio Natalucci, David Reifschneider, Clara Vega, William Wascher, and David Wilcox--who contributed to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text 2.This downward trend in inflation has not been confined to any specific sectors of the economy, such as housing. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas constructs a trimmed-mean rate of PCE inflation by removing the tails of the distribution of monthly price changes for disaggregated spending categories. That measure of underlying inflation has also declined fairly steadily since mid-2008 and dipped slightly below 1 percent last autumn. Moreover, diffusion indexes of price changes--which subtract the percentage of items in the consumption basket with price increases from the percentage of items with price decreases--also fell noticeably over this period, providing further evidence that the decline in inflation has been widespread across many categories of consumer spending.Return to text 3.As indicated in the minutes of the November FOMC meeting, the Committee has also considered the potential costs and benefits of setting a peg for a term interest rate. While targeting the yield on a term security could be an effective way to reduce longer-term interest rates, such an approach might require the Federal Reserve to make an open-ended commitment to purchasing longer-term securities.Return to text 4.Examples include Culbertson (1957), Tobin (1958), and Modigliani and Sutch (1966); see also Vayanos and Vila (2009).Return to text 5.A burgeoning literature focuses on the experience of asset purchase programs of the Federal Reserve and other central banks; for example, see D'Amico and King (2010); Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2010); Hamilton and Wu (2010); and Joyce, Lasaosa, Stevens, and Tong (2010).Return to text 6.See Ben S. Bernanke (2008), "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices Revisited," speech delivered at the Greater Austin Chamber of Commerce, Austin, Tex., December 1.Return to text 7.The December 2008 FOMC announcement also reported the Committee's decision to reduce the target for the federal funds rate to a range of 0 to 1/4 percent.Return to text 8.See Chung and others (2011).Return to text 9.In addition, the federal funds rate is assumed to remain unchanged from baseline for several years and then to follow the prescriptions of a simple estimated policy rule; for further details, see Chung and others (2011).Return to text 10.The simulation results are reported as deviations from baseline and hence eventually return to zero. In effect, under circumstances in which the baseline path involves a large and relatively persistent unemployment gap, these results can be interpreted as gauging the extent to which the policy stimulus accelerates the pace at which the economy returns to its balanced-growth path with maximum sustainable employment and low, stable inflation.Return to text 11.See Chung and others (2011) for further details.Return to text 12.Consistent with the conjecture that bond yields are affected by expected purchase size, the 30-year Treasury yield increased markedly in the days following the November FOMC meeting, as market participants reportedly revised downward their expectations of the amount of purchases by the Federal Reserve in this maturity sector.Return to text 13.The backup in rates may have been amplified by technical factors such as mortgage-related hedging flows and year-end positioning by leveraged investors.Return to text 14.On changes in matching efficiency, see Barnichon and Figura (2010) and Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2010). Possible reasons for a decline in matching efficiency include decreased mobility of workers due to the drop in house prices and a mismatch between the skills demanded by businesses and the skills offered by unemployed workers. On the issue of migration rates and mobility, see Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2010).Return to text 15.See Barnichon and Figura (2010).Return to text 16.On the effect of extended unemployment benefits on the unemployment rate, see Kuang and Valleta (2010).Return to text 17.Declining demand leads businesses with positive trend growth in employment to reduce vacancies--a movement down the Beveridge curve--and businesses with flat or downwardly trending employment to increase layoffs--an outward shift in the Beveridge curve. For the response of vacancies and layoffs to changes in firm-level employment, see Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2010).Return to text 18.For the purposes of this discussion, the EMEs comprise Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Venezuela.Return to text 19.Kim (2001), Canova (2005), and Uribe and Yue (2006), among others, find that U.S. monetary stimulus affects aggregate output in emerging market and advanced foreign economies positively.Return to text