The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application of Hancock Holding Company, Gulfport, Mississippi, to acquire Whitney Holding Corporation, and indirectly acquire Whitney's wholly owned subsidiary bank, Whitney National Bank, both of New Orleans, Louisiana. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action together with a Concurring Statement by Governor Daniel K. Tarullo.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve Board's role in monitoring systemic risk and promoting financial stability, both as a member of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and under our own authority. Financial Stability Oversight CouncilThe Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) created the FSOC to identify and mitigate threats to the financial stability of the United States. During its existence thus far, the FSOC has promoted interagency collaboration and established the organizational structure and processes necessary to execute its duties.1The FSOC and its member agencies also have completed studies on limits on proprietary trading and investments in hedge funds and private equity funds by banking firms (the Volcker rule), on financial sector concentration limits, on the economic effects of risk retention, and on the economic consequences of systemic risk regulation. The FSOC is currently seeking public comments on proposed rules that would establish a framework for identifying nonbank financial firms and financial market utilities that could pose a threat to financial stability and that therefore should be designated for more stringent oversight. Importantly, the FSOC has begun systematically monitoring risks to financial stability and is preparing its inaugural annual report. Additional Financial Stability-Related Reforms at the Federal ReserveIn addition to its role on the FSOC, the Federal Reserve has other significant financial stability responsibilities under the Dodd-Frank Act, including supervisory jurisdiction over thrift holding companies and nonbank financial firms that are designated as systemically important by the council. The act also requires the Federal Reserve (and other financial regulatory agencies) to take a macroprudential approach to supervision and regulation; that is, in supervising financial institutions and critical infrastructures, we are expected to consider the risks to overall financial stability in addition to the safety and soundness of individual firms. A major thrust of the Dodd-Frank Act is addressing the too-big-to-fail problem and mitigating the threat to financial stability posed by systemically important financial firms. As required by the act, the Federal Reserve is developing more-stringent prudential standards for large banking organizations and nonbank financial firms designated by the FSOC. These standards will include enhanced risk-based capital and leverage requirements, liquidity requirements, and single-counterparty credit limits. The standards will also require systemically important financial firms to adopt so-called living wills that will spell out how they can be resolved in an orderly manner during times of financial distress. The act also directs the Federal Reserve to conduct annual stress tests of large banking firms and designated nonbank financial firms and to publish a summary of the results. To meet the January 2012 implementation deadline for these enhanced standards, we anticipate putting out a package of proposed rules for comment this summer. Our goal is to produce a well-integrated set of rules that meaningfully reduces the probability of failure of our largest, most complex financial firms, and that minimizes the losses to the financial system and the economy if such a firm should fail. The Federal Reserve is working with other U.S. regulatory agencies to implement Dodd-Frank reforms in additional areas, including the development of risk retention requirements for securitization sponsors, margin requirements for noncleared over-the-counter derivatives, incentive compensation rules, and risk-management standards for central counterparties and other financial market utilities. The Federal Reserve has made significant organizational changes to better carry out its responsibilities. Even before the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act, we were strengthening our supervision of the largest, most complex financial firms. We created a centralized multidisciplinary body called the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee to oversee the supervision of these firms. This committee uses horizontal, or cross-firm, evaluations to monitor interconnectedness and common practices among firms that could lead to greater systemic risk. It also uses additional and improved quantitative methods for evaluating the performance of firms and the risks they might pose. And it more efficiently employs the broad range of skills of the Federal Reserve staff to supplement supervision. We have established a similar body to help us effectively carry out our responsibilities regarding the oversight of systemically important financial market utilities. More recently, we have also created an Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research at the Federal Reserve Board. This office coordinates our efforts to identify and analyze potential risks to the broader financial system and the economy. It also helps evaluate policies to promote financial stability and serves as the Board's liaison to the FSOC. International Regulatory CoordinationAs a complement to those efforts under Dodd-Frank, the Federal Reserve has been working for some time with other regulatory agencies and central banks around the world to design and implement a stronger set of prudential requirements for internationally active banking firms. These efforts resulted in the agreements reached in the fall of 2010 on the major elements of the new Basel III prudential framework for globally active banks. The requirements under Basel III that such banks hold more and better-quality capital and more-robust liquidity buffers should make the financial system more stable and reduce the likelihood of future financial crises. We are working with the other U.S. banking agencies to incorporate the Basel III agreements into U.S. regulations. More remains to be done at the international level to strengthen the global financial system. Key tasks ahead for the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board include determining how to further increase the loss-absorbing capacity of systemically important banking firms and strengthening resolution regimes to minimize adverse systemic effects from the failure of large, complex banks. As we work with our international counterparts, we are striving to keep international regulatory standards as consistent as possible, to ensure that multinational firms are adequately supervised, and to maintain a level international playing field. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 1.The FSOC's internal structure consists of a Deputies Committee--composed of personnel from all of the voting and nonvoting members--and six other standing committees, each with its own specific duties. The Deputies Committee, under the direction of the FSOC members, coordinates the work of the six committees and aims to ensure that the FSOC fulfills its mission in an effective and timely manner.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: BW Bancorp (54 KB PDF), Ely, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated May 20, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Calwest Bancorp (60 KB PDF), Rancho Santa Margarita, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated April 29, 2011 First Financial Service Corporation (73 KB PDF), Elizabethtown, KentuckyWritten Agreement dated April 20, 2011 Regent Bancorp, Inc. (69 KB PDF), Davie, FloridaWritten Agreement dated April 25, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Community Banks of Georgia, Inc. (63 KB PDF), Jasper, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated May 24, 2011 PlainsCapital Bank, and PrimeLending, a PlainsCapital Company (110 KB PDF), Dallas, Texas.Order of assessment of civil money penalty dated May 23, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Community Financial Shares, Inc. (59 KB PDF), Glen Ellyn, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated May 23, 2011 Four Oaks Fincorp, Inc. and Four Oaks Bank & Trust Company (158 KB PDF), both of Four Oaks, North CarolinaWritten Agreement dated May 24, 2011 North Texas Bancshares, Inc., Dallas, Texas, and North Texas Bancshare of Delaware, Inc. (81 KB PDF), Wilmington, DelawareWritten Agreement dated May 23, 2011 Provident Community Bancshares, Inc. (55 KB PDF), Rock Hill, South CarolinaWritten Agreement dated May 20, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: HCSB Financial Corporation (71 KB PDF), Loris, South CarolinaWritten Agreement dated May 9, 2011 Johnson Financial Group, Inc. and Johnson Bank (145 KB PDF), both of Racine, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated May 10, 2011 Liberty Shares, Inc. (73 KB PDF), Hinesville, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated May 9, 2011 Metropolitan Bank Group, Inc. (91 KB PDF), Chicago, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated May 10, 2011 Mid-Wisconsin Financial Services, Inc. (72 KB PDF), Medford, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated May 10, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the United States-Mexico Chamber of Commerce Annual Gala, Washington, D.C. Good evening. I am very pleased to join the United States-Mexico Chamber of Commerce at this gala dinner as its members look back on another year of working to build the mutually beneficial trade and investment relationship between our two countries. The ties between Mexico and the United States, both economic and cultural, are close and enduring--in no small part, I am sure, because of the nearly 40 years of effort by the chamber. Thus, I am especially honored to join Agustín Carstens, the distinguished governor of the Bank of Mexico, in receiving your Good Neighbor Award. Thank you very much.Muchísimas gracias. I have benefited from many years of contact and shared experiences with Agustín and his colleagues at the central bank of Mexico. Some years ago, I had the opportunity to visit the Bank of Mexico. As an economist, I found the visit very stimulating. But I must confess that I enjoyed the trip as much for the cultural excursions as for the economics. I remember in particular the beauty of Diego Rivera's monumental mural in the National Palace in Mexico City. As with so many things, I credit my wife, Anna, who has a graduate degree in Latin American literature, for my greater-than-average appreciation for the arts of Mexico and the other Latin American nations. Perhaps Agustín might also credit his spouse, the writer Catherine Mansell Carstens, for an appreciation of culture that encompasses both of our nations. I met Agustín not long after I came to Washington to serve on the Federal Reserve Board. He was then a highly regarded deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund. In late 2006, not long after I became Chairman, he became finance minister of Mexico, and last year he succeeded Guillermo Ortiz as governor of the Bank of Mexico. We have had many opportunities to meet and share views about the U.S., Mexican, and global economies. My appreciation for his wisdom and insight as an economist and policymaker has grown with each encounter. Our productive and, I hope, mutually beneficial relationship reflects the close relationship of the United States and Mexico. Our countries are tightly linked through trade. The United States is by far Mexico's largest trading partner, accounting for about two-thirds of total Mexican merchandise trade. Mexico, in turn, accounts for about one-eighth of the United States' foreign trade, ranking it--along with Canada and China--among our three largest trading partners. Not surprisingly, then, the growth of the Mexican and U.S. economies are strongly related. I'd be remiss if I concluded without noting Mexico's tremendous economic strides during the past two decades. It has tamed the rampant inflation that prevailed before the 1990s, placed its budget on a sounder footing, and avoided the repeated financial crises to which it was once prone. Great credit goes to the thoughtful policies designed by Agustín and other economic leaders in Mexico. Because the prosperity of our countries is so closely linked, we in the United States benefit from their foresight and hard work. Our economies continue to face challenges that require mutual cooperation. We are working together to promote international financial stability, both bilaterally and through international forums such as the Group of Twenty and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. In closing, I deeply appreciate receiving the chamber's Good Neighbor Award.Agradezco profundamente su gentileza.
On Tuesday, May 31, 2011 the Federal Reserve will offer $5 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's September 8, 2010 release, this offering is part of ongoing small-value operations designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to become familiar with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of theTerm Deposit Facility. Description of Offering and Competitive Auction Parameters Competitive bids submitted at the stop-out rate will be pro-rated and will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. Non-Competitive bids are allowed in this auction. All non-competitive bids will be automatically awarded in full at the stop-out rate of the competitive auction. The minimum amount for a non-competitive bid is $10,000; the maximum amount is $5,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. Non-Competitive bids must be submitted between 10:00 a.m. ET and 2:00 p.m. ET on the auction date. Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the auction date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on theBoard of Governors' websiteat approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, results will be posted on the Term Deposit Facility Resource Center page of theCentral Bank Central website. Participant awards will be posted to the Term Deposit Facility application at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date, and participants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested public comment on a proposed rule that would create new protections for consumers who send remittance transfersto recipients located in a foreign country. The proposed rule would require that remittance transfer providers make certain disclosures to senders of remittance transfers, including information about fees and the exchange rate, as applicable, and the amount of currency to be received by the recipient. In addition, the proposed rule would provide error resolution and cancellation rights for senders of remittance transfers. The proposal is being made under Regulation E (Electronic Fund Transfers) pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The Federal Register notice is attached. Comments on the proposal must be submitted within 60 days after publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Registernotice:HTML|1 MB PDF Summary of Findings: Design and Testing of Remittance Disclosures (1 MB PDF) Model forms 1.A-30 (8 KB PDF PDF)Model form for pre-payment disclosures for remittance transfers exchanged into local currency (§ 205.31(b)(1))2.A-31 (10 KB PDF)Model form for receipts for remittance transfers exchanged into local currency (§ 205.31(b)(2))3.A-32 (9 KB PDF)Model form for combined disclosures for remittance transfers exchanged into local currency (§ 205.31(b)(3))4.A-33 (19 KB PDF)Model form for pre-payment disclosures for dollar-to-dollar remittance transfers (§ 205.31(b)(1))5.A-34 (9 KB PDF)Model form for receipts for dollar-to-dollar remittance transfers (§ 205.31(b)(2))6.A-35 (9 KB PDF)Model form for combined disclosures for dollar-to-dollar remittance transfers (§ 205.31(b)(3))7.A-36 (16 KB PDF)Model form for error resolution and cancellation disclosures (long) (§ 205.31(b)(4))8.A-37 (8 KB PDF)Model form for error resolution and cancellation disclosures (short) (§ 205.31(b)(2)(vi))9.A-38 (8 KB PDF)Model form for pre-payment disclosures--Spanish (§ 205.31(b)(1))10.A-39 (9 KB PDF)Model form for receipts--Spanish (§ 205.31(b)(2))11.A-40 (9 KB PDF)Model form for combined disclosures--Spanish (§ 205.31(b)(3))12.A-41 (17 KB PDF)Model form for error resolution and cancellation disclosures (long)--Spanish (§ 205.31(b)(4)) Comments:Submit|View
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the 2011 Exploring Innovation Conference on Community Development Finance, St. Louis, Missouri Good morning. It is a pleasure to be in St. Louis to open the third biennial Exploring Innovation Conference. The first Exploring Innovation conference was opened four years ago by Professor Andrew Hargadon, the Charles J. Soderquist Chair in Entrepreneurship at the University of California, Davis and a senior fellow at the Kauffman Foundation. His remarks established a framework of collaboration for innovation in community development finance. Since then, this conference has served as a forum for sharing ideas and maintaining the networks that are so critical to this work. Professor Hargadon initially set the stage by explaining that innovation and creativity are not the same. An individual acting alone to solve a problem can be creative, while innovation is the process of adding value by applying a new idea or method to something that is already established. For example, Henry Ford did not contribute the creative energy to invent an automobile. Rather, Ford's innovation was the idea to combine the 100-year-old technology for the automobile with the meat packing industry's assembly line process, resulting in a means to mass produce cars. On the same note, Apple did not invent the MP3 player with the introduction of the iPod. Rather, the company used existing technology and a collaboration with the music industry to develop iTunes software, bringing an affordable application of the MP3 to the public. In each of these examples, improving upon a good idea was as important, if not more important, than the initial idea. The message for community development professionals was the importance of collaboration, sharing ideas, and building upon the ideas of others in order to innovate for the benefit of our communities. The significance of Professor Hargadon's message should not be lost in today's challenging economic climate. Times are particularly difficult for residents of our low- and moderate-income communities who are struggling more than ever to support their families, obtain affordable housing, and access basic services. We are here this week to develop fresh approaches to address these persistent problems that are even more widespread today than they were four years ago. Throughout the conference, I hope you will contribute your own best ideas and look for ways to use the ideas of others to improve your own communities and enhance your innovation network. To this end, I would like to talk about efforts underway across the Federal Reserve System and to share some of our ideas and resources. Situated at the intersection of the federal government and private financial institutions, the Federal Reserve System is well-positioned to facilitate collaborative activities among experts in the community development finance industry. Through our network of 12 Reserve Banks across the country, we build relationships with local governments, nonprofits, foundations, academic institutions, and financing entities. We use outreach to connect the creative minds working in community development to generate innovative policy and finance solutions. By adding applied research to the mix, we convene these stakeholders around particular community development topics and disseminate information to low- and moderate-income communities, practitioners, and other interested parties. I realize that collaboration and innovation can sound abstract, so let me offer some examples of issues that the Fed has championed recently, and where we have seen the results of our efforts. Housing CrisisI would like to start with the Federal Reserve System's response to the housing crisis as it unfolded over the past three years. Our multifaceted response included guidance to banks, updates to regulations, changes to monetary policy, and analytical research contributions. It also included engagement in national and regional partnerships to inform policy and practices around foreclosure prevention and neighborhood stabilization in communities hard hit by foreclosures. From the onset of the crisis, we called on the expertise of community development professionals within the Federal Reserve System to respond to concerns from homeowners by crafting strategies to enhance foreclosure mitigation, encourage loan modifications, and stave off the rising number of rescue scams. The Fed also strengthened existing collaborations with fellow regulators, community groups, policy organizations, financial institutions, and public officials to discuss innovative methods for preventing unnecessary foreclosures and the negative impact they have on communities. One valuable product of this effort was the development and dissemination of data tools, heat maps, and detailed analysis to identify neighborhoods most at risk of foreclosures and their damaging effects. Equipped with this information, community leaders can better target limited resources to borrowers and declining communities. In 2008, as interest in market-specific responses to foreclosures grew, the Fed developed a conference series entitled "Recovery, Renewal, Rebuilding"1in five cities that represented a variety of housing markets--from older, industrial cities with shrinking populations to boomtowns that grew too quickly. Meanwhile, we also launched online Foreclosure Resource Centers at each Reserve Bank that continue to provide homeowners, prospective homebuyers, and community groups with information to help prevent foreclosures and lessen their negative influence on neighborhoods. These centers offer a variety of resources, including an enhanced Foreclosure Mitigation Toolkit, which provides detailed steps and information for localities seeking to develop foreclosure prevention activities. The toolkit also includes a new Foreclosure Recovery Resource Guide to help consumers recover from the foreclosure process. As the foreclosure crisis unfolded and concerns expanded from loss mitigation and loan modifications to worries about housing values, vacant properties, and neighborhood stabilization, the Fed's response evolved as well. For example, starting in 2009, the Board worked with the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland to produce a publication addressing issues related to the acquisition and disposition of real estate owned properties (REO), a term that refers to property owned by a financial institution, typically a bank, after a foreclosure. The publication, "REO and Vacant Properties,"2is a compendium of papers by national experts that highlight their key ideas regarding the disposition of vacant properties. Last November, the papers were presented publicly at a forum at the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C., where more than 100 participants shared ideas and lessons learned about community stabilization.3In addition, last year, the Federal Reserve worked with other federal regulators to encourage neighborhood stabilization activities through the Community Reinvestment Act. This year, we created video reports that describe specific strategies for managing vacant properties in Cleveland, Phoenix, and Detroit.4 Throughout our work on the housing crisis, we have witnessed policy changes and novel responses to the challenges facing our communities. The collaborative efforts and information sharing from national housing and community development experts, including those led by our own staff, helped bring these innovative efforts to fruition. For example, as a result of our neighborhood stabilization work, some Reserve Banks partnered with national groups to help declining cities learn how to use land banks as a potential tool to address high rates of foreclosure and vacant properties. Based on the initial success of the Genesee County Land Bank, established in Michigan in 2002, and resources provided by the National Vacant Properties Campaign, land banking is becoming an integral part of community revitalization efforts for many places across the country. For example, the city of Cleveland has used the Cuyahoga County Land Bank as an important tool to address its vacant property issue. Cuyahoga County works with lenders and servicers, including the government sponsored entities (GSEs), to access properties quickly after they become vacant. This enables the county to make decisions regarding the REO before it becomes dilapidated or a nuisance for neighboring properties. Because dealing with vacant property is a high profile issue in Cleveland, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland regularly participates in conversations about solutions, such as land banking, and provides research on the neighborhood dynamics of this problem to support communities crafting solutions. The Bank recently released the "Adaptive Policies Needed to Address Changing Foreclosure Landscape"5paper to highlight the changing circumstances driving the foreclosure crisis and the need for comprehensive policy approaches that cater to the specific challenges of diverse neighborhoods. For its part, the city of Cleveland has responded to the growing number of vacant properties through the innovative use of data that allows the city to provide neighborhood-specific responses. NEO CANDO, or the Northeast Ohio Community and Neighborhood Data for Organizing, is a free and publicly accessible social and economic data system provided by the Center on Urban Poverty and Community Development, a research institute housed at Case Western Reserve University. NEO CANDO developers recognize that limited resources are available to address foreclosure issues, and their data support a systemic methodology for allocating available dollars. Hopefully, others will draw on the experiences with targeted data use in Cleveland just as Cleveland drew on the land banking experience of Genesee County. Small Business CreditLast year, diminishing credit availability for small businesses emerged as a significant stumbling block to the economic recovery. Small businesses are central to creating jobs and to restoring our economic prosperity. In fact, about one-half of all Americans are employed by firms with fewer than 500 employees.6As the challenges facing small business owners surfaced, the Federal Reserve sought to better understand the nuances of the credit tightening. Together, the Reserve Banks across the System leveraged relationships with lending institutions, small business owners, and community groups to discuss the changes in small business credit and think about potential solutions. Through this initiative, the Federal Reserve sought to deepen its understanding of the dynamics of the supply of and demand for small business credit, to identify specific credit gaps, and to learn of promising practices and suggestions for improvement. In the course of just five months, the Fed hosted more than 40 meetings around the country and finished with a wrap-up forum in Washington, D.C., designed to summarize what we had heard and to plan next steps.7Some of the meetings took the form of small focus groups or listening sessions. Other meetings were larger in scale, with more formal agendas focusing on a particular aspect of small business financing, such as minority entrepreneurship, the role of Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), or federal guarantee loan programs. Several meetings focused on a specific industry, such as auto suppliers. Whether small or large, all of the meetings brought together small business owners, small business trade groups, financial institutions and other private lenders, bank supervision officials, CDFIs, and other small business support service providers to discuss ways to improve the flow of credit to viable small businesses. Although the information obtained through these meetings was anecdotal in nature, common themes did emerge. And the ability to obtain real-time information directly from lenders and potential borrowers has proved invaluable to our understanding of the issues affecting credit availability. Illustrating the importance of small business access to credit, a compilation of the key findings of our outreach effort was included in Chairman Bernanke's semiannualMonetary Policy Report to the Congressin July 2010.8Already, a few of the meeting participants' recommendations have become a policy reality for the small business credit market. Participants in the nationwide meetings recommended improving access for CDFI loan funds to participate as guaranteed lenders in the SBA 7(a) program in order to increase the availability of credit to the underserved markets that depend on CDFIs. Later, the Small Business Administration (SBA) rolled out two pilot programs aimed at increasing the number of loans in these communities. The Community Advantage program will increase the number of lower-dollar loans in underserved communities by allowing CDFIs, and other mission-focused lenders, to originate SBA 7(a) loans up to $250,000. Also, the Small Loan Advantage program is structured to encourage larger, existing SBA lenders to make lower-dollar loans, which often benefit businesses in underserved markets.9 Meeting participants also expressed support for additional low-cost, long-term capital for CDFIs. Such capital would allow CDFIs to price loans to reflect their risk and still offer an affordable rate to small businesses that may not qualify under conventional bank standards and products. One participant recommended that policymakers consider capital models for CDFIs that further leverage private dollars and create innovative incentives for the private sector to partner with experienced CDFI fund managers with strong risk-management capacity. Soon, as part of the Small Business Jobs Act, the U.S. Treasury will provide up to $1 billion annually in federal guarantees for the next three years for bonds issued by CDFIs for community development purposes. In addition, the act established a $300 million Small Business Lending Facility for Community Development Loan Funds. The regulations for both of these programs are currently under development. At this point, I am pleased to tell you that recent anecdotal evidence leads me to believe that conditions are improving for small businesses. Although no definitive data source exists, the combination of a variety of recent survey results paints a picture of increasing optimism about future sales and business conditions and a corresponding easing of credit availability for small businesses.10While this upward trend is encouraging, the Fed is continuing to look for ideas that will help small businesses as they work through some of the more subtle issues constraining their overall growth. Going forward, we will coordinate a series of regional forums for financial institutions and CDFIs on the use and deployment of small business programs authorized in the Small Business Jobs Act and on sharing information about issues and successful practices at a national level. The forums are being organized with participation from the Opportunity Finance Network (OFN), the trade organization for CDFIs; the SBA; the Treasury; the CDFI Fund; and our partner regulatory agencies. In addition to providing information to regional forum participants, we will seek to use these forums to gather information on best practices, trends, and any barriers to the successful implementation of these federal programs. This year's work will culminate with a November conference at the Board of Governors, in partnership with the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, to discuss small business credit and workforce training issues facing entrepreneurs--particularly women and minority entrepreneurs and those living in low- and moderate-income communities. Because jobs and the needs of low- and moderate-income communities remain a priority for us, we will continue to foster collaborative efforts in hopes of additional innovative responses. Community Data InitiativeThe Federal Reserve has a long history of using anecdotal information gathered from businesses within the Reserve Districts to better understand underlying regional economies and economic conditions. One of the lessons to be learned from the role of subprime lending in the recent crisis is that it is equally important to pay attention to underlying trends in segments of the economy, such as low- to moderate-income communities or small businesses. The anecdotal information we collect from community advocates and development professionals is quite valuable, but it will be even more actionable if we have a framework for systematically collecting, studying, and disseminating the information. To address this need to identify early warning signs of future economic challenges, we are testing several initiatives to collect information from practitioners and others working directly in the communities. This effort, known as the "Community Data Initiative," is intended to provide a systematic approach to gathering and disseminating on-the-ground intelligence on current conditions and emerging challenges facing low- and moderate-income communities. Insights from the data will inform existing processes at the Fed and provide useful information to low- and moderate-income communities. In order to achieve this new data collection and analysis objective, a number of the Reserve Banks are leveraging their own research resources to survey, poll, or otherwise collect information about communities in their District. At the Board, we are also conducting our own surveys to help validate the District results. Although the project is in its infant stage, I would like to share some initial findings from two of the Reserve Banks that are already participating in the process. The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's "Community Indicators Project" is a quarterly survey tool that includes a collection of open-ended questions to inform community development policy and practice in a richer way than quantitative data alone. Leaders from banks, nonprofits, community-based organizations, foundations, local government, and the private sector are asked about the conditions and trends affecting low-income households. The lack of jobs was the dominant theme in the first year of data collection, with the majority of respondents identifying unemployment as the primary cause of new distress in the housing sector as increasing numbers of residents struggled to make mortgage or rent payments. One survey participant stated that "prolonged unemployment and underemployment are causing a huge growth in the number of low-and moderate-income individuals and communities. Unemployment is now the driving force behind most of the other crises we are facing."11 Similarly, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond has been using their Emerging Issues Surveillance Tool (EIST) to identify the most significant current and emerging community development issues in the District's diverse communities. The top three issues in the spring 2011 data release were employment opportunities, access to housing, and home foreclosures. The jobs issue surfaced again, with a focus on the need for training, when a participant stated: "Employment is the key to sustained self-sufficiency. There are jobs available in the Washington, D.C., market, but mostly high-skilled jobs for which low-income residents are unqualified." As with the San Francisco survey, the results from this tool provide useful data for Richmond policymakers and District stakeholders. Virtual CollaborationThe growth in survey and other tools is intended to expand the Federal Reserve's outreach efforts and to ensure that we are responsive to the entire population. As we continue to improve the tools we use, we hope to continue to engage each of you in the conversation. In the past, collaboration often required outlays of scarce time and financial resources to attend face-to-face meetings. We are increasingly exploring ways to use technology to effectively expand our reach. For example, the System is using live web-streaming to share key conferences through a YouTube channel as well as sharing information through webinars. In addition, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta has introduced a series of podcasts with information on topics from foreclosure responses to perspectives on real estate.12Finally, as noted earlier, the Board just released three video reports about strategies for addressing REO and vacant properties.13If I have sparked your interest, I hope you will visit the Board's website to watch the videos. ConclusionIt is clear that it will take all of us working together to solve the problems that face communities today. Collaboration among government, nonprofits, and our partners in the private sector should focus on innovative ideas that can address the changing conditions of our communities. As the nature of problems change, we all need to be flexible and modify our responses. Remember Professor Hargadon and his theory about innovation? Well, he also stated that "social network theory divides the world into nodes and ties. You are a node with ties to other people you know. The people you know have ties to each other…. If you can talk to a wide range of people, you are broadening your entire world, the more people you know, the more likely you are to be successful and happy. This has been proven.… The more you share and talk to new people about your ideas, the more likely you are to be innovative."14I would like to take this final moment to encourage you to please make the most of your opportunities to share with your colleagues here this week, and to continue to push the envelope on innovation. And I hope the Federal Reserve System continues to be a node of innovation with ties to each of you. Thank you. 1.For more information, seehttp://stlouisfed.org/RRRSeries/.Return to text 2.Thispublication (4.6 MB PDF)is available on the Board's website.Return to text 3.To learn more about the forum, go towww.federalreserve.gov/events/conferences/2010/reovpsns/default.htm.Return to text 4.All threevideo reportsare available on the Board's website.Return to text 5.Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (2010), "Containing a Firestorm: Adaptive Policies Needed to Address Changing Foreclosure Landscape (3.36 KB PDF)," Community Reinvestment Forum paper.Return to text 6.See John C. Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2010), "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs. Young," NBER Working Paper Series 16300 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August).Return to text 7.Theforum agendais available on the Board's website.Return to text 8.See Ben Bernanke (2010), "Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress," testimony before the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, Washington, DC, July 21.Return to text 9.More information on the SBA's Small Loan Advantage program is available atwww.sba.gov/advantage.Return to text 10.Governor Elizabeth A. Duke, "Small Business Credit Availability," remarks at the 2011 International Factoring Association Conference, Washington, DC, April 14, 2011.Return to text 11.For more information, see the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco'sCommunity Indicators Project webpage.Return to text 12.The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta'spodcasts.Return to text 13.The Board'svideo reports.Return to text 14.For more information, seehttp://www.stlouisfed.org/community/innovation/web/framepages/index.htm.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the 47th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, Illinois The recent financial crisis revealed critical gaps and weaknesses in the U.S. financial system and the financial regulatory framework. The Congress and the Administration last year provided a roadmap for addressing many of these problems, in the form of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act)--the topic of this year's conference. Legislative reforms in any complex area always face the risk of fighting the last war, responding to the causes of the last crisis without sufficient attention to where new problems may arise. To their credit, the authors of the Dodd-Frank Act attempted to reduce this risk by building in a number of features aimed at helping our system of financial oversight adapt over time to changes in the financial environment. Notably, a central element of the legislation is the requirement that the Federal Reserve and other financial regulatory agencies adopt a so-called macroprudential approach--that is, an approach that supplements traditional supervision and regulation of individual firms or markets with explicit consideration of threats to the stability of the financial system as a whole. The act also created a new Financial Stability Oversight Council, whose membership comprises a diverse group of federal and state financial regulators, to coordinate the government's efforts to identify and respond to systemic risks. The explicit incorporation of macroprudential considerations in the nation's framework for financial oversight represents a major innovation in our thinking about financial regulation, one that is taking hold abroad as well as in the United States. This new direction is constructive and necessary, I believe, but it also poses considerable conceptual and operational challenges in its implementation. In my remarks today I will briefly discuss the rationale for macroprudential supervision and regulation, describe the new structure of macroprudential supervision and regulation in the United States, and explain how we at the Fed are doing our part to implement the macroprudential approach to financial oversight. Macroprudential Supervision and RegulationUltimately, the goal of macroprudential supervision and regulation is to minimize the risk of financial disruptions that are sufficiently severe to inflict significant damage on the broader economy. The systemic orientation of the macroprudential approach may be contrasted with that of the traditional, or "microprudential," approach to regulation and supervision, which is concerned primarily with the safety and soundness of individual institutions, markets, or infrastructures. Relative to traditional regulation and supervision, executing a macroprudential approach to oversight can involve heavier informational requirements and more-complex analytic frameworks. In particular, because of the highly interconnected nature of our financial system, macroprudential oversight must be concerned with all major segments of the financial sector, including financial institutions, markets, and infrastructures; it must also place particular emphasis on understanding the complex linkages and interdependencies among institutions and markets, as these linkages determine how instability may be propagated throughout the system. Moreover, broadly speaking, macroprudential regulators must be concerned with at least two types of risks. The first type encompasses aspects of the structure of the financial system--such as gaps in regulatory coverage or the evolution of shadow banking--that pose ongoing risks to financial stability. The second class of risks are those that vary over time with financial or economic circumstances, such as widespread buildups of leverage in good times that could ultimately unwind in destabilizing ways. To be sure, a macroprudential approach to oversight does not avoid the need for careful microprudential regulation and supervision. The oversight of individual institutions serves many purposes beyond the enhancement of systemic stability, including the protection of the deposit insurance fund, the detection of money laundering and other forms of financial crime, and the prevention of unlawful discrimination or abusive lending practices. Equally important, however, is that microprudential oversight also provides the knowledge base on which a more systemic approach must be built; we cannot understand what is going on in the system as a whole without a clear view of developments within key firms and markets. Without a strong microprudential framework to underpin them, macroprudential policies would be ineffective. That said, a key lesson of the crisis is that a purely microprudential approach, focused on the conditions of individual firms or markets, may fail to detect important systemic or cross-cutting risks. For example, a traditional microprudential examination might find that an individual financial institution is relying heavily on short-term wholesale funding, which may or may not induce a supervisory response. The implications of that finding for the stability of the broader system, however, cannot be determined without knowing what is happening outside that particular firm. Are other, similar financial firms also highly reliant on short-term funding? If so, are the sources of short-term funding heavily concentrated? Is the market for short-term funding likely to be stable in a period of high uncertainty, or is it vulnerable to runs? If short-term funding were suddenly to become unavailable, how would the borrowing firms react--for example, would they be forced into a fire sale of assets, which itself could be destabilizing, or would they cease to provide funding or critical services for other financial actors? Finally, what implications would these developments have for the broader economy? The analysis of risks from a systemic perspective, not just from the perspective of an individual firm, is the hallmark of macroprudential regulation and supervision. And the remedies that might emerge from such an analysis could well be more far-reaching and more structural in nature than simply requiring a few firms to modify their funding patterns. Implementing the Macroprudential Approach in the United StatesLet me be more concrete and talk about the implementation of the macroprudential approach in the context of the evolving U.S. regulatory system. The first required element of macroprudential oversight is a system for monitoring evolving risks to financial stability. Beyond assigning individual regulatory agencies this responsibility, the Dodd-Frank Act took the additional step of setting up a new body, the Financial Stability Oversight Council, as I mentioned earlier. The council is charged with monitoring the U.S. financial system, identifying risks that threaten the stability of that system, and promoting market discipline and other conditions that mitigate excessive risk-taking in financial markets. The council is made up of 10 voting members--including the Federal Reserve‑‑and 5 nonvoting members, who serve in an advisory capacity.1 The regulatory agencies represented on the council oversee a wide range of participants in the U.S. financial system. The broad membership of the council is intended to limit the tendency of regulators to focus narrowly on the institutions and markets within their jurisdictions while overlooking risks from interdependencies that cut across jurisdictions. The council also facilitates coordination and information sharing among member agencies. By breaking down the silos that in the past sometimes discouraged agencies from looking beyond their specific responsibilities, the council should help identify and eliminate gaps and weaknesses within the regulatory structure. The Dodd-Frank Act also established--within the Treasury Department--the Office of Financial Research, which is responsible for improving the quality of financial data available to policymakers. The oversight council may direct the research office to collect information from certain individual financial companies to assess risks to the financial system. This collection and analysis of financial-sector data should allow regulators to see more of the financial landscape and better equip them to identify systemic risks and other emerging threats. To digress for a moment, it's interesting that the United States isn't the only jurisdiction that has recently created a new institutional structure to implement macroprudential policies. Notably, the European Union (EU) established the European Systemic Risk Board, which is responsible for the macroprudential oversight of the EU's financial system. The board will collect and analyze information on the EU's financial system, identify and prioritize systemic risks, and issue warnings and recommendations to national and European authorities. It will also work closely with the three newly created European Supervisory Authorities, which in turn are charged with coordinating prudential regulations for banking, insurance, and securities among EU member states.2In the United Kingdom, the government plans to move its microprudential regulatory authority back into the Bank of England and create a new Financial Policy Committee to implement macroprudential policies. (Former Federal Reserve Board Vice Chairman Donald Kohn has been tapped to serve on the Financial Policy Committee, which must make him one of the few people to have served as a top financial regulator in two different countries.) The U.K. committee is expected to identify and monitor systemic risks and take actions to remove or reduce them. And it will operate a new resolution regime for failing financial firms. The monitoring efforts of the Financial Stability Oversight Council in the United States are already well under way. Staff members from the member agencies have established working groups with responsibility for specific sectors or aspects of the financial system and are making regular presentations to the council. This work will also be reflected in the council's required annual report to the Congress on financial stability, which is expected to be released in the summer. Of course, the identification of threats to financial stability must be followed by appropriate remedies. The powers of the council itself are relatively limited in this regard, at least under most circumstances. Perhaps its most important responsibility is the designation of certain nonbank financial firms and financial market utilities as systemically important and thereby subject to additional regulation and oversight by the Federal Reserve and other member agencies, including the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). To make those designations, the council will need to determine criteria for identifying firms whose financial distress would impose the greatest risks to financial stability. Of course, this task requires continued development of an analytical framework for understanding systemic risk and its sources. Although the council's own powers are circumscribed to some degree, the potential benefits of its ability to foster cooperative work among U.S. regulatory agencies should not be underestimated. To cite just one example, the stability of money market mutual funds--which suffered dramatic runs that worsened funding conditions at the height of the crisis--is clearly a systemic issue, not just an industry issue. The SEC, which has already issued rules to increase the stability of money market mutual funds, is appropriately taking the lead in investigating whether further steps are necessary. Under the aegis of the council, however, the SEC has consulted with other agencies, including the Federal Reserve, which have provided their own analyses and perspectives. In particular, interagency consultation has helped clarify the potential systemic implications of instability in the money market mutual fund industry. The Federal Reserve will be among the agencies participating in a roundtable on money fund regulation sponsored by the SEC later this month.Understandably, given the damage wrought by the crisis, the council and its members remain focused on addressing possible sources of financial instability, including both structural problems and risks arising from ongoing economic or financial developments. However, no one's interests are served by the imposition of ineffective or burdensome rules that lead to excessive increases in costs or unnecessary restrictions in the supply of credit. Increased coordination and cooperation among regulators, under the auspices of the council where appropriate, should serve not only to improve our management of systemic risk, but also reduce the extent of duplicative, inconsistent, or ineffective rulemakings. More generally, in evaluating alternative approaches to mitigating systemic risks, regulators must aim to avoid stifling reasonable risk-taking and innovation in financial markets, as these factors play an important role in fostering broader productivity gains, economic growth, and job creation. Macroprudential Policy at the Federal ReserveAs I have mentioned, besides creating new institutions like the Financial Stability Oversight Council, the Dodd-Frank Act has also imposed a macroprudential mandate on individual agencies, including the Federal Reserve. This mandate comes, in some cases, with changes in the powers and responsibilities of key agencies. In the case of the Federal Reserve, in addition to membership on the Financial Stability Oversight Council, our new responsibilities include the supervision of thrift holding companies as well as oversight of nonbank financial firms and certain payment, clearing, and settlement utilities that the council designates as systemically important. In consultation with other agencies, we also are responsible for developing more-stringent prudential standards for all large banking organizations and for nonbank firms designated by the council as systemically important. These enhanced standards include tougher capital and liquidity requirements, the development of resolution plans (so-called living wills), mandatory stress tests conducted by the Federal Reserve and by the firms themselves, new counterparty credit limits, and more-demanding risk-management requirements. The Federal Reserve has made and will continue to make significant organizational changes as needed to best fulfill our responsibilities. Even before the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act, we had begun to overhaul our supervision of the largest, most-complex financial firms. An important milestone in this regard was the Federal Reserve's leadership in the spring of 2009 of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, popularly known as the bank stress test, which comprehensively evaluated the health of the largest banking organizations in the country. We learned valuable lessons from that exercise, including an appreciation of the additional insights that can be gained by examining a number of major institutions simultaneously, with a focus on comparative performance. Another lesson of the stress test was the value of a multidisciplinary approach to supervision, one that combines the skills of economists, financial experts, payments systems analysts, and other specialists with those of supervisors and examiners. Drawing on this experience, we created a high-level, multidisciplinary working group within the Federal Reserve to oversee the supervision of large financial institutions. Under the auspices of this committee--called the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee, or LISCC--Federal Reserve supervisors, supported by economists and other experts, now routinely use horizontal, or cross-firm, reviews to monitor industry practices, common investment or funding strategies, changes in the degree or form of financial interconnectedness, or other developments with implications for systemic risk. Supplementing its individual and horizontal reviews, the LISCC has also made increasing use of improved quantitative methods for evaluating the health and performance of supervised firms as well as the risks they may pose to the broader financial system. A similar committee structure within the Federal Reserve is being developed to help us meet our obligations to supervise systemically important financial market utilities. To improve our monitoring of the financial system and to coordinate work bearing on financial stability, we have also created a new office within the Board, called the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research. This office brings together staff with a range of backgrounds and skills and works closely with other groups at the Federal Reserve. The office helps monitor global financial risks and analyze the implications of those risks for financial stability; works with our bank supervisory committees, for example, on the development of quantitative loss models and alternative scenarios to serve as the basis for stress tests; serves as a liaison to the Financial Stability Oversight Council and its various working groups; and helps develop and evaluate alternative approaches to implementing macroprudential regulations. The recent Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, in which the Federal Reserve evaluated the internal capital planning processes and shareholder distribution requests of the 19 largest bank holding companies, is an example of a horizontal assessment with a macroprudential approach. In the wake of the crisis, banks' capital payouts had been kept to a minimum. As banks' earnings and capital positions continued to improve in 2010, however, some firms sought approval to increase dividends or restart share repurchase programs. The simultaneous assessment of the payout requests in the capital review allowed the Federal Reserve, working through the LISCC, to evaluate not only the conditions of individual banks but also the potential implications of capital payouts for aggregate credit extension and the sustainability of the economic recovery. Thus, the program had both microprudential and macroprudential goals. From a traditional safety-and-soundness perspective, we wanted each firm to demonstrate that it had robust risk-management systems as well as a capital plan that would allow it to manage potential losses in stress scenarios while comfortably meeting Basel III capital requirements as they are phased in. But, with the help of macroeconomic and capital market analysts, we also considered the implications of the requests for the capital available to the banking system as a whole, with the objective of ensuring that bank credit would still be available to households and businesses even if the economy were to perform more poorly than expected. We now also routinely apply macroprudential methods to the analysis of significant economic developments, whether domestic or foreign. The sovereign debt concerns in Europe provide one example. As yields on European sovereign debt and bank debt rose in the spring of 2010, Federal Reserve supervisors began to evaluate U.S. banking firms' exposures to European banking firms and sovereigns. In addition to evaluating direct exposures, we analyzed scenarios under which sovereign debt concerns might lead to broader financial volatility. Our focus was on the possibility that financial disruptions might impede credit flows and economic activity in both Europe and the United States. In our work we conferred extensively with European bank supervisors; for example, we discussed potential risks to European banks' abilities to obtain dollar funding and the implications of European banks' need for dollars on U.S. money markets. This work suggested that providing a backstop for the dollar-funding needs of European financial institutions could mitigate the potential for spillovers to the United States from European sovereign debt concerns. In accord with this analysis, in May 2010 the Federal Open Market Committee announced that it had authorized dollar liquidity swap lines with other central banks in a preemptive move to avert a further deterioration in liquidity conditions. Macroprudential considerations have also been important for the Federal Reserve's rulemaking, particularly those rules implementing the Dodd-Frank Act. For example, with other regulators, we recently proposed rules to set margin requirements for over-the-counter derivatives that are not cleared through a central counterparty. The proposed rules reflect not only safety-and-soundness concerns but also macroprudential goals; specifically, the rules seek to increase the resiliency of the financial system as a whole by reducing the potential for contagion between swap market participants. Under the proposed rules, the most-stringent margin requirements would apply to derivatives contracts between swap dealers or other major swaps market participants, as such arrangements could otherwise involve a risk of "default chains" in which distress at one major firm could cascade through the swap markets. As I mentioned earlier, the macroprudential approach to financial regulation is gaining increasing adherence internationally. Along with our efforts to implement reforms domestically, the Federal Reserve has for some time been working closely with foreign counterparts to help coordinate the reform process at the international level. The objectives of international coordination are of the highest importance. These goals include maintaining a level competitive playing field across countries, minimizing opportunities for multinational firms to take advantage of weaker or inconsistent regulations in some jurisdictions, establishing consistent and complementary standards, and ensuring effective oversight of internationally active firms and markets. The Group of Twenty has devoted considerable attention to financial-sector policies in its meetings during the past couple of years. The Financial Stability Board, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, and other international groups also have undertaken substantial work to coordinate macroprudential policies across borders. Much of the Federal Reserve's international effort has involved working with other regulatory agencies and central banks to design and implement new prudential requirements for internationally active banks. This work resulted in the adoption of more-stringent regulatory capital standards for trading activities and securitization exposures in the summer of 2009, as well as the agreement last fall on the major elements of the new Basel III framework for globally active banks. Consistent with the macroprudential approach, the Basel III framework requires the largest, most globally active banks to hold more, higher-quality capital, reflecting the greater systemic risk associated with financial distress at the largest institutions. ConclusionThe financial crisis demonstrated clearly that supervisory and regulatory practices must consider overall financial stability as well as the safety and soundness of individual firms.The Dodd-Frank Act requires regulators to mitigate the buildup of financial excesses and reduce vulnerabilities, and it created an interagency council to monitor financial markets, to identify emerging threats, and to help formulate policies to contain those risks. For our part, the Federal Reserve has restructured its internal operations to facilitate a macroprudential approach to supervision and regulation and to monitor systemic risks. We are committed to working closely with the oversight council and other agencies to promote financial stability. While a great deal has been accomplished since the act was passed less than a year ago, much work remains to better understand sources of systemic risk, to develop improved monitoring tools, and to evaluate and implement policy instruments to reduce macroprudential risks. These are difficult challenges, but if we are to avoid a repeat of the crisis and its economic consequences, these challenges must be met. 1.The Secretary of the Treasury serves as the chairman of the Financial Stability Oversight Council. Other voting members include the heads of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the National Credit Union Administration, the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, and an independent insurance expert appointed by the President. The latter two seats are not yet filled.Return to text 2.The three authorities are the European Securities and Markets Authority, the European Banking Authority, and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings on April 4 and April 25, 2011. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on April 26-27, 2011. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the April 26-27, 2011 meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximately quarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeApril 26-27, 2011:PDF (411 KB)|HTML
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Conference on "New Building Blocks for Jobs and Economic Growth," Washington, D.C. I am pleased to speak at this conference on new building blocks for jobs and economic growth. The conference organizers have gathered an outstanding group of participants and have set an ambitious agenda. The topics you will address today and tomorrow, bearing on innovation and intangible capital, are central to understanding how we can best promote robust economic growth in the long run. I won't have to spend much time convincing this audience of the importance of long-run economic growth. The Nobel Prize-winning economist Robert E. Lucas, Jr., wrote that once one starts thinking about long-run growth and economic development, "it is hard to think about anything else."1Although I don't think I would go quite that far, it is certainly true that relatively small differences in rates of economic growth, maintained over a sustained period, can have enormous implications for material living standards. A growth rate of output per person of 2-1/2 percent per year doubles average living standards in 28 years--about one generation--whereas output per person growing at what seems a modestly slower rate of 1-1/2 percent a year leads to a doubling in average living standards in about 47 years--roughly two generations. Compound interest is powerful! Of course, factors other than aggregate economic growth contribute to changes in living standards for different segments of the population, including shifts in relative wages and in rates of labor market participation. Nonetheless, if output per person increases more rapidly, the prospects for greater and more broad-based prosperity are significantly enhanced. Over long spans of time, economic growth and the associated improvements in living standards reflect a number of determinants, including increases in workers' skills, rates of saving and capital accumulation, and institutional factors ranging from the flexibility of markets to the quality of the legal and regulatory frameworks. However, innovation and technological change are undoubtedly central to the growth process; over the past 200 years or so, innovation, technical advances, and investment in capital goods embodying new technologies have transformed economies around the world. In recent decades, as this audience well knows, advances in semiconductor technology have radically changed many aspects of our lives, from communication to health care. Technological developments further in the past, such as electrification or the internal combustion engine, were equally revolutionary, if not more so. In addition, recent research has highlighted the important role played by intangible capital, such as the knowledge embodied in the workforce, business plans and practices, and brand names. This research suggests that technological progress and the accumulation of intangible capital have together accounted for well over half of the increase in output per hour in the United States during the past several decades.2 Innovation has not only led to new products and more-efficient production methods, but it has also induced dramatic changes in how businesses are organized and managed, highlighting the connections between new ideas and methods and the organizational structure needed to implement them. For example, in the 19th century, the development of the railroad and telegraph, along with a host of other technologies, were associated with the rise of large businesses with national reach. And, as transportation and communication technologies developed further in the 20th century, multinational corporations became more feasible and prevalent. Economic policy affects innovation and long-run economic growth in many ways. A stable macroeconomic environment; sound public finances; and well-functioning financial, labor, and product markets all support innovation, entrepreneurship, and growth, as do effective tax, trade, and regulatory policies. Policies directed at objectives such as the protection of intellectual property rights and the promotion of research and development, or R&D, promote innovation and technological change more directly. In the remainder of my remarks, I will focus on one important component of innovation policy--namely, government support for R&D. As I have already suggested, the effective commercial application of new ideas involves much more than just pure research. Many other factors are relevant, including the extent of market competition, the intellectual property regime, and the availability of financing for innovative enterprises. That said, the tendency of the market to supply too little of certain types of R&D provides a rationale for government intervention; and no matter how good the policy environment, ultimately, big new ideas are often rooted in well-executed R&D. The Rationale for a Government Role in Research and DevelopmentGovernments in many countries directly support scientific and technical research, for example, through grant-providing agencies (like the National Science Foundation in the United States) or through tax incentives (like the R&D tax credit). In addition, the governments of the United States and many other countries run their own research facilities, including facilities focused on nonmilitary applications such as health. The primary economic rationale for a government role in R&D is that, absent such intervention, the private market would not adequately supply certain types of research.3The argument, which applies particularly strongly to basic or fundamental research, is that the full economic value of a scientific advance is unlikely to accrue to its discoverer, especially if the new knowledge can be replicated or disseminated at low cost. For example, James Watson and Francis Crick received a minute fraction of the economic benefits that have flowed from their discovery of the structure of DNA. If many people are able to exploit, or otherwise benefit from, research done by others, then the total or social return to research may be higher on average than the private return to those who bear the costs and risks of innovation. As a result, market forces will lead to underinvestment in R&D from society's perspective, providing a rationale for government intervention. One possible policy response to the market underprovision problem would be to substantially strengthen the intellectual property rights regime, for example, by granting the developers of new ideas strong and long-lasting claims to the economic benefits of their discoveries--perhaps by extending and expanding patent rights. This approach has significant drawbacks of its own, however, in that strict limitations on the free use of new ideas would inhibit both further research and the development of valuable commercial applications. Thus, although patent protections and similar rules remain an important part of innovation policy, governments have also turned to direct support of R&D activities. Of course, the rationale for government support of R&D would be weakened if governments had consistently performed poorly in this sphere. Certainly, there have been disappointments; for example, the surge in federal investment in energy technology research in the 1970s, a response to the energy crisis of that decade, achieved less than its initiators hoped. In the United States, however, we have seen many examples--in some cases extending back to the late 19th and early 20th centuries--of federal research initiatives and government support enabling the emergence of new technologies in areas that include agriculture, chemicals, health care, and information technology. A case that has been particularly well documented and closely studied is the development of hybrid seed corn in the United States during the first half of the 20th century.4Two other examples of innovations that received critical federal support are gene splicing--federal R&D underwrote the techniques that opened up the field of genetic engineering--and the lithium-ion battery, which was developed by federally sponsored materials research in the 1980s. And recent research on the government's so-called war on cancer, initiated by President Nixon in 1971, finds that the effort has produced a very high social rate of return, notwithstanding its failure to achieve its original, ambitious goal of eradicating the disease.5 What about the present? Is government support of R&D today at the "right" level? This question is not easily answered; it involves not only difficult technical assessments, but also a number of value judgments about public priorities. As background, however, a consideration of recent trends in expenditures on R&D in the United States and the rest of the world should be instructive. In the United States, total R&D spending (both public and private) has been relatively stable over the past three decades, at roughly 2-1/2 percent of gross domestic product (GDP).6However, this apparent stability masks some important underlying trends. First, since the 1970s, R&D spending by the federal government has trended down as a share of GDP, while the share of R&D done by the private sector has correspondingly increased.7Second, the share of R&D spending targeted to basic research, as opposed to more applied R&D activities, has also been declining.8These two trends--the declines in the share of basic research and in the federal share of R&D spending--are related, as government R&D spending tends to be more heavily weighted toward basic research and science. The declining emphasis on basic research is somewhat concerning because fundamental research is ultimately the source of most innovation, albeit often with long lags. Indeed, some economists have argued that, because of the potentially high social return to basic research, expanded government support for R&D could, over time, significantly boost economic growth.9That said, in a time of fiscal stringency, the Congress and the Administration will clearly need to carefully weigh competing priorities in their budgetary decisions. Another argument sometimes made for expanding government support for R&D is the need to keep pace with technological advances in other countries. R&D has become increasingly international, thanks to improved communication and dissemination of research results, the spread of scientific and engineering talent around the world, and the transfer of technologies through trade, foreign direct investment, and the activities of multinational corporations. To be sure, R&D spending remains concentrated in the most-developed countries, with the United States still the leader in overall R&D spending.10However, in recent years, spending on R&D has increased sharply in some emerging market economies, most notably in China and India. In particular, spending for R&D by China has increased rapidly in absolute terms, although recent estimates still show its R&D spending to be smaller relative to GDP than in the United States.11Reflecting the increased research activity in emerging market economies, the share of world R&D expenditures by member nations of the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, which mostly comprises advanced economies, has fallen relative to non-member nations, which tend to be less developed. A similar trend is evident, by the way, with respect to science and engineering workforces.12 How should policymakers think about the increasing globalization of R&D spending? On the one hand, the diffusion of scientific and technological research throughout the world potentially benefits everyone by increasing the pace of innovation globally. For example, the development of the polio vaccine in the United States in the 1950s provided enormous benefits to people globally, not just Americans. Moreover, in a globalized economy, product and process innovations in one country can lead to employment opportunities and improved goods and services around the world. On the other hand, in some circumstances, the location of R&D activity can matter. For example, technological prowess may help a country reap the financial and employment benefits of leadership in a strategic industry. A cutting-edge scientific or technological center can create a variety of spillovers that promote innovation, quality, skills acquisition, and productivity in industries located nearby; such spillovers are the reason that high-tech firms often locate in clusters or near leading universities.13To the extent that countries gain from leadership in technologically vibrant industries or from local spillovers arising from inventive activity, the case for government support of R&D within a given country is stronger.14 How Should Governments Provide Support for Research and Development?The economic arguments for government support of innovation generally imply that governments should focus particularly on fostering basic, or foundational, research. The most applied and commercially relevant research is likely to be done in any case by the private sector, as private firms have strong incentives to determine what the market demands and to meet those needs.15 If the government decides to foster R&D, what policy instruments should it use? A number of potential tools exist, including direct funding of government research facilities, grants to university or private-sector researchers, contracts for specific projects, and tax incentives. Moreover, within each of these categories, many choices must be made about how to structure specific programs. Unfortunately, economists know less about how best to channel public support for research and development than we would like; it is good news, therefore, that considerable new work is being done on this topic, including recent initiatives on science policy by the National Science Foundation.16 Certainly, the characteristics of the research to be supported are important for the choice of the policy tool. Direct government support or conduct of the research may make the most sense if the project is highly focused and large-scale, possibly involving the need for coordination of the work of many researchers and subject to relatively tight time frames. Examples of large-scale, government-funded research include the space program and the construction and operation of "atom-smashing" facilities for experiments in high-energy physics. Outside of such cases, which often are linked to national defense, a more decentralized model that relies on the ideas and initiative of individual researchers or small research groups may be most effective. Grants to, or contracts with, researchers are the typical vehicle for such an approach. Of course, the success of decentralized models for government support depends on the quality of execution. Some critics believe that funding agencies have been too cautious, focusing on a limited number of low-risk projects and targeting funding to more-established scientists at the expense of researchers who are less established or less conventional in their approaches. Supporting multiple approaches to a given problem at the same time increases the chance of finding a solution; it also increases opportunities for cooperation or constructive competition.17The challenge to policymakers is to encourage experimentation and a greater diversity of approaches while simultaneously ensuring that an effective peer-review process is in place to guide funding toward high-quality science.18 However it is channeled, government support for innovation and R&D will be more effective if it is thought of as a long-run investment. Gestation lags from basic research to commercial application to the ultimate economic benefits can be very long. The Internet revolution of the 1990s was based on scientific investments made in the 1970s and 1980s. And today's widespread commercialization of biotechnology was based, in part, on key research findings developed in the 1950s. Thus, governments that choose to provide support for R&D are likely to get better results if that support is stable, avoiding a pattern of feast or famine.19 Government support for R&D presumes sufficient national capacity to engage in effective research at the desired scale. That capacity, in turn, depends importantly on the supply of qualified scientists, engineers, and other technical workers. Although the system of higher education in the United States remains among the finest in the world, numerous concerns have been raised about this country's ability to ensure adequate supplies of highly skilled workers. For example, some observers have suggested that bottlenecks in the system limit the number of students receiving undergraduate degrees in science and engineering: Surveys of student intentions in the United States consistently show that the number of students who seek to major in science and engineering exceeds the number accommodated by a wide margin, and waitlists to enroll in technical courses have trended up relative to those in other fields, as has the time required to graduate with a science and engineering degree.20Moreover, although the relative wages of science and engineering graduates have increased significantly over the past few decades, the share of undergraduate degrees awarded in science and engineering has been roughly stable.21At the same time, critics of K-12 education in the United States have long argued that not enough is being done to encourage and support student interest in science and mathematics. Taken together, these trends suggest that more could be done to increase the number of U.S. students entering scientific and engineering professions. At least when viewed from the perspective of a single nation, immigration is another path for increasing the supply of highly skilled scientists and researchers. The technological leadership of the United States was and continues to be built in substantial part on the contributions of foreign-born scientists and engineers, both permanent immigrants and those staying in the country only for a time. And, contrary to the notion that highly trained and talented immigrants displace native-born workers in the labor market, scientists and other highly trained professionals who come to the United States tend to enhance the productivity and employment opportunities of those already here, reflecting gains from interaction and cooperation and from the development of critical masses of researchers in technical areas. More generally, technological progress and innovation around the world would be enhanced by lowering national barriers to international scientific cooperation and collaboration. ConclusionIn the abstract, economists have identified some persuasive justifications for government policies to promote R&D activities, especially those related to basic research. In practice, we know less than we would like about which policies work best. A reasonable strategy for now may be to continue to use a mix of policies to support R&D while taking pains to encourage diverse and even competing approaches by the scientists and engineers receiving support. We should also keep in mind that funding R&D activity is only part of what the government can do to foster innovation. As I noted, ensuring a sufficient supply of individuals with science and engineering skills is important for promoting innovation, and this need raises questions about education policy as well as immigration policy. Other key policy issues include the definition and enforcement of intellectual property rights and the setting of technical standards. Finally, as someone who spends a lot of time monitoring the economy, let me put in a plug for more work on finding better ways to measure innovation, R&D activity, and intangible capital. We will be more likely to promote innovative activity if we are able to measure it more effectively and document its role in economic growth. ReferencesArrow, Kenneth J. (1962). "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing,"Review of Economic Studies, vol. 29 (3), pp. 155-73. Battelle andR&D Magazine(2010). "2011 Global R&D Funding Forecast,"R&D Magazine, December, www.battelle.org/aboutus/rd/2011.pdf. Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel (2009). "Intangible Capital and U.S. Economic Growth,"The Review of Income and Wealth, vol. 55 (September), pp.661-85. Corrado, Carol, and Charles R. Hulten (2010). "How Do You Measure a 'Technological Revolution'?"American Economic Review, vol. 100 (May), pp. 99-104. David, Paul A., Bronwyn H. Hall, and Andrew A. Toole (2000). "Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute for Private R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence,"Research Policy, vol. 29 (4-5), pp. 497-529. Freeman, Richard, and John Van Reenen (2009). "What if Congress Doubled R&D Spending on the Physical Sciences?"Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 9, pp.1-38. Greenstein, Shane (2007). "Economic Experiments and Neutrality in Internet Access,"Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 8, pp. 59-109. Griliches, Zvi (1958). "Research Cost and Social Returns: Hybrid Corn and Related Innovations,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 66 (5), pp. 419-31. Griliches, Zvi (1992). "The Search for R&D Spillovers,"Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 94, supplement, pp. 29-47. Hall, Bronwyn H., Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen (2009). "Measuring the Returns to R&D," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15622. Cambridge, Mass.: NBER. Hall, Bronwyn, and John Van Reenen (2001). "How Effective are Fiscal Incentives for R&D? A Review of the Evidence,"Research Policy, vol. 29 (4-5), pp. 449-69. Huang, Kenneth G., and Fiona E. Murray (2010). "Entrepreneurial Experiments in Science Policy: Analyzing the Human Genome Project,"Research Policy, vol.39(5), pp. 567-82. Jaffe, Adam B. (1989). "Real Effects of Academic Research,"American Economic Review, vol. 79 (5), pp. 957-70. Jones, Charles I., and John C. Williams (1998). "Measuring the Social Return to R&D,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 113 (4), pp. 1119-35. Lakdawalla, Darius, Eric Sun, Anupam Jena, Carolina Reyes, Dana Golman, and Tomas Philipson (2010). "An Economic Evaluation of the War on Cancer,"Journal of Health Economics, vol. 29(3), pp. 333-46. Lane, Julia (2009). "Assessing the Impact of Science Funding,"Science, vol. 324 (June), pp. 1273-75. Lucas, Jr., Robert E. (1988). "On the Mechanics of Economic Development,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 22 (1), pp. 3-42. National Science Board (2010). "Science and Engineering Indicators: 2010." Arlington, Va.: National Science Foundation. National Science Foundation (2010). "National Patterns of R&D Resources: 2008." Arlington, Va.: NSF. Nelson, R. R. (1959). "The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 67 (3), pp. 297-306. Nelson, R. R. (1961). "Uncertainty, Learning, and the Economics of Parallel Research and Development Efforts,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 43, pp.351‑64. Noll, Roger G. (2003). "Federal R&D in the Antiterrorist Era,"Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. (3), pp. 61-89. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2010). "Main Science and Technology Indicators," OECD Science, Technology, and R&D Statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/data-00182-en­­. Romer, Paul M. (2000). "Should the Government Subsidize Supply or Demand in the Market for Scientists and Engineers?"Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 1, pp. 221-52. 1.Lucas (1988), p. 5.Return to text 2.See Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009) and Corrado and Hulten (2010).Return to text 3.For an early version of this argument see Arrow (1962).Return to text 4.See Griliches (1958).Return to text 5.See Lakdawalla et al. (2010).Return to text 6.In 2010, total U.S. R&D spending as a share of GDP was estimated to be 2.8 percent (Battelle andR&D Magazine, 2010). For earlier data, see National Science Foundation (2010), table 13.Return to text 7.The federal share of total U.S. R&D spending was 26 percent in 2008, while the private-sector share was 67 percent. The remaining funding comes from universities and colleges, private foundations, and other nonprofits. Three decades prior, the federal and private-sector shares were 50 percent and 46 percent respectively. See table 5 in National Science Foundation (2010).Return to text 8.See tables 6 through 8 in National Science Foundation (2010).Return to text 9.For example, see Jones and Williams (1998). Griliches (1992) reports estimates of the average social return that cluster in the range of 20 to 60 percent a year. See also Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen (2009). The estimates in the literature are typically for average social returns; the return to an additional dollar of R&D spending, which is the relevant variable for determining whether further spending is warranted, may be lower than the average return.Return to text 10.Among Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) nations, the United States is estimated to have spent the most on R&D in 2010, followed by Japan, Germany, South Korea, France, and the United Kingdom (Battelle andR&D Magazine, 2010). As a percentage of GDP, Israel ranked first among OECD nations in R&D spending, followed by Finland, Sweden, Japan, and South Korea (OECD, 2010).Return to text 11.China's gross R&D expenditures are estimated to have increased more than five-fold between 1997 and 2007 and, by 2010, are estimated to have been roughly on par with expenditures in Japan, the world's second-largest spender on R&D, although they were still about one-third the expenditures in the United States. See National Science Foundation (2010) and Battelle andR&D Magazine(2010).Return to text 12.See OECD (2010).Return to text 13.See Jaffe (1989).Return to text 14.Another argument for fostering domestic innovation is that it may have national security implications.Return to text 15.For example, see David, Hall, and Toole (2000) and Hall and van Reenen (2001).Return to text 16.See Lane (2009).Return to text 17.For early work in this area, see Nelson (1959, 1961).Return to text 18.See Greenstein (2007), Huang and Murray (2010), and Freeman and van Reenen (2009).Return to text 19.See Freeman and van Reenen (2009).Return to text 20.For a discussion of why these bottlenecks persist, see Romer (2000) and Noll (2003).Return to text 21.See National Science Board (2010), tables 2-6 and 2-12.Return to text
Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Bank of Finland 200th Anniversary Conference, Helsinki, Finland Thank you. I usually begin my remarks by stating that my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). However, in this case, I would like to extend best wishes to the Bank of Finland on its 200th anniversary not only from myself but also on behalf of Chairman Bernanke, of the rest of the FOMC, and of the entire Federal Reserve System. All of us have enjoyed many years of fruitful contact with the Bank of Finland, and we hope to continue to do so for many more to come. Okay, disclaimer back on.1 The subject of this session, "Finance and Growth," is aptly chosen, as the severity of the recent global financial crisis has prompted a reappraisal of conventional thinking regarding the role of the financial system in our economies. Because one of the distinguishing features of the crisis was its global reach, this reappraisal should address, among other issues, the benefits of global capital mobility and the extent to which countries should open their financial markets to the rest of the world. Does increased financial openness result in stronger economic growth and improved economic performance more generally? Indeed, even well before the current crisis, a number of economists had begun to question the near-consensus view in favor of unrestricted financial openness. And, more recently, a number of publications from economists at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) have suggested circumstances when capital controls might be appropriate.2As a practical matter, during the ongoing recovery from the crisis, some emerging market economies have attracted considerable capital inflows, raising concerns about potential overheating and leading authorities in a number of countries to impose capital controls in an attempt to manage these flows. As I will discuss today, these issues are complicated, but I continue to believe that open capital markets offer significant benefits in terms of greater efficiency and improved standards of living, and that they represent a long-run goal to which policymakers should remain committed. That said, recent experience suggests that reaping the full benefits of capital mobility requires prerequisites, including a sound legal and institutional infrastructure, solid prudential supervision and regulation, and appropriate incentives for risk management by domestic financial institutions. Suffice it to say that the achievement of these objectives takes time. In the interim, countries may need to employ a variety of tools to effectively manage capital flows. Such tools may include macroeconomic policies, exchange rate flexibility, liberalization of capital outflows, and, perhaps in some particularly challenging instances, constraints on capital inflows. Nevertheless, while successfully managing sizable capital inflows may require a range of policy responses, the need to make these responses is not cause to abandon the pursuit of financial openness as an objective over the longer term. The Case for Financial OpennessTo start off, the arguments in favor of countries being open to financial flows are compelling. First, countries that open their markets to capital flows can be expected to reap stronger economic growth. Indeed, the economic history of a number of small, open advanced economies, such as Australia, Canada, and New Zealand, points to a notable role for foreign capital, especially from the United Kingdom and the United States.3And the United States was itself aided by foreign capital at an early stage of its development.4That the advanced economies have achieved high standards of living, while at the same time embracing financial openness, suggests that such openness is likely to bring long-term benefits for other countries as well. Free capital markets support economic growth by allowing resources to move across borders to their most productive uses. These flows should expand the opportunities for savers and, in the savings-rich countries, likely raise the return on domestic savings. Capital inflows can lower the cost of capital to firms in capital-scarce countries, raising investment. The result is more investment, more productive investment, and faster economic growth than would have occurred in the absence of such capital flows. And these flows do not merely represent the wherewithal to finance investments--they potentially are accompanied by positive spillovers from technological transfer and the adoption of managerial and organizational best practices. Second, opening up domestic financial markets to the rest of the world subjects domestic financial institutions to foreign competition. Increased competition should make domestic financial institutions more efficient as well as more transparent and better governed. Financial openness may also provide impetus for institutional reform within countries. Such reforms might include a better legal system to enforce contracts and other property rights, better accounting and disclosure standards as domestic firms compete for foreign funds, and improved prudential supervision as domestic regulators observe the risk-management practices of foreign financial institutions. In addition, some observers argue that greater financial openness may even yield better macroeconomic policy, as countries are subject to the discipline of outside capital markets. Third, being more open to the rest of the world--both to financial flows and to trade--may help countries better absorb economic shocks by allowing temporary current account surpluses and deficits. For example, a spending boom that leads the economy to overheat could induce a rise in the country's currency and a decline in exports, restoring more normal conditions and avoiding an undesirable rise in inflation. Any impediments to the free operation of international capital markets, including their role in setting exchange rates, can hamper this rebalancing of demand across countries. Finally, openness also improves welfare by allowing countries greater scope to share risk. Although financial openness may or may not reduce the volatility of an economy's output, risk-averse consumers should benefit by diversifying their portfolios across countries and thus insuring themselves against the shocks hitting their own particular economy. During domestic recessions, lower income from domestic assets may be offset by higher income from abroad, thereby reducing consumption volatility, as long as the shocks hitting the domestic and foreign economies are not too similar. Some Practical ChallengesDespite the strong case for financial openness, countries have faced some practical challenges in the pursuit of this objective. In particular, capital flows can be volatile, and many countries have struggled with the adverse effects of this volatility on the domestic economy. Access to foreign capital may also exacerbate domestic financial distortions, such as maturity mismatches or agency problems, by channeling funds into the domestic system that would not have otherwise been available. A related matter is that the domestic financial system may simply not have the capacity to effectively intermediate large volumes of inflows. For example, if financial supervision is not sufficient to ward off such problems, short-term lending from abroad (so-called hot money) can result in maturity mismatches, which can bankrupt domestic institutions in the event of sharp and sudden outflows. Unhedged borrowing in foreign currencies creates an additional mismatch, where a sharp currency depreciation can dramatically boost debt burdens, push borrowers into insolvency, and, in a vicious circle, induce further curtailment of finance from abroad. Heavily managed exchange rate regimes may also provide incentives for such mismatches to arise. In addition, increased financial openness may increase countries' exposure to the risk of contagion and spillovers from financial shocks elsewhere in the global economy. Many of these vulnerabilities have been manifest in the emerging market crises of the past several decades. For example, in the lead-up to the 1997-98 Asian crisis, domestic financial intermediation failed to prudently allocate capital, and these deficiencies were amplified by large amounts of external borrowing in foreign currencies, encouraged by heavily managed exchange rate regimes. As such deficiencies came to light, exchange rates collapsed, resulting in large balance sheet losses. Foreign investors lost confidence in much of the region, precipitating capital flight, the spread of the crisis to additional countries, and a sharp downturn in activity in these economies. Consistent with the broad set of practical challenges posed by capital flows that I have just highlighted, the empirical literature on the connection between openness and growth contains a wide range of findings. For example, work using firm-level data finds notable positive effects, while other papers that draw on cross-country data find little or no effect.5In addition, there is limited evidence of any decline in consumption volatility due to increased financial openness. More generally, capital has been observed to flow from capital-poor emerging market economies to capital-rich advanced economies over the past decade, a finding that appears to undermine one of the central rationales for free capital mobility. These empirical results notwithstanding, it may be that benefits exist but are difficult to identify in empirical research due to methodological difficulties in measuring financial openness, issues of endogeneity, and the coincidence of greater openness with other types of reform. But the failure of the empirical literature to identify clear gains from financial openness likely also reflects that countries have struggled to effectively manage sizable flows of capital. Notably, a separate literature that considers the link between domestic financial development and growth finds somewhat stronger evidence for such a relationship.6This research finds that countries with stronger domestic financial systems grow faster, partly because firms are better able to access financing from sources besides their own retained earnings.7This finding suggests that the benefits of greater financial openness among countries may be larger than has been identified to date. Managing Capital InflowsDespite the practical challenges associated with managing capital inflows, we should be careful not to conclude that limiting capital mobility is a first-best policy outcome. The recent financial crisis certainly highlighted the fact that financial markets are prone to speculative excesses and behavior that may exacerbate systemic risk. But, as central bankers and supervisors, we must remain humble about our ability to preempt market forces in ways that predictably enhance welfare. An alternative to limiting capital mobility is for countries to rely on more-standard policy tools as an initial line of defense against the challenges posed by capital flows. For example, the effects of undesired capital movements prompted by variations in the business cycle can be addressed directly with the mix of fiscal and monetary policies. Countries facing overheating, with strong capital flows being attracted by rising interest rates, may consider a tighter fiscal policy to reduce both the extent of overheating and the related strength of capital inflows. And some countries facing strong capital inflows may help alleviate pressures by lifting controls on capital outflows. Exchange rate flexibility can also play a crucial role in helping modulate the effects of capital flows, as exchange rates appreciate in response to an inflow (or depreciate in the face of outflows), thereby contributing to external balance and damping further such flows by altering asset valuations. Increased exchange rate flexibility should also discourage excessive currency mismatches, as market participants better gauge the risks of future currency movements. Notably, in some cases, volatile capital flows have been a symptom of deeper distortions within the recipient country, and addressing these distortions has required a shift in the underlying mix of the country's policies. Past experience also highlights that attempts to limit financial openness are themselves imperfect. Clearly, capital controls can influence capital flows if applied with enough force. But how effective are they and at what cost? The Chilean controls on capital inflows during the 1990s are often cited as an example of an approach that other countries might use. But studies of these controls, including by staff members at the Central Bank of Chile itself, suggest that the success of the Chilean controls was mixed. The controls did shift the composition of flows away from assets with shorter maturities, but the effects on the volume of flows and the exchange rate--two key goals of the controls--are less clear.8Some evidence also suggests that the controls harmed small firms in Chile by reducing the availability of financing and raising interest rates.9 In addition, the incentives to circumvent capital controls are powerful when the returns that these flows might reap are large. In the extreme, controls can lead to rent-seeking behavior or, worse, result in corruption among public officials.10Controls can also result in unintended distortions in prices in other financial markets or in goods prices as investors use those markets to try to move funds into or out of a country. Moreover, global capital flows have increased dramatically in recent decades. Although these substantial flows are the very reason that many countries wish to impose capital controls, the size of the flows--as well as the sophistication of investors who might seek to circumvent controls--means that countries that avoid opening up may face higher and higher costs in trying to control them. Finally, capital controls have global implications, as restricting financial openness can impede current account adjustment and thus hinder the world economy from reaching a more balanced equilibrium. Indeed, as I have noted in an earlier speech, the current international monetary system is a mixture of economies, some with open capital accounts and flexible exchange rates, and others with managed exchange rates, more-restricted capital mobility, and more-limited monetary policy independence. Many of these latter economies also have current account surpluses, in part because authorities have been able to resist currency appreciation, and thus inhibit external adjustment, for prolonged periods. This feature of the international system inhibits the process of global rebalancing and could restrain the current recovery. Thus, at most, capital controls should be seen as just one of many tools that can be used to manage capital inflows, and one to be used only in particularly challenging situations. The IMF work that I mentioned earlier concludes that capital controls may be appropriate in conjunction with other policy tools as long as countries meet certain conditions. Foreign currency reserves should already be adequate, and exchange rates should not be undervalued. Controls should not be used as a substitute for necessary macroeconomic policy adjustments; for example, if the economy is overheating, controls should only be used along with a suitable monetary-fiscal policy mix. Moreover, controls should be lifted once these prerequisites no longer apply.11 In addition, the IMF's work encourages countries to turn to macroprudential tools before making use of capital controls. Although admittedly no bright line differentiates these two types of policies, macroprudential tools generally are designed to enhance the resilience of the financial system, a broader and more enduring objective than directly managing capital flows. Operationally, macroprudential tools typically do not discriminate between residents and nonresidents, nor differentiate by currency. Examples of such prudential policies would include guidance on loan-to-value ratios, capital adequacy standards, and limits on net open foreign exchange positions.12 Reaping the Full Benefits of Financial OpennessSo where do we go from here? What needs to be done for countries to reap the full benefits of financial openness? In my view, all countries must continue working toward improving the resilience of their domestic financial systems to better take advantage of the potential gains from free international financial flows. Policymakers should strive to mitigate financial distortions by improving the regulation and supervision of financial markets and institutions, encouraging market transparency, and setting rules to enhance corporate governance. Effective microprudential policy frameworks should promote robust domestic financial institutions that are able to suitably intermediate both domestic and foreign capital. Prudential regulation should also be alert for risks from abroad, such as a buildup of liquidity risk, foreign currency exposure, or, more generally, inadequate intermediation of foreign credit. Indeed, some empirical studies find greater benefits from financial openness when domestic financial markets are more developed and where institutions and markets are well supervised.13 Granted, setting up an adequate financial policy framework takes significant time and resources. Moreover, putting such a framework in place before liberalizing capital flows is not a guarantee that countries will capture the full gains to financial openness without any attendant stresses. Indeed, the recent crisis highlights that these efforts are ongoing for all countries, including the United States. However, though effective regulation and supervision are not a panacea, they doubtless increase the chance that economies will benefit from financial innovation and openness. The United States has taken an important step toward strengthening the institutional underpinnings of its financial system with the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The act will improve the monitoring of systemic risks, strengthen the supervision of systemically important institutions, support an effective resolution mechanism for large institutions, bring greater transparency to derivatives markets, and improve the effectiveness of consumer financial protection regulation. The act gives the Federal Reserve some new responsibilities. Among them are participating in the new Financial Stability Oversight Council and developing enhanced prudential standards for systemic nonbank financial firms and bank holding companies. We are working diligently to meet our new responsibilities and to enhance our monitoring of emerging risks to the financial system. Beyond strengthening our domestic prudential framework, we need to make further progress in international cooperation on improving financial regulation and the international monetary system. Central banks and regulatory agencies are working to design and implement a stronger set of prudential requirements for large, internationally active banking firms. Last year's agreement on the framework for Basel III was an important step, and the Federal Reserve is committed to its timely adoption. Its requirements for more and higher-quality capital and more-stringent liquidity buffers should increase the stability of the financial system and reduce the probability of future crises. In addition, we need to continue to make progress in setting rigorous international standards, clarifying the responsibilities of national regulators of internationally diverse financial institutions, and preventing regulatory arbitrage. We also need to continue to work toward an international monetary system characterized by more-flexible exchange rates and independent monetary policies. The case for increased financial openness is complicated, and one where many of us have seen our views evolve. As I have already noted, the challenges to opening domestic financial systems to international capital flows are real, and getting the appropriate policy frameworks in place to permit the successful intermediation of these flows, while crucially important, is likely to take time. But while we should be pragmatic about the tools we use to manage capital flows, we should also keep in mind the long-term benefits that financial openness promises. References Arcand, Jean-Louis, Enrico Berkes, and Ugo Panizza (2011). "Too Much Finance?" unpublished paper, available atNo Original Content(blog), March. Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen, and Douglas A. Irwin (1999). "Is Globalization Today Really Different from Globalization a Hundred Years Ago?" in Robert Z. Lawrence and Susan M. Collins, eds.,Brookings Trade Forum:1999. Washington: Brookings Institution Press, pp. 1-72. Chari, Anusha, and Peter Blair Henry (2004). "Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,"Journal of Finance,vol. 59 (June), pp. 1295-1324. Cowan, Kevin, and José De Gregorio (2007). "International Borrowing, Capital Controls, and the Exchange Rate: Lessons from Chile," in Sebastián Edwards, ed.,Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and Consequences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 241-96. Dow, Alexander (1984). "Finance and Foreign Control in Canadian Base Metal Mining, 1948–55,"Economic History Review, vol. 37 (February), pp. 54-67. Edison, Hali J., Ross Levine, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk, (2002). "International Financial Integration and Economic Growth,"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol.21 (6), pp. 749-76. Edwards, Sebastián (1999). "How Effective Are Capital Controls?"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 13 (Fall), pp. 65-84. Forbes, Kristin J. (2007). "The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free Lunch," in Sebastián Edwards, ed.,Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and Consequences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 171-99. International Monetary Fund (2011).Recent Experiences in Managing Capital Inflows--Cross-Cutting Themes and Possible Policy Framework (195 KB PDF). Washington: IMF, February. Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei (2006). "Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal," IMF Working Paper. Washington: IMF, August. Layton, Allan P., and Anthony Makin (1993). "Estimates of the Macroeconomic Impact of Foreign Investment in Australia,"International Economic Journal, vol. 7 (Winter), pp. 35-42. Levine, Ross (2005). "Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 866-923. Makin, Anthony, Wei Zhang, and Grant Scobie (2008). "The Contribution of Foreign Borrowing to the New Zealand Economy," New Zealand Treasury Working Paper. Wellington, New Zealand: New Zealand Treasury, July. Obstfeld, Maurice (2008). "International Finance and Growth in Developing Countries: What Have We Learned?"Commission on Growth and Development Working Paper Series. Washington: Commission on Growth and Development, October. Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Dennis B.S. Reinhardt (2010). "Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls (958 KB PDF)," International Monetary Fund Staff Position Note. Washington: IMF, February. 1.I am indebted to Board staff members Brian Doyle, Steven Kamin, and Nathan Sheets for their assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2.See Ostry (2010) and International Monetary Fund (2011).Return to text 3.See Layton and Makin (1993), Makin, Zhang, and Scobie (2008), and Dow (1984) for some evidence on the importance of foreign investment in Australia, Canada, and New Zealand.Return to text 4.Bordo, Eichengreen, and Irwin (1999) note that in the 19th century most foreign investment in the United States and in other countries was directed to certain sectors of the economy, including railways, resource extraction, public utilities, and government.Return to text 5.See Obstfeld (2008) and Kose and others (2006) for a survey of the empirical literature. One example of a paper using cross-country data that finds little evidence of a connection is Edison and others (2002); an example of a paper using firm-level data that finds a more substantial effect is Chari and Henry (2004).Return to text 6.See Levine (2005) for a survey of research on the link between financial development and growth.Return to text 7.Recently some researchers have argued that the financial sector can become so large relative to the size of the economy that it begins to harm growth. See Arcand, Berkes, and Panizza (2011) for an example.Return to text 8.See Edwards (1999) and Cowan and De Gregorio (2007) for a further discussion.Return to text 9.See Forbes (2007).Return to text 10.See Edwards (1999) for a survey of problems associated with controls on capital outflows.Return to text 11.See Ostry (2010) and International Monetary Fund (2011).Return to text 12.See Ostry (2010) and International Monetary Fund (2011).Return to text 13.See Obstfeld (2008) for a discussion of this literature. Edwards (1999) surveys some of the literature on sequencing reforms.Return to text
David J. Stockton, director of the Division of Research and Statistics, will retire on September 30 after 30 years of service with the Federal Reserve Board, including 11 years as the director of the division. In addition to overseeing the division's 325 employees, he has been responsible for briefing the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) on the outlook for the U.S. economy. In that capacity, he has served under two Federal Reserve Chairmen: Ben S. Bernanke and Alan Greenspan. "Dave Stockton is one of the finest economists I have known. My colleagues on the Committee and I have enjoyed the benefits of his penetrating and insightful analysis and impeccable judgment--not to mention his superb sense of humor," Chairman Bernanke said. The members of the Division of Research and Statistics engage in economic analysis, forecasting, and research related to the domestic economy and financial markets. The division also produces statistical releases, including the Industrial Production and Flow of Funds reports. In addition, it provides research and analysis in support of the Federal Reserve's financial stability responsibilities and supervisory and regulatory activities. Prior to joining the Board staff in 1981, Stockton was an instructor and lecturer at Yale University in New Haven, Conn., and at Trinity College in Hartford, Conn. He began his career at the Board as an economist in the Wages, Prices, and Productivity Section with responsibility for the forecasting and analysis of inflation. Later, he was a member of the Economic Activity Section, coordinating the staff economic projections for the FOMC. Stockton was appointed an officer of the Board in 1987, as assistant director and chief of the Economic Activity Section. He held various positions within the division before being appointed its director in 2000. He has published numerous papers in the areas of macroeconomics and labor markets. In addition, he makes frequent presentations to various professional organizations, foreign central banks, and international organizations. Stockton has also been a visiting researcher at Georgetown University. Stockton received his B.A. and M.A. in 1976 from the University of Connecticut and his M.Phil. in 1978 and Ph.D. in 1983, both from Yale University.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts I would like to thank Eric Rosengren, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, for inviting me to speak to you today. This is the third in a series of conferences on the Future of Life-Cycle Saving and Investing cosponsored by Boston University School of Management and the Boston Reserve Bank. The audience here includes leading academics in household finance and consumer financial education, industry practitioners, and policymakers. The work you do every day is critically important to the financial well-being of American consumers and to the overall functioning of our economy. Today's topic is a daunting one: how to improve consumers' financial education. I hope to set the stage for your discussions by sharing my perspective on recent economic factors and trends in the financial services industry and the impact they have had on consumers, particularly those with low and moderate incomes. I will also give you my thoughts on the role of financial education in facilitating effective decisionmaking and suggest areas where additional research could help shape policies and practices to benefit individual consumers and lead to safe and sustainable economic growth. The Case for Financial EducationI certainly don't need to impress upon this audience the importance of financial education. Today's consumers are making decisions among increasingly complex financial products and in the context of uncertain economic times. A working knowledge of basic financial terms and concepts can lead to better economic decisions and outcomes for individuals over the course of a lifetime. In addition, there is a clear relationship betweenindividuals'financial decisions and the health of our entire economy. The financial crisis and the slow recovery from it has obviously had a dramatic impact on the financial decisions made by American families. Many now have fewer financial resources and limited options. The pace and timing of their saving and investing life cycle has also been disrupted. For example, high unemployment levels among recent high school and college graduates, especially among young African Americans, means that this demographic likely won't be able to start saving and investing as early in life as previous generations. In addition, starting salaries for recent college graduates have also declined, which means that young Americans whoareemployed will have fewer resources for saving and investing than their predecessors. Young people are living with their parents longer, which helps conserve their limited resources but likely places a strain on their parents' budgets. Also troubling is research showing that many consumers who should besavingfor retirement instead have been forced to take hardship withdrawals from their 401(k) plans. According to an analysis by Vanguard, hardship withdrawals increased by 49 percent between 2005 and 2010. Other types of withdrawals increased by 56 percent. The increasing use of retirement savings for other purposes is particularly troubling given that the responsibility for saving for retirement has shifted away from employers to individual employees. Having a secure retirement is a high priority and a significant long-term goal for many Americans, so it is especially important that they have an understanding of what level of resources they will need in retirement and the investment options available to them. Individuals who are approaching retirement age, in particular, are being forced to make changes to their plans for retirement. Social Security Administration data indicate that in 2009 and 2010, the proportions of men and women claiming social security benefits at age 62 began to rise again after several years of decline. Workers have either chosen to leave the work force early in the last few years or, more likely, have applied for social security benefits as early as possible because of the weak job market.1Opting to receive a smaller social security annuity earlier in life is just one of many hard decisions Americans have had to make in order to balance their short-term and long-term financial needs. The recession has clearly disrupted the future expectations and financial plans of millions of Americans, but even in the best of circumstances, effectively managing one's longevity risk requires a level of financial knowledge well beyond that required of any previous generation. The pending retirement of Baby Boomers means that millions of older households will need to assess pension distributions and make decisions about payout options for their defined benefit plans. Those with defined contribution plans will need to make decisions about the purchase of annuities or rates of withdrawal from these plans. Younger workers, a majority of whom will not have pensions, will need to make complicated decisions about their target amounts of retirement savings, portfolio allocation, and asset management using 401(k) plans, individual retirement accounts, and other, non-tax advantaged, accounts. Financial products have also become more complex, adding a significant degree of difficulty to the important task of managing one's own retirement savings. Consumers need information and education to understand their saving and investment options, to make the best choices for themselves and their families, and to help them implement and monitor these choices over time. In short, your efforts to identify, address, and meet the financial education needs of consumers in all stages of the life-cycle have never been more urgent. Changing Consumer Behaviors and Information NeedsThe financial crisis has changed all of our assumptions about the future. Naturally, consumer behavior is changing as a result, though it is unclear whether these changes represent temporary or more permanent shifts in thinking and planning for the future. For example, the collapse of housing prices and resulting worker immobility has changed consumers' appetite for homeownership. In Fannie Mae's 2010 Own-Rent Analysis, the percentage of respondents who said they were more likely to rent their next home than buy climbed from 30 percent in January to 33 percent in December of the same year. Similarly, the recent increase in gasoline prices has affected consumer choices in housing and other purchases, big and small. Family incomes have not kept pace with rising costs and many families, particularly those with low-to-moderate incomes, are actually facing the decision between buying gas to drive long distances to work and paying their mortgage. During the housing boom, when gas prices were much lower, potential homebuyers moved steadily farther away from employment centers in search of more affordable homes. This was referred to as the "drive till you qualify" method of home buying. Foreclosures remain high in these areas where the cost of driving to work has become so great. But, even independent of recent economic trends and the increasing complexity of financial products, consumers' need for financial information and education is changing. Evolving Education NeedsThere is growing evidence that the changing financial services landscape has disconnected young and other vulnerable consumers from mainstream financial services, making them more prone to using alternative financial products. For example, some consumers prefer using reloadable stored-value cards to opening a deposit account at a bank or credit union.2This choice could have significant implications for a consumer's financial well-being, both good and bad. These cards, with their Visa and Mastercard branding, make it easy for consumers to make purchases online, but do not carry the same robust federal protections as debit or credit cards and their use does not establish a relationship with a financial institution that can serve as the entry point for other financial services such as loans. As more and more new products are introduced to the financial marketplace, it becomes more important for consumers to be able to evaluate and compare products' benefits and potential costs. Many consumers seek the advice of friends and family when making financial decisions. Online social networks are increasingly playing this role as a source of financial information, particularly among younger consumers.3At the same time, it is crucial that they also have access to accurate, comprehensive, and unbiased financial information. Starting Financial Education EarlySuccessfully navigating the volumes of financial information out there, whether from advertisements, advisors, or social media, requires critical skills based on a foundation of numeracy, language arts, and decisionmaking that is first developed in school. It is important that these skills be included in curriculum and measured in student achievement tests. If our schools can't spare the resources to provide financial literacy as a subject unto itself, I believe that the concepts required for sound financial decisionmaking should, at a minimum, be incorporated into existing subject areas. Math problems can involve consumer financial calculations. Social studies classes can help students understand the real world financial issues and decisions they will face as young adults. I also think that the work many of you are doing to make financial lessons more appealing to school aged children is extremely important given the competition for attention from media and web-based entertainment and games. More broadly, financial education is a life-long endeavor. Sound financial decisions are made when consumers have access to information that is clear and culturally relevant and that is provided at critical "teachable" moments, such as when a consumer is financing education, buying a car, starting a family, purchasing a house, or planning for retirement. These are just a few examples. As academicians, practitioners, and policymakers, we need to identify as many of these moments as possible and determine how best to support positive financial outcomes for consumers at those moments. Reaching ConsumersThere's a saying among communications professionals that "the mediumisthe message." In that vein, I believe that how we deliver financial education has a significant impact on how effective the lessons will be. New technologies present exciting new opportunities to deliver timely financial lessons. Mobile payments and financial services are growing at a rapid pace.4Financial management "apps" for smart phones abound, making it possible for consumers to get just-in-time information. The developments in mobile financial services have only begun to exploit the potential of this technology to provide tools for consumer financial decisionmaking. I will be particularly interested to see how technology can be used to better serve lower-income populations who may be more focused on stretching their paychecks to meet monthly expenses than on investing. If you can have an app to track what you eat, certainly you could use one to track what you spend. Evaluating the Effectiveness of Financial EducationUntil now, we have had a limited understanding of which methods work best with respect to financial education. For years, one of the correlates of higher scores on the JumpStart Financial Literacy test was participation in the Stock Market Game, an enrichment program offered in many schools. The FINRA Education Foundation sponsored a study to determine just what it was about the game that made a difference. Not surprisingly, the answer is that the game seems to develop math skills.5 Entertainment-based financial education also seems to be effective in capturing attention and instilling knowledge among youths. Young people who played one of the Doorway to Dreams (D2D) financial education games reported increases in financial knowledge, aspirations, and self-confidence.6 Among young adults, financial education was found to be most relevant when it was tied to financial outcomes.7For example, in a Federal Reserve study conducted with Army Emergency Relief, young enlisted service members who participated in a financial education program seemed to make better car-buying decisions. These soldiers had higher down payment-to-loan ratios and shorter-term loans than a comparison group who did not take the financial education program.8 These are notable examples, but the fact is that we have very limited data on how effective financial education is in improving financial well-being. The Financial Literacy and Education Commission, of which the Federal Reserve is a member, has only recently developed a core set of financial competencies, and has yet to establish the knowledge, skills, and behaviors that will meet these competencies. In order to develop an effective financial course of study, we need to find the answers to some important research questions. I believe the answers to these questions will be quite important: Undoubtedly some of the research shared at this conference will shed light on these questions and also raise others. I look forward to learning from your work and to implementing and supporting programs that have demonstrated results. ConclusionDecisions about saving and investing have a profound effect on the financial well-being of individual consumers. Collectively, those same decisions shape our national economic outcomes. Changes in the financial products offered to consumers and in the economic circumstances of those consumers have added even more complexity to the financial decisions faced by consumers. Comprehensive, effective regulation of consumer products is the first step in ensuring positive outcomes for consumers. But consumers must also be equipped with the necessary quantitative and decisionmaking tools, and supported with the right information at the right time in order to make the best possible choices. While much attention and many resources have been devoted to financial education, we still have surprisingly little information about the effectiveness of financial literacy efforts. I hope that the dialog facilitated by this conference and future research will focus on understanding the best who, what, when, where, and why of financial education that will help American consumers make better decisions and achieve better financial futures. The outcomes of this conference will help us develop the tools to do that. I commend you for your efforts and wish each of you success here and in the future. 1. In 2004, 50 percent of men and 54 percent of women were new retirement beneficiaries at age 62. These percentages dropped to 42 percent for men and 48 percent for women (i.e., both men and women were staying in the labor force longer) through 2008; in 2009 and 2010, these proportions rose again, to 43.6 percent and 49.0 percent respectively. Social Security Administration Annual Statistical Supplement, 2007 and 2010, Table 6.B1.Return to text 2. Corey Stone and Joshua Sledge (2010),"Financial First Encounters: An Examination of the Fractured Financial Landscape Facing Youth Today." (320 KB PDF). Center for Financial Services Innovation.Return to text 3. Wendy Way, Nancy Wong, and Constance Steinkuehler (2010), "Social Network Sites and Internet Forums: An Investigation of Interactions around Personal Finance in the Online Social World". University of Wisconsin-Madison.Return to text 4. Mobile payments and financial services have grown nearly five-fold from 2007 to 2010, and that growth is projected to continue at about 20 percent per year over the next four years. Javelin Strategy and Research (2010) ,"2010 Mobile Banking and Smartphone Forecast."Return to text 5. Learning Point Associates (2009),"The Stock Market Game Study: Brief Report." (164 KB PDF).Return to text 6. Financial entertainment games include Celebrity Calamity, Bite Club, Groove Nation, and Farm Blitz. Information on preliminary evaluations is available athttp://www.d2dfund.org/financial_entertainment_preliminary_results.Return to text 7. Joshua Sledge, Jennifer Tescher, and Sarah Gordon (2010),"From Financial Education to Financial Capability: Opportunities for Innovation" (637 KB PDF). Center for Financial Services Innovation.Return to text 8. Catherine Bell and Jeanne M. Hogarth (2010), "Better Deals on Wheels: The Effects of Financial Education on Car Buying," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,Community Dividend,April. The Center for Financial Services Innovation also promotes relevance as one of the key features of innovative financial education programs.Return to text