Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation Large, systemically significant bank holding companies and nonbank financial companies would be required to submit annual resolution plans and quarterly credit exposure reports under a rule proposed by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The agencies are requesting comment by June 10, 2011, on the proposal, which would implement requirements of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The requirements apply to bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for supervision by the Board. The annual resolution plan would be required to describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution in bankruptcy during times of financial distress. A company would also have to describe how resolution planning and oversight of the resolution planning process fits into the company's overall governance structure. In addition, it would be required to include a detailed listing and description of all significant interconnections and interdependencies among major business lines and operations of the company that, if disrupted, would materially affect the funding or operations of the company or its major operations. The quarterly credit exposure report would be required to describe the nature and extent of the company's credit exposure to other large financial companies, as well as the nature and extent of credit exposure by other large financial companies to the company. The credit exposure report would be required to include information related to the aggregate credit exposure associated with a range of transactions. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF (110 KB) Comments:Submit|View
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Housing Finance AgencyOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Five federal agencies are seeking comment on a proposed rule to establish margin and capital requirements for swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers, and major security-based swap participants as required by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The rule is proposed by the Federal Reserve Board, the Farm Credit Administration, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The proposed rule would require swap entities regulated by the five agencies to collect minimum amounts of initial margin and variation margin from counterparties to non-cleared swaps and non-cleared, security-based swaps. The amount of margin that would be required under the proposed rule would vary based on the relative risk of the counterparty and of the swap or security-based swap. A swap entity would not be required to collect margin from a commercial end user as long as its margin exposure is below an appropriate credit exposure limit established by the swap entity. A swap entity would also not be required to collect margin from low-risk financial end users as long as its margin exposure does not exceed a specific threshold. The proposed margin requirements would apply to new, non-cleared swaps or security-based swaps entered into after the proposed rule's effective date. The proposal also seeks comment on several alternative approaches to establishing margin requirements. Provisions in the Dodd-Frank Act also require the agencies to establish capital requirements for regulated swap entities. The proposed rule would implement these provisions by requiring swap entities to comply with the existing capital standards that apply to those entities as part of their prudential regulation, as those capital standards already address non-cleared swaps and non-cleared, security-based swaps. Staff of the agencies consulted with staff of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission in developing the proposed rule. The agencies request comments on the proposed rule by June 24, 2011. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Before the Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government Sponsored Enterprises, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member Waters, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the implementation of the risk retention requirements of section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (the DoddâFrank Act). This provision seeks to promote sustainable availability of credit by requiring that securitizers generally retain some of the credit risk of the assets they securitize (sometimes referred to as "skin in the game"). Retaining credit risk creates incentives for securitizers to better monitor the credit quality of assets they securitize and ultimately discourages unsafe and unsound underwriting practices by originators. In my testimony, I will discuss problems associated with the securitization process that became prominent during the crisis and how the risk retention requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act may help both to alleviate these problems and to provide positive incentives to market participants. I will also describe elements of the rules proposed by the Federal Reserve and other agencies and discuss how these rules can achieve the goals of risk retention without causing undue market disruption or negative effects on the availability of credit to consumers and businesses. As explained in the Board's October 2010 report to the Congress on the Dodd-Frank Act's risk retention requirements, securitization provides economic benefits that can lower the cost of credit to households and businesses.1Securitization can reduce the costs of lending because it creates investment products with different maturity and credit risk profiles from a single pool of assets that can appeal to a broad range of investors. In addition, securitization allows for more efficient management of maturity mismatches. Investors with a long-term investment horizon and stable funding sources can more efficiently hold longer-duration credit assets because they avoid the asset-liability duration mismatch that often arises with depository institutions (for example, when residential mortgage loans are funded with short-term bank deposits). The ability to match asset and liability duration fosters financial stability. Securitization can also promote financial stability by allowing depository institutions and other lenders a means to reduce concentrations in credit risk to certain types of loans and borrowers on their balance sheets. However, despite the benefits to the economy, the securitization process is vulnerable to significant informational and incentive problems.2Incentives between lenders and investors become misaligned when lenders originate riskier loans in ways that are not readily apparent to investors and quickly sell loans without retaining meaningful exposure to their credit risk. These problems, if unchecked, can lead to inappropriate pricing of risk by market participants and imprudent relaxing of lending standards, which in turn can have severe repercussions and even lead to disruptions in market function. As demonstrated by the recent crisis, the resulting effects can cause serious harm to investors, consumers, financial institutions, and the financial system. The risk retention requirements of section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act, in conjunction with other parts of the statute, are intended to help address these problems in the securitization markets. Retaining an economic interest in the credit risk of securitized assets should encourage securitizers to more closely screen and control the credit risk of these assets before securitizing them, and, therefore, should more closely align the interests of securitizers with the interests of investors. Further, this incentive for securitizers to more closely monitor the assets they securitize should act as a check on broad tendencies by lenders to loosen underwriting standards on loans they sell. Importantly, section 941's risk retention requirement applies to all securitizers (regardless of regulatory status) and most types of securitization transactions. Establishing the risk retention requirement on a broad basis builds upon the various incentive-alignment mechanisms that have long been a part of the market practice for most types of securitization transactions. In the months since the Dodd-Frank Act became law, the Board has worked closely with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (collectively, the agencies)3to develop proposed rules to implement the risk retention requirements in accordance with the purpose of section 941. We have endeavored to take into account the diversity of assets that are securitized, the variety of structures and practices present in the securitization markets, and the mechanisms for risk retention that have been used effectively in the market, as well as the important goal of fostering the availability of credit to creditworthy borrowers.4 The Board welcomes public comment on these proposed rules. This is an important and complex area that directly affects the manner in which liquidity is found to support the availability of credit to consumers, homeowners, small business, and others. The Board looks forward to the information and ideas that will be provided during the public comment period and will consider those comments carefully. Proposed Risk Retention RequirementIn accordance with the Dodd-Frank Act, the proposed rules generally would require that a sponsor of a securitization transaction retain credit risk in the securitized assets either by retaining 5 percent of the par value of asset-backed securities (ABS) issued in the securitization transaction or 5 percent of the assets securitized in the transaction. The proposal would apply the risk retention requirement to sponsors of securitization transactions, who typically have the most active and direct role in arranging a securitization transaction and selecting the assets to be securitized. The statute gives the agencies the authority to determine the permissible forms of required risk retention, and its legislative history indicates that the Congress intended that the agencies "recognize the differences in securitization practices for various asset classes."5In selecting the permissible options for sponsors to retain risk under the proposed rules, the agencies considered the best practices in risk retention for various classes of assets and their performance during the financial crisis. The options under the proposed rules include: As permitted by section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act, the proposed rules recognize the standard market practice for commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) transactions, for which risk frequently has been retained by a third-party purchaser (or "B-piece buyer") who negotiates for, and retains, the most subordinated class of interest issued in the securitization. Under the proposed rules, a sponsor of CMBS may meet its risk retention requirements if a B-piece buyer acquires a 5 percent or greater first-loss position that complies with the requirements in the proposed rules for horizontal interests. Disclosure Requirements under the Proposed RulesAs discussed above, some of the problems arising out of the securitization process were due to informational asymmetry among participants in the markets: for example, the sponsor typically understands the risks in the pool better than the investors in the securitization. The proposed rules attempt to remedy some of these asymmetries through disclosure requirements. A sponsor utilizing any of the options to meet its risk retention requirements would be required to provide certain tailored disclosures to investors and, upon request, to the SEC and the sponsor's appropriate supervisor (if any). This should provide investors and regulators with useful information on the sponsor's retained interest in the securitization transaction and the basis on which the sponsor valued its interest. For example, if a sponsor meets its risk retention requirement by retaining a horizontal interest in a securitization transaction, it must disclose both the amount it was required to retain under the proposed rules and the amount it actually retained, in each case, expressed as a percentage and dollar amount. The sponsor must also disclose the material terms related to the interest it retained and the material assumptions and methodology used to determine the aggregate dollar amount of ABS interests issued in the securitization transaction, including those related to the discount rate and estimated cash flows. The other risk retention options generally incorporate these disclosure requirements, and also, in some cases, require additional disclosure related to the specific type of risk retention. Thus, sponsors retaining risk through a representative sample must provide disclosures similar to those required for horizontal retention, and must provide comprehensive disclosures related to the methodologies used to choose the representative sample to ensure that the sample portfolio of assets retained by the sponsor is truly representative of the entire pool of securitized assets. Hedging and Transfer RestrictionsConsistent with section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act, the proposed rules would prohibit a sponsor from transferring (or pledging as collateral without recourse) any interest or assets that the sponsor is required to retain under the rule to any person other than a consolidated affiliate. The proposal also would prohibit a sponsor or any of its consolidated affiliates from hedging the credit risk the sponsor is required to retain through a financial instrument or agreement that involves payments materially related to that credit risk and that would reduce the sponsor's exposure to that credit risk. This provision ensures that the sponsor remains exposed to the credit risk of the securitized assets, and, therefore, incentivizes the sponsor to select and manage the securitized assets appropriately, based on quality of underwriting. Under the proposal, the sponsor and its affiliates would retain the ability to manage risks that are not specific to the credit risk it is required to retain under the proposed rules. Thus, the sponsor may enter into hedges related to market movements, currency exchange rates, home prices, or the overall value of a particular broad category of ABS. These provisions are intended to allow sponsors to continue to appropriately manage their risks on an enterprise-wide basis, while preventing them from evading the risk retention requirements through hedging or transfer of risk. Government-Sponsored EnterprisesThe Dodd-Frank Act did not exempt the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) from their risk retention requirements. Because Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (the GSEs) fully guarantee the timely payment of principal and interest on the mortgage-backed securities (MBS) they issue and sponsor, they are exposed to all of the credit risk of the mortgages that they securitize. In effect, the GSEs retain 100 percent of the risk of the mortgages they securitize. However, unlike the various other types of risk retention discussed earlier, which all involve the acquisition of an asset by the sponsor, the GSEs' risk exposure is generally in the form of an unfunded guarantee, which would not satisfy the risk retention requirements of the proposed rules. Nevertheless, there are special circumstances that currently distinguish the GSEs from other securitization sponsors. Both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have been operating in conservatorship under FHFA since September 6, 2008. Each of them also benefits from U.S. government financial support through capital support agreements with the United States Department of the Treasury. These capital support agreements extend to the guarantees made by the GSEs. With the consent of the Treasury, these support agreements may be assigned or transferred to a "bridge GSE" established by FHFA, acting as receiver, with respect to the enterprise (referred to as a "limited-life regulated entity"). In light of these special circumstances, the proposed rules would allow the MBS guarantees of the GSEs to satisfy their risk retention requirements for so long as they (or a successor limited-life regulated entity) operate under the conservatorship or receivership of FHFA with credit support from the United States. The alternative of requiring the GSEs to hold back and fund 5percent of the MBS they issue would simply expand their portfolios. This would not reduce the burden on the government capital support agreements, and would require the GSEs to issue more corporate debt without having any material effect on the economics of their securitizations or their incentives as sponsors. For the same reasons, both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (or a successor limited-life regulated entity) would be exempt from the premium capture cash reserve account requirements and the hedging and transfer restrictions of the proposal. In recent months, the Administration and the Congress have been considering a variety of proposals to reform the housing finance system, including the operations of the GSEs. The agencies are committed to revisiting and, if appropriate, modifying the risk retention requirements for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac after the statutory and regulatory framework applicable to them is further developed. Allocation to OriginatorSection 941 expressly authorizes the agencies to allow a sponsor to allocate a portion of the credit risk it is required to retain to the originator(s) of the securitized assets, subject to a number of considerations. The proposed rules would permit (but not require) a sponsor of a securitization that is retaining risk through the vertical or horizontal options to allocate 20percent or more of its risk retention obligation to any originator that contributed at least 20percent of the underlying assets in the pool, up to the percentage of the securitized assets in the pool that the originator contributed. The originator would be required to hold the risk retention in the same form and manner as the sponsor and would be required to abide by all restrictions of the proposed rules as if it were the sponsor. This provision is designed to allow sponsors to allocate their risk retention requirements only to originators with sufficient financial resources to appropriately monitor the credit risk of all the securitized assets in the transaction and to negotiate the allocation with the sponsor. Premium Capture Cash Reserve AccountIn addition to incorporating some of the risk retention practices that were most effective prior to and during the crisis, the proposed rules also attempt to address several practices that tend to undermine the incentives of effective risk retention. One such practice involves monetization of so-called "excess spread," or "premium capture." In broad terms, the difference between the rate lenders charge borrowers and their total costs is "excess spread." Prior to the financial crisis, securitization sponsors commonly sold off part of this excess spread to realize an immediate profit on the securitization of the assets. While securitization sponsors benefited from this practice, it meant that the excess spread was unavailable to support the ABS tranches bought by investors. More importantly, this practice encouraged aggressive underwriting, allowed the securitizer to offset immediately its retained risk, and provided incentives for sponsors to maximize securitization scale and complexity in securitization structures. The proposed rules seek to address this problem by requiring the sponsor to place any amounts it receives from monetizing excess spread into a cash reserve account that would be used to cover losses on a first-loss basis. This amount would be in addition to the sponsor's base risk retention requirement. This regulatory mechanism essentially puts sponsors in a position closer to that of a lender that keeps loans it originates on its balance sheet for the life of the loan. The goal is to promote simpler securitization structures, as sponsors would receive excess spread over time, and to better align the interests of sponsors and investors by promoting more robust monitoring of the credit risk of the securitized assets. Exemptions from Risk Retention RequirementsIn circumstances where securitized assets pose low credit risk because they meet high underwriting and other standards set by the agencies, section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act provides or permits an exemption to the risk retention requirements. The agencies have incorporated these exemptions into the proposed rules, along with other exemptions and adjustments to the risk retention requirements proposed in accordance with the authority granted under the statute. Qualified Residential MortgagesSection 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act provides that securitizations backed by mortgages that meet the definition of a "qualified residential mortgage" (QRM) are not subject to the risk retention requirements. Under the statute, the agencies must develop a definition for QRM that takes into consideration underwriting and product features that historical loan performance data indicate result in a lower risk of default. In addition, section 941 requires that the definition of a QRM be no broader than the definition of a "qualified mortgage" under the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), as amended by the Dodd-Frank Act.7The complete statutory exemption from the risk retention requirements for QRMs based on their low risk of default underscores that these assets must be of high credit quality. In developing the QRM definition, the agencies examined data from market sources, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the Board's Survey of Consumer Finances, and other data linking mortgage loan characteristics to default rates. The agencies used the data available to them to develop minimum QRM standards that have low credit risk even in stressful economic environments. To be eligible as a QRM under the proposed rules, a mortgage loan must be a closed-end first-lien mortgage to purchase or refinance a one-to-four family property. It cannot have product features that have been associated with a high incidence of delinquencies and foreclosures, such as negative amortization, interest-only payments, and the potential for large interest rate increases. In addition, it must meet standards the agencies have identified as being closely associated with a lower probability of default. These standards include conservative debt-to-income ratios and strict limits on the number of derogatory factors in the borrower's recent credit history. To enhance predictability for participants in the mortgage securitization market, under the proposed rules, QRM eligibility is determined at or prior to origination of the mortgage loan.8 QRM eligibility also requires a 20 percent down payment and a maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of 80 percent for purchase mortgages (with no junior lien known to exist at closing) and a maximum LTV ratio of 75percent on rate and term refinance loans and 70percent for cash-out refinance loans. These LTV requirements are supported by the data reviewed by the agencies, which demonstrate that default rates increase noticeably among purchase loans with an LTV ratio greater than 80percent and are also higher for refinance mortgages. The Board recognizes that loans with LTV ratios above 80 percent and with other features that do not meet the proposed QRM definition can be safely underwritten. Indeed, the Board anticipates that a somewhat narrow definition of QRM will help ensure that a deep and liquid market for non-QRMs can and will exist. Risk retention in these cases should, in principle, add only modestly to the cost of a non-QRM mortgage. On the other hand, a broad definition of QRM that encompassed a much wider swath of residential mortgages, as some have proposed, could keep the small segment of the market left outside such a QRM definition from being able to attract sufficient funding to thrive. This result could diminish access to credit for creditworthy borrowers and stifle innovation in residential mortgage products that do not meet the definition of QRM. This disincentive is removed if the markets recognize that a great many creditworthy loans may be made and securitized with the retention of a modest amount of credit risk. In a related matter, some expressed concern that the proposed rules do not expressly incorporate private mortgage insurance (PMI) into the QRM definition. While PMI and similar credit enhancements protect lenders and investors from losses when borrowers default, the agencies have not identified studies or historical loan performance data that adequately demonstrate that PMI lowers the probability that a borrower will default. Moreover, PMI is used overwhelmingly in connection with loans guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. In fact, these GSEs guarantee approximately 90percent of loans covered by PMI. As I discussed earlier, the guarantee provided by the GSEs would satisfy the risk retention requirements under the proposed rules. In the notice of proposed rulemaking, the agencies requested comment on this point and will consider any new data or evidence presented. A final noteworthy feature of the proposed QRM definition is that it requires the originator of a QRM to incorporate into the mortgage-transaction documents certain features related to servicing policies and practices that would be employed by the loan servicer in the event of a serious delinquency or default on the mortgage. These features include reliance on the net present value calculations in comparing the costs of loan modifications to loan foreclosure, policies for addressing second liens held by the servicer on properties backing a first mortgage held by the securitization vehicle, and certain incentive compensation limitations. While the proposed rules would apply these standards to the limited group of residential mortgages that meet the QRM definition, the Board is currently engaged in an interagency effort to develop national mortgage servicing standards that would apply more broadly to residential mortgages regardless of whether the mortgages are QRMs or are securitized. These more comprehensive standards would address many of the issues arising out of servicing practices that have affected the residential mortgage market in the past. Exemption for Certain Commercial, Commercial Real Estate, and Automobile LoansThe Dodd-Frank Act directs the agencies to lower risk retention requirements below 5percent for securitizations of commercial loans, commercial real estate (CRE) loans, and automobile loans, if the loans meet underwriting standards that indicate low credit risk. The agencies developed and are seeking public comment on underwriting standards for these loans categories. Sponsors of securitizations collateralized by loans meeting these underwriting standards would have a zeropercent risk retention requirement. Other ExemptionsSection 941 directs the agencies to provide exemptions from the risk retention requirements for certain assets insured or guaranteed by the United States or a U.S. agency. This exemption includes loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration or the Department of Veterans Affairs. The statute also provides exemptions for ABS guaranteed by the United States or a U.S. agency and ABS issued or guaranteed by U.S. state and local governments. The proposed rules implement these exemptions. The proposed rules also provide a safe harbor for certain foreign transactions, based on the limited nature of the transactions' connections with the United States and U.S. investors. ConclusionThe Board, in cooperation with the other agencies, has put significant effort into developing proposed rules that would implement the risk retention requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act. We have attempted to do this in a flexible fashion with the goal of better aligning interests among participants in the securitization markets while preserving the public benefits of securitization, including lower funding costs and increased credit availability for businesses and consumers. The Board welcomes input from the public and from members of the Committee in this effort. I appreciate the opportunity to describe the proposed rules and am happy to answer any questions. 1.See "Report to the Congress on Risk Retention (572 KB PDF)," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at 8 (October 2010).Return to text 2.See Board Report at 14-15.Return to text 3.In accordance with the Dodd-Frank Act, the chairperson of the Financial Stability Oversight Council coordinated this rulemaking effort.Return to text 4.The risk retention requirement established by the proposed rules would be a regulatoryminimum. The sponsor, originator, or other party to a securitization may, either on its own initiative or in response to the demands of private market participants, retain additional exposure to the credit risk of assets that the sponsor, originator, or other party helps securitize beyond that required by the proposed rules.Return to text 5.See 15 U.S.C. § 78o-11(c)(1)(C)(i); see also S. Rep. No. 111-176, at 130 (2010) ("The Committee [on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs] believes that implementation of risk retention obligations should recognize the differences in securitization practices for various asset classes.").Return to text 6.The proposed rules include a variety of policies and procedures, testing, and disclosure requirements designed to ensure the random and representative nature of the sample and limit to the greatest extent possible "cherry picking" of assets by the sponsor.Return to text 7.The rulewriting effort to implement Dodd-Frank Act changes to the definition of "qualified mortgage" under TILA is ongoing. The agencies will review the "qualified mortgage" rules, when issued, to determine whether changes to the definition of a QRM are necessary or appropriate to ensure that the definition of a QRM isno broaderthan the definition of a "qualified mortgage."Return to text 8.The rule provides for certification requirements to ensure processes are in place to credibly check QRM eligibility at closing. However, if due to an oversight a mortgage loan is later determined to not have met the QRM eligibility requirements, the sponsor would be required to repurchase the loan from the securitization vehicle at a price at least equal to the remaining principal balance and accrued interest.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday approved the application by Bank of Communications Co., Ltd., Shanghai, People's Republic of China, to establish a branch in San Francisco, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application and notice under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by M&T Bank Corporation, Buffalo, New York, to acquire Wilmington Trust Corporation, and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary bank, Wilmington Trust Company, both of Wilmington, Delaware, and its subsidiary savings association, Wilmington Trust FSB, Baltimore, Maryland. The Board also approved the applications by Manufacturers and Traders Trust Company, Buffalo, a state member bank, to acquire certain assets and assume certain liabilities of Wilmington Trust Company and Wilmington Trust FSB, pursuant to section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, and to operate branches at the existing branch locations of Wilmington Trust Company and Wilmington Trust FSB, pursuant to section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Provided for the record of a hearing held on April 12, 2011 conducted by the Subcommittee on Oversight of Government Management, the Federal Workforce, and the District of Columbia, Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Akaka, Ranking Member Johnson, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to submit a statement for the record. As April is Financial Literacy Month, I am pleased to highlight the importance of financial literacy to a stable and healthy economy and to describe some of the Federal Reserve System's efforts to help Americans make informed financial decisions. The recent crisis demonstrated the critical importance of financial literacy and good financial decisionmaking, both for the economic welfare of households and for the soundness and stability of the system as a whole. Good financial choices depend on reliable and useful information, presented in an understandable way. Essential components of personal financial management include an understanding of how to budget strategically, use credit, save to build personal wealth, and shop for and choose suitable financial products. The Federal Reserve recognizes that informed, educated consumers not only achieve better outcomes for themselves but, through careful shopping for and use of financial products, help to increase market efficiency and innovation. Our approach to assisting consumers to successfully navigate the financial marketplace has been three-pronged: First, we have worked diligently to foster financial and economic education. Second, we conduct research on consumer decisionmaking that helps to identify what works in financial education and informs the regulatory process. Third, in recognition that basic financial knowledge is not sufficient to safeguard people from fraud and deceptive practices, we have promulgated strong consumer protection rules and consumer-tested required financial product disclosures to ensure they present information clearly and in a useful format. We vigorously enforce consumer protection laws to ensure that providers of consumer financial products act fairly and comply with the spirit and letter of the rules. Financial and Economic EducationIn our dynamic and complex financial marketplace, financial education must be a life-long pursuit that enables consumers of all ages and economic positions to stay attuned to changes in their financial needs and circumstances and to take advantage of products and services that best meet their goals. Well-informed consumers, who can serve as their own advocates, are one of the best lines of defense against the proliferation of financial products and services that are unsuitable, unnecessarily costly, or abusive. Financial Education from the Federal ReserveThe Federal Reserve has provided unbiased, credible, research-based financial information and educational materials, in print and on the Internet, for many years. We offer publications--in both English and Spanish--that provide consumers tips on a broad range of topics, from avoiding mortgage foreclosure scams to managing a checking account. More recently, the Federal Reserve Board has developed interactive webpages with up-to-date information on regulatory changes that affect consumer financial products and services. These webpages offer information in plain language and in an easy-to-understand format; they also provide links to calculators, additional resources, and other relevant material. The Board's "What You Need to Know" series provides user-friendly information and tools about new terms, disclosures, and protections for credit card accounts, overdraft protection programs, gift cards, credit decisions and credit scores, and notices of mortgage transfers.1Since the series webpage was launched in February 2010, more than 366,000 web views have been logged, with 60 percent of those visits for credit card information. The Federal Reserve Banks, through their Community Affairs offices, have developed financial education materials and programs on topics that range from establishing banking accounts to building wealth. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as part of Financial Literacy Month, offers free classes and activities during its "Money Smart Week." In events developed in cooperation with local organizations and firms, young people and adults learn about financial matters ranging from opening a savings account to applying for a mortgage. Several Federal Reserve Banks are also actively involved in "Bank On" programs that help cities and financial institutions bring unbanked and underbanked consumers into the financial mainstream by educating them about the benefits of having a bank account and using other banking services. Exposing young people to financial concepts is particularly important. Students can be particularly vulnerable to the temptations of taking on excessive debt, such as credit card debt. And the earlier that young people can develop basic financial skills, the more likely it is that they will make good financial decisions when they become adults. The Federal Reserve is committed to helping teachers and schools work more effectively with students as they develop their financial literacy. For example, the Federal Reserve provides a financial and economic education website with a variety of resources for teachers, and students of various ages and knowledge levels.2The site offers educational games, classroom lesson plans, online publications, and multimedia tools. Federal Reserve Banks offer teachers professional development opportunities to improve their ability to teach personal finance topics. A number of Federal Reserve Banks also organize personal finance essay, video, and academic competitions for students. We encourage students and teachers to visit Federal Reserve Bank learning centers and museums, which feature interactive exhibits about many aspects of banking, the financial system, and the economy. Collaboration in Financial EducationIn addition to conducting its own programs, the Federal Reserve collaborates with numerous organizations and agencies that educate and counsel individuals from a broad range of audiences. Our long-standing partnership and role on the board of NeighborWorks America supports homebuyer, foreclosure, and mortgage modification counseling to lower-income consumers and communities. We have helped these and other organizations--such as American Savings Education Council, Junior Achievement, the Council for Economic Education, the National Endowment for Financial Education, and America Saves--develop, implement, and evaluate personal finance awareness and education programs. In addition, we have worked with the Jump$tart Coalition, American Library Association, the AARP, the National Council of La Raza, the National Association of School Boards, and the Congressional Black Caucus to increase awareness of our financial and economic education resources. We also collaborate with other federal government agencies on education and outreach initiatives. Since 2004, the Board has participated in the Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC), which is composed of representatives from 22 federal agencies and coordinates financial education resources offered by the federal government. To support the FLEC's mission, Board staff members have served on Commission task forces to develop its website, national strategy, and research agenda. Research and EvaluationAs part of our policy research mission, the Federal Reserve dedicates considerable resources to the study of consumer economics and consumer behavior. Our work includes the development of valuable new data and empirical studies in these areas. For example, for many decades the Board's Survey of Consumer Finances has provided one of the most important sources of information on the assets, debts, and wealth of American households.3The Federal Reserve has also developed substantial expertise in assessing and drawing policy conclusions from a range of consumer financial data, such as data from credit records or data on mortgages provided by lenders under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. The Federal Reserve has been involved in studying the efficacy of financial education in helping people make better financial decisions. For example, several years ago, researchers in the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs joined with Army Emergency Relief to conduct a longitudinal study of the effect of a two-day financial education program on soldiers' financial management. In general, studies show that financial education for young adults is most effective when it is both timely and relevant. At the same time, research has also provided important insight into other factors that contribute to the development of personal financial skills, such as general education levels, family experiences and parental influence, access to financial services (for example, having a savings account while growing up), and income level.4These findings underscore the importance of early and ongoing education as well as experience with financial products in helping people make good financial choices. We have also analyzed alternative approaches to financial education. For example, the economic education staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia investigated the effectiveness of a personal finance course that uses a specific curriculum, "Keys to Financial Success." This semester-long course is taught by teachers who attended a 30âhour training course. A 50-question exam administered before and after the course showed that students who took the course had a statistically significant increase in their personal finance achievement, compared with a control group of students of the same age who were not exposed to the program.5 Consumer Protection Regulation and EnforcementAlthough financial education is a critical first line of defense, it is not a substitute for strong and effective regulations that safeguard consumers against abusive and fraudulent practices. The Board has been the primary federal agency charged with writing rules governing consumer financial products, and in recent years, we have issued rules for mortgages, credit cards, student loans, and overdraft protection programs, among others. We have also maintained a robust compliance program to ensure that banks under our purview adhere to these rules. As you know, our consumer-protection rulemaking authority and our consumer-protection supervisory and enforcement authority over some of the nation's largest financial institutions will transfer to the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The Board will retain some relevant rule-writing authorities (for example, under the Community Reinvestment Act) as well as supervisory authorities for smaller financial institutions that we also regulate for safety-and-soundness purposes. We are working closely with the Department of the Treasury and the new Bureau to facilitate the necessary transfers of authorities and personnel. Regardless of how the regulatory and supervisory responsibilities are distributed, a comprehensive approach--one that includes education, research, and regulation--remains essential to ensuring that consumers receive adequate protections and that markets for consumer financial products function well. The Board will work collaboratively with the Bureau and other agencies to help individuals and families make the best choices for their financial futures. For your reference, I am attaching some examples of financial literacy programs and outreach that are available from the Federal Reserve. Appendix A:Federal Reserve Community Affairs Outreach (39 KB PDF) Appendix B:Federal Reserve Youth Education (53 KB PDF) 1.See Board, "What You Need to Know Series."Return to text 2.See theFederal Reserve Education website.Return to text 3.The Board'sSurvey of Consumer Finances.Return to text 4.See Catherine Bell, Daniel Gorin, and Jeanne M. Hogarth (2009), "Does Financial Education Affect Soldiers' Financial Behaviors?" paper presented at the Federal Reserve System Community Affairs Research Conference, held in Washington, April 16-17, www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/events/community/2009carc/Hogarth.pdf; Catherine Bell and Jeanne M. Hogarth (2010), "Better Deals on Wheels: The Effects of Financial Education on Car Buying," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,Community Dividend,April; Catherine J. Bell, Jeanne M. Hogarth, and Daniel R. Gorin (2009), "Teaching for the Test, and Life Is the Final Exam," paper presented at the annualconference of the Association for Financial Counseling and Planning Education, held in Scottsdale, Ariz., November 18-20; and Catherine J. Bell, Daniel Gorin, and Jeanne M. Hogarth (2010), "What Makes a Good Money Manager Good? Insights from an Evaluation of an Education Initiative," paper presented at the 56th Annual Conference of the American Council on Consumer Interests, held in partnership with the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Ga., April 14-16.Return to text 5.See Andrew T. Hill, Bonnie T. Meszaros, and Brian Tyson (2011), "Evidence of Student Achievement in a High School Personal Finance Course," paper presented at the Allied Social Science Associations conference, held inDenver, Colo., Jan. 6-9.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: The Leaders Group, Inc. (71 KB PDF), Oak Brook, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated April 26, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: TransPecos Financial Corp. (47 KB PDF), San Antonio, Texas, and TransPecos Banks, Pecos, TexasWritten Agreement dated April 13, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Premier Bancorp, Inc. (18 KB PDF), Wilmette, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated April 18, 2011 Syringa Bancorp (18 KB PDF), Boise, IdahoWritten Agreement dated April 18, 2011Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFlorida Office of Financial RegulationNew York State Banking Department The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the New York State Banking Department (NYSBD), and the Florida Office of Financial Regulation (OFR) Friday announced the issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order and Assessment of Civil Money Penalties totaling $1.8 million against Banco Industrial de Venezuela, C.A. (BIV), Caracas, Venezuela, and BIV's agencies in New York and Miami. The order is designed to address deficiencies revealed in repeated examinations of the agencies by the Federal Reserve and the state supervisors. The order also addresses issues relating to BIV's financial condition and the lack of audited financial statements. The order restricts BIV's U.S. agencies from making new loans or taking on new customers without the approval of its U.S. banking supervisors. BIV will also be required to submit acceptable plans to make a number of improvements at the agencies, including in management and home office oversight, internal and operational controls, asset quality, investment securities procedures, and internal audit. BIV will also be required to adhere to regulatory reporting deadlines. The order requires that BIV submit financial statements for each of the agencies and for the consolidated organization that have been audited by an acceptable independent, internationally recognized accounting firm. BIV and the agencies are subject to a Written Agreement issued by the supervisors in July 2006. Provisions of the Written Agreement remain in place that involve compliance, particularly Anti-Money Laundering and Office of Foreign Assets Control procedures. Other provisions of the Written Agreement are superseded by this consent order. BIV has also agreed to pay $600,000 each to the Board of Governors, the NYSBD, and the OFR as a result of allegedly unsafe and unsound practices, and late-filed and insufficient financial information submitted to the supervisors. BIV is owned by ministries of the Venezuelan state. BIV was subject to an intervention by the Venezuelan government in May 2009--a form of conservatorship under Venezuelan law. In January 2011, the intervention was lifted.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the 2011 Financial Markets Conference, Stone Mountain, Georgia I am pleased to speak once again at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's Financial Markets Conference. This year's conference covers an interesting mix of topics bearing on the vital ongoing global debate on how best to prevent and respond to financial crises. Tonight I would like to discuss post-crisis reform as it relates to a prominent part of our financial market infrastructure--namely, clearinghouses for payments, securities, and derivatives transactions. This audience, I know, recognizes the importance of what is often called the "plumbing" of the financial system--a set of institutions that very safely and efficiently handles, under most circumstances, enormous volumes of financial transactions each day. Because clearinghouses and other parts of the financial infrastructure fared relatively well during the crisis--despite moments of significant stress--the public debate on financial reform has understandably focused on the risks posed by so-called too-big-to-fail financial firms, whose dramatic failures or near failures put our financial system and economy in dire jeopardy. Nevertheless, the smooth operation and financial soundness of clearinghouses and related institutions are essential for financial stability, and we must not take them for granted. Importantly, title 8 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) contains provisions aimed at improving the transparency, resilience, and financial strength of clearinghouses, which the act callsfinancial market utilities. Recognizing the systemic importance of clearinghouses, title 8 also challenges U.S. regulatory authorities to improve and better coordinate their oversight of these institutions. Moreover, to put into effect the macroprudential or systemic approach to regulation and oversight encouraged by the Dodd-Frank Act, regulators will have to work to gain greater insight into the complex linkages among clearinghouses as well as those between clearinghouses and the financial firms that rely on and support them. The Development of Clearinghouses and Their Economic RationaleClearinghouses have been around a long time and have been used for many types of transactions, yet virtually all clearinghouses perform certain basic functions. Notably, by centralizing and standardizing specific classes of financial transactions, clearinghouses reduce the costs and operational risks of clearing and settlement among multiple market participants. In many cases they also act as a guarantor of transactions--the counterparty to every trade--thereby helping to reduce counterparty credit and liquidity risks. However, the flip side of the centralization of clearing and settlement activities in clearinghouses is the concentration of substantial financial and operational risk in a small number of organizations, a development with potentially important systemic implications. Because the failure of, or loss of confidence in, a major clearinghouse would create enormous uncertainty about the status of initiated transactions and, consequently, about the financial positions of clearinghouse participants and their customers, strong risk management at these organizations as well as effective prudential oversight is essential. A historical perspective is helpful for understanding the economics of clearinghouses and the implications of their operations for financial stability. The first important clearinghouse in the United States, the New York Clearing House, was founded by New York City's commercial banks in 1853 to streamline the clearing and settling of checks. By one account, before the New York Clearing House was set up, the clearing and settlement process involved employees from 60 banks crisscrossing each other's paths through the city streets to present checks, a time-consuming process filled with "confusion, disputes and unavoidable blunders."1The establishment of the clearinghouse improved the situation almost immediately, resulting in significant savings in time, effort, and financial costs.2By the late 19th century, check clearinghouses had been established across the United States.3Large segments of the financial system came to rely on the efficiency and integrity of daily settlements by the clearinghouses. Indeed, as these institutions developed, the roles of clearinghouses and clearinghouse associations--the groups of firms that used and supported individual clearinghouses--went well beyond purely operational functions: In the years prior to the establishment of the Federal Reserve, to increase public confidence in banks, clearinghouse associations at times took on quasi-governmental supervisory functions--for example, by examining the financial condition of members rumored to be experiencing difficulties--and even served at times as lender of last resort to individual clearinghouse members. In the securities and derivatives markets, the story unfolded a bit later and was more complex than in the case of checks. Nevertheless, many of the essential themes are the same. In 1892, on the centennial of the famous Buttonwood Agreement, the New York Stock Exchange took its first steps to improve clearing and settlement by creating a clearinghouse for limited types of brokers' trades.4Faced with growing volumes of trading and the associated clearing costs after World War I, the New York Stock Exchange took a further step in 1920 by establishing the Stock Clearing Corporation; this new clearinghouse reduced the number of checks needed for settlements by up to 90 percent and the volume of funds and credit needed by 70 percent or more.5 It was not until the dramatic increase in equity trading volumes in the late 1960s, however, that backlogs of trading tickets, confirmations, and delivery instructions caused the infamous "paperwork crisis" that led the exchange to curtail trading hours and close on Wednesdays for six months in order to manage the situation.6The paperwork crisis represented more than a set of operational problems for financial institutions and other market participants. Unprocessed instructions and delivery failures also increased the financial risks faced by many firms, leading to supervisory concerns about the ability of firms to control and monitor their securities holdings and exposures and to manage their financial positions appropriately. These risks clearly needed to be addressed. Pressed by the Congress and regulators, the industry began in the mid-1970s to establish central securities depositories and central counterparties (CCPs) to immobilize paper certificates, encourage multilateral netting of trades, reduce pre-settlement risk through the guarantee of trades, and conduct securities settlements through "book entries" to electronic records. The result of these efforts was a set of critical electronic infrastructures to centralize and coordinate clearing and settlement, including the establishment of CCPs to provide settlement guarantees and reduce counterparty risk. The market for government securities saw reforms as well, following the failures in the early 1980s of several smaller government securities dealers and increasing concerns about the integrity of clearing in that market. In 1986, authorities and market participants developed a CCP for over-the-counter (OTC) government securities trades to augment bilateral clearing, at the time the dominant practice. Today, this CCP is part of the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation, a subsidiary of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation. In the case of exchange-traded derivatives, the significant benefits of clearinghouses likewise became apparent over time. The Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), now part of the CME Group, was established in 1848. After various experiments to manage the paperwork associated with growing trading volumes, the CBOT established a clearinghouse in 1883. Although the role of the clearinghouse was initially limited, it significantly reduced back-office work and the amount of funds and credit needed by its members.7In 1925, the members of the CBOT set up a full-fledged and independent central counterparty--The Board of Trade Clearing Corporation, now called The Clearing Corporation--to provide the guarantee and settlement functions that are familiar today.8Risk-management tools such as margining systems and default funds were adopted to backstop the guarantee provided by the clearinghouse. The use of CCPs for exchange-traded derivatives continues to evolve. For example, a new CCP that combines the clearing of futures on Eurodollars and U.S. Treasury securities with positions in fixed-income instruments, New York Portfolio Clearing, launched in March. Clearinghouses and Financial CrisesAs clearinghouses developed, their resilience--in particular, their ability to manage their liquidity and ensure the integrity of transactions under stressed conditions--was tested by financial shocks and crises. I'll briefly discuss three historical episodes that tested the financial infrastructure: the financial panic of 1907, the 1987 stock market crash, and the recent crisis. Although the clearinghouses of the time survived all of these episodes, in each case the problems they faced demonstrated potential vulnerabilities and a need for reform. More generally, these episodes warn us to remain vigilant and to guard against complacency; complexity and change in the financial system will continue to present new challenges to stability, as they have in the past. I noted earlier the development of clearinghouses for checks in cities around the country in the second half of the 19th century. In the financial panic of 1907, which involved depositor runs on banks and trust companies in New York and elsewhere, check clearinghouses struggled to obtain the liquidity needed to complete daily settlements. To avoid settlement failures and address a wider need for liquidity, including liquidity being demanded by the anxious depositors of troubled banks, many clearinghouses followed a practice that sprang up shortly after the founding of the New York Clearing House. Specifically, members of the clearinghouse, as a group, issued collateralized loans in the form of "clearinghouse loan certificates" to those members that were short of liquidity needed for settlements; in a real sense, the clearinghouse served as a private-sector lender (or liquidity provider) of last resort. Some clearinghouses even issued small-denomination certificates that circulated widely outside the clearinghouse as a substitute for currency.9Although these measures were helpful, demands grew for public action to address the problem of recurrent panics. These demands ultimately led to the formation of the Federal Reserve in 1913, in part to act as a liquidity provider of last resort as well as to strengthen the supervision of state-chartered banks. Eighty years later, the 1987 stock market crash provided a marketwide test for securities and derivatives clearinghouses, as well as their members, banks, and related institutions.10Surging volumes of trades and extraordinary price volatility during the week of October 19th created errors and delays in confirming stock trades, severe operational and financial stress at clearing members, and heavy liquidity demands throughout the financial markets.11In the derivatives markets, multiple intraday margin calls were made to protect the clearinghouses, but banks sometimes delayed making key payments to and from the clearinghouses, adding to the uncertainty. Meanwhile, the clearinghouses themselves apparently absorbed significant amounts of intraday liquidity from the markets by collecting, but not always paying out, so-called variation margin--payments that investors were required to make as the values of their holdings plunged. In reviewing the episode, the Brady Commission noted that although the clearinghouse system avoided defaults, investor uncertainties about the viability of the clearinghouses, as well as about the ability of major broker-dealers to meet their obligations, intensified market fluctuations and panic.12In response, the public and private sectors worked together to address the weaknesses that had been revealed--for example, by clarifying the obligations that clearinghouses, clearing members, and settlement banks must assume and by bolstering the liquidity and security of the financial resources of clearinghouses.13 In 2008, clearinghouses and their members were again tested by significant financial shocks, both in the United States and abroad. Although the events of 2008 were not centered in equity-related markets, the measures taken after 1987 no doubt contributed to the resilience of clearing arrangements in the securities and derivatives markets. The official sector's support arrangements for financial firms and markets, including the Federal Reserve's discount window lending and special liquidity programs, also indirectly eased liquidity pressures on the clearinghouses. In the global foreign exchange market, CLS Bank International, a system that began operating in 2002 with the purpose of addressing settlement risk, is widely credited with maintaining confidence for continued interbank trading and settlement of foreign exchange. Overall, the historical record shows that clearinghouse arrangements have generally withstood even severe crises. This solid performance reflects good planning and sound institutional structures but also some degree of good luck, as crises have also revealed important vulnerabilities, vulnerabilities which prompted subsequent reforms by both the private and public sectors. Clearly, if we do not want to put all our trust in continued good fortune, we will have to continue to be proactive in identifying and remedying weaknesses in these critical infrastructures. Clearinghouses and Financial ReformBroadly speaking, the recent financial reform legislation bears on the future structure and role of clearinghouses in two different ways. First, it aims to increase the resilience of these critical institutions against severe financial shocks, the issue that I have emphasized thus far. Second, it also encourages the greater development and use of clearinghouses to address weaknesses identified in other parts of the financial system. Of course, increased reliance on clearinghouses to address problems in other parts of the system increases further the need to ensure the safety of clearinghouses themselves. As Mark Twain's character Pudd'nhead Wilson once opined, if you put all your eggs in one basket, you better watch that basket. The theme of expanded use of clearinghouses as a tool to address other problems in the system is perhaps best illustrated by the derivatives provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act. Prior to the crisis, some of the same economic forces that had led to the development of clearinghouses for other instruments were already pushing industry participants toward greater use of clearinghouses for OTC derivatives transactions. For example, as one response to the growth of the market for interest rate swaps in the early 1990s, a clearinghouse was created in London in 1999 that, by the onset of the financial crisis, was handling a major portion of interdealer activity in those swaps.14Also, in the years leading up to the crisis, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York initiated joint efforts with other regulators and market participants to improve clearing arrangements for credit default swaps. However, for several reasons, the willingness of market participants to move all derivatives transactions to clearinghouses was limited. Notably, many believed that the standardization of derivatives contracts that is needed for multilateral clearing imposed too high a cost on end users with needs for customized arrangements. Market participants also were concerned that the establishment of clearinghouse guarantees might require implicit subsidies from clearinghouse members with stronger credit to those with weaker credit. These calculations, however, were substantially changed by the galvanizing events of 2008, notably the development of large and uncertain counterparty credit risks in many bilateral derivatives agreements. On the heels of the crisis, the Group of Twenty countries endorsed a policy of mandatory central clearing for standardized OTC derivatives. The aim was to reduce systemic risk in the financial system more broadly as well as to improve the transparency of the OTC derivatives markets. In the United States, title 7 of the Dodd-Frank Act incorporated a mandatory clearing policy for standardized derivatives. Other major countries are following suit. In the spirit of keeping a close eye on the basket, as dependence on clearinghouses grows, private-sector participants and regulators will need to review risk-management and member-default procedures for financial market utilities to ensure that they meet high standards of safety. As I mentioned, strengthening the financial infrastructure is indeed a key theme of the Dodd-Frank Act. Title 8 addresses several prudential issues associated with clearing and settlement. One important provision provides additional authority for U.S. regulators to set enhanced and consistent risk-management standards for systemically important financial market utilities, taking into consideration relevant international standards and existing prudential requirements. Another provision encourages more intensive supervision of clearinghouses (including required annual examinations) along with strengthened cooperation among the relevant regulatory agencies. And, as in other major countries, Dodd-Frank permits systemically important financial market utilities to apply for accounts at the central bank (in the U.S. context, at the Federal Reserve Banks) and to obtain payment services. These utilities could also be given access to emergency credit if private-sector sources are exhausted, under terms set by the Board and subject to authorization by the Board in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury. As is well understood, the existence of emergency credit facilities for financial market utilities could give rise to moral hazard (for example, in the form of insufficient attention by clearinghouses to establishment of private-sector liquidity arrangements in advance of a crisis). To minimize moral hazard concerns, the Federal Reserve believes it essential that the regulatory regime for these institutions include strong prudential requirements for credit and liquidity risk management, robust liquidity buffers, the maintenance of adequate amounts of high-quality collateral, and effective member-default procedures. The Board is working hard to implement the new statutory provisions of title 8. We are actively collaborating with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) on the setting of regulatory standards and plans for the supervision of financial market utilities. We have recently published for comment proposed risk-management standards that would apply to financial market utilities that would be supervised by the Board under title 8. These standards track the existing standards published in the Board's Payment System Risk Policy, which in turn are based on existing international standards. For the longer term, the Federal Reserve is working closely with the SEC and the CFTC as well as securities regulators and central banks from more than 20 other countries to revise and strengthen the existing international standards for the major types of financial market utilities. This work is being carried out by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and by the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions. These two committees published new international standards for public consultation in March. We hope that the regulatory agencies in the United States, and those in other major countries, can adopt a single set of enhanced risk-management standards that will apply to all systemically important financial market utilities globally. Coordination among regulators, both within and between countries, is especially important in light of the increasing interdependencies among financial market utilities around the world.15What was once a landscape of numerous, separate clearinghouses that operated largely independently from one another has now become dominated by fewer and larger clearinghouses supporting more integrated markets and consolidated, global financial firms. Moreover, the same globally active banks participate in all of the major clearinghouses, and the major clearinghouses often rely on similar sets of banks for payment services, funding, settlement, and emergency liquidity. In such a world, problems at one clearinghouse could have significant effects on others, even in the absence of explicit operational links. The need for strong risk management and oversight will only increase as we go forward. ConclusionClearinghouses around the world generally performed well in the highly stressed financial environment of the recent crisis. However, we should not take for granted that we will be as lucky in the future. Past crises, including the financial panic of 1907 and the 1987 stock market crash, led to significant reforms and improvements in clearing and settlement that paid off in subsequent periods of financial stress. Given the growing interdependencies among clearinghouses, along with the new mandates for central clearing, now is a good time to reflect on the lessons of the recent crisis and consider whether further improvements are possible. For more than a century, financial stability has depended on the resilience under stress of clearinghouses and other parts of the financial infrastructure. As we rely even more heavily on these institutions in the United States and around the world, we must do all that we can to ensure their resilience, even as our financial system continues to evolve rapidly and in ways that we cannot fully predict. In short, I think Pudd'nhead Wilson would agree that that is one important basket. 1.See J.S. Gibbons (1859),The Banks of New-York, Their Dealers, the Clearing House, and the Panic of 1857(New York: D. Appleton & Co), pp. 292-295.Return to text 2.See Gibbons,Banks of New-York,in note 1, pp. 307-308; and U.S. Office of the Comptroller of Currency (1920),Annual Report, vol. 2 (Washington: Government Printing Office, December), p. 849. Table 97 of theAnnual Report, for example, contains time-series data on the settlement balances and the value of check exchanges for the New York Clearing House from 1854 to 1920. Other tables provide select contemporaneous data for a large number of check clearinghouses.Return to text 3.See U.S. National Monetary Commission (1910), "Clearing Houses and Credit Instruments: Including Clearing-House Methods and Practices by J.G Cannon; The Use of Credit Instruments in Payments in the United States by David Kinley,"Publications of National Monetary Commission, vol. 6 (Washington: Government Printing Office).Return to text 4.Twenty-four stockbrokers met on May 17, 1792, under a sycamore, or buttonwood, tree to sign the agreement establishing what later became the New York Stock Exchange.Return to text 5.See New York Stock Exchange (1930),Report of the President: May 1st, 1929--May 1st, 1930(New York: NYSE), pp. 66-68.Return to text 6.See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (1971),Study of Unsafe and Unsound Practices of Brokers and Dealers: Report and Recommendations (Pursuant to section 11 (h) of the Securities Investor Protection Act of 1970)(Washington: Government Printing Office), pp. 13-14.Return to text 7.See The Clearing Corporation (2011),A History: Trusting, Growing, Leading, Clearing(Chicago: Board of Trade Clearing Corporation).Return to text 8.For a summary discussion of the historical development of Chicago futures clearing arrangements and their challenges, see Randall S. Kroszner (1999), "Can the Financial Markets Privately Regulate Risk?: The Development of Derivatives Clearinghouses and Recent Over-the-Counter Innovations," in "The Role of Central Banks in Money and Payments Systems," ed. David E. Altig, part 2 (special issue),Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 31 (August), pp. 596-618.Return to text 9.See National Monetary Commission, "Clearing Houses," in note 3, pp. 75-136. For a more modern account, see Gary Gorton and Donald J. Mullineaux (1987), "The Joint Production of Confidence: Endogenous Regulation and Nineteenth Century Commercial-Bank Clearing Houses,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 19 (November), pp. 457-68.Return to text 10.For an analytical perspective on the development of central counterparties and their functions in the context of the 1987 stock market crash, see Ben S. Bernanke (1990), "Clearing and Settlement during the Crash,"Review of Financial Studies, vol. 3 (1), pp. 133-51.Return to text 11.See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (1988),The October 1987 Market Break:A Report by the Division of Market Regulation, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission(Washington: Government Printing Office, February); and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (1988),Follow-Up Report on Financial Oversight of Stock Index Futures Markets during October 1987(Washington: CFTC, January).Return to text 12.See Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms (1988),Report of the Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms(Washington: Government Printing Office, January), pp. 52-53. The task force was headed by Nicholas Brady.Return to text 13.For a discussion of potential reform initiatives. see Working Group on Financial Markets (1988),InterimReport of the Working Group on Financial Markets submitted to the President of the United States(Washington: Government Printing Office, May).Return to text 14.See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the Euro-Currency Standing Committee of the Central Banks of the Group of Ten Countries (1998),OTC Derivatives: Settlement Procedures and Counterparty Risk Management(463 KB PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, September).Return to text 15.Reflecting on these changes, a 2008 report by the Bank for International Settlements Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems noted the extensive scope of interdependencies among these financial market utilities. See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (2008),The Interdependencies of Payment and Settlement Systems(633 KB PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June).Return to text
Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York Good afternoon. For more than a century, the Economic Club of New York has provided an influential forum for the discussion of social, political and economic challenges facing the nation, and I appreciate very much your inviting me to speak today. My comments will focus on recent increases in commodity prices and the effects of those developments on the outlook for inflation, the economic recovery now under way, and the appropriate stance of monetary policy. Let me emphasize at the outset that these remarks reflect my own views and not those of others in the Federal Reserve System.1 Since early last summer, the prices of oil, agricultural products, and other raw materials have risen significantly. For example, the price of Brent crude oil has risen more than 70 percent and the price of corn has more than doubled; more broadly, the Commodity Research Bureau's index of non-fuel commodity prices has risen roughly 40 percent. The imprint of these increases has become increasingly visible in overall measures of inflation. For example, inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) moved up to an annual rate of about 4 percent over the three months ending in February after having averaged less than 1-1/2 percent over the preceding two years. Moreover, survey data suggest that surging prices for gasoline and food have pushed up households' near-term inflation expectations and are making consumers less confident about their economic circumstances. Some observers have attributed the recent boom in commodity prices to the highly accommodative stance of U.S. monetary policy, including the marked expansion of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet and the maintenance of the target federal funds rate at exceptionally low levels. Such an interpretation of recent developments naturally leads to the conclusion that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) should move promptly toward firmer monetary conditions. Indeed, some have even raised the specter of a return to the high inflation of the 1970s in arguing for the urgency of monetary policy tightening. Increases in energy and food prices are, without doubt, creating significant hardships for many people, both here in the United States and abroad. However, the implications of these increases for how the Federal Reserve should respond in terms of monetary policy must be considered very carefully. In my remarks today, I will make the case that recent developments in commodity prices can be explained largely by rising global demand and disruptions to global supply rather than by Federal Reserve policy. Moreover, empirical analysis suggests that these developments, at least thus far, are unlikely to have persistent effects on consumer inflation or to derail the recovery. Critically, so long as longer-run inflation expectations remain stable, the increases seen thus far in commodity prices and headline consumer inflation are not likely, in my view, to become embedded in the wage and price setting process and therefore are not likely to warrant any substantial shift in the stance of monetary policy. An accommodative monetary policy continues to be appropriate because unemployment remains elevated, and, even now, measures of underlying inflation are somewhat below the levels that FOMC participants judge to be consistent, over the longer run, with our statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. While I continue to anticipate a gradual economic recovery in the context of price stability, I do recognize that further large and persistent increases in commodity prices could pose significant risks to both inflation and real activity that could necessitate a policy response. The FOMC is determined to ensure that we never again repeat the experience of the late 1960s and 1970s, when the Federal Reserve did not respond forcefully enough to rising inflation and allowed longer-term inflation expectations to drift upward. Consequently, we are paying close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations. Sources of the Recent Rise in Commodity PricesLet me now turn to a discussion of the sources of the recent increase in commodity prices. In my view, the run-up in the prices of crude oil, food, and other commodities we've seen over the past year can best be explained by the fundamentals of global supply and demand rather than by the stance of U.S. monetary policy. In particular, a rapid pace of expansion of the emerging market economies (EMEs), which played a major role in driving up commodity prices from 2002 to 2008, appears to be the key factor driving the more recent run-up as well. Although real activity in the EMEs slowed appreciably immediately following the financial crisis, those economies resumed expanding briskly by the middle of 2009 after global financial conditions began improving, with China--which has accounted for roughly half of global growth in oil consumption over the past decade--again leading the way. By contrast, demand for commodities by the United States and other developed economies has grown very slowly; for example, in 2010 overall U.S. consumption of crude oil was lower in than in 1999 even though U.S. real gross domestic output (GDP) has risen more than 20 percent since then. On the supply side, heightened concerns about oil production in the Middle East and North Africa have recently put significant upward pressure on oil prices, while droughts in China and Russia and other weather-related supply disruptions have contributed to the jump in global food prices. In contrast, the arguments linking the run-up in commodity prices to the stance of U.S. monetary policy do not seem to hold up to close scrutiny. In particular, some observers have pointed to dollar depreciation, speculative behavior, and international monetary linkages as key channels through which accommodative U.S. monetary policy might be exacerbating the boom in commodity markets. Let me address each of these possibilities in turn. First, it does not seem reasonable to attribute much of the rise in commodity prices to movements in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Since early last summer, the dollar has depreciated about 10 percent against other major currencies, and of that change, my sense is that only a limited portion should be attributed to the Federal Reserve's initiation of a second round of securities purchases. By comparison, as I noted earlier, crude oil prices have risen more than 70 percent over the same period, and nonfuel commodity prices are up roughly 40 percent. Put another way, commodity prices have risen markedly in all major currencies, not just in terms of U.S. dollars, suggesting that the evolution of the foreign exchange value of the dollar can explain only a small fraction of those increases. A second potential concern is that U.S. monetary policy is boosting commodity prices by reducing the cost of holding inventories or by fomenting "carry trades" and other forms of speculative behavior. But here, too, the evidence is not compelling. Price increases have been prevalent across a wide range of commodities, even those that are associated with little or no trading in futures markets. Moreover, if speculative transactions were the primary cause of rising commodity prices, we would expect to see mounting inventories of commodities as speculators hoarded such commodities, whereas in fact stocks of crude oil and agricultural products have generally been falling since last summer.2 A third concern expressed by some observers is that the exceptionally low level of U.S. interest rates has translated into excessive monetary stimulus in the EMEs. In particular, even though their economies have been expanding quite rapidly, many EMEs have been reluctant to raise their own interest rates because of concerns that higher rates could lead to further capital inflows and boost the value of their currencies. Some argue that their disinclination to tighten monetary policy has in turn resulted in economic overheating that has generated further upward pressures on commodity prices. I do not think this explanation accounts for much of the surge in commodity prices, in part because I believe that the bulk of the rapid economic growth in EMEs mainly reflects fundamental improvements in productive capacity, as those countries become integrated into the global economy, rather than loose monetary policies. Irrespective of monetary conditions in the advanced foreign economies, it is clear that the monetary and fiscal authorities in the EMEs have a range of policy tools to address any potential for overheating in their economies if they choose to do so. Indeed, in light of the relatively high levels of resource utilization and inflationary pressures that many EMEs face at present, monetary tightening and currency appreciation might well be appropriate for those economies. The Outlook for Consumer PricesTurning now to the outlook for U.S. consumer prices, I anticipate that the recent surge in commodity prices will cause headline inflation to remain elevated over the next few months. However, I expect that consumer inflation will subsequently revert to an underlying trend that remains subdued, so long as increases in commodity prices moderate and longer run inflation expectations remain reasonably well-anchored. Underlying Inflation TrendsFocusing on inflation prospects over the medium term is essential to the formulation of monetary policy because, due to lags, the medium term is the timeframe over which the FOMC's actions can influence the economy. For this purpose, economists have constructed a variety of measures to separate underlying persistent movements in inflation from more transitory fluctuations. These measures include "core" inflation, which excludes changes in the prices of food and energy, and "trimmed mean" inflation, which exclude prices exhibiting the largest increases or decreases in any given month. No single measure of underlying inflation is perfect, but it is notable that these measures have exhibited a remarkably consistent pattern since the onset of the recession: All show the underlying inflation rate declining markedly to a level somewhat below the rate of 2 percent or a bit less that FOMC participants consider to be consistent with the Fed's dual mandate. For example, core PCE price inflation stood at less than 1 percent over the 12 months ending in February, down from 2-1/2 percent over the year prior to the recession. Trimmed-mean measures of inflation have also trended down over the past couple of years and are now close to 1 percent. I want to emphasize that this focus on core and other inflation measures that may exclude recent increases in the cost of gasoline and other household essentials is not intended to downplay the importance of these items in the cost of living or to lower the bar on the definition of price stability. The Federal Reserve aims to stabilize inflation across the entire basket of goods and services that households purchase, including energy and food. Rather, we pay attention to core inflation and similar measures because, in light of the volatility of food and energy prices, core inflation has been a better forecaster of overall inflation in the medium term than overall inflation itself has been over the past 25 years.3 In my view, the marked decline in these trend measures of inflation since the intensification of the crisis largely reflects very low rates of resource utilization. Strong productivity gains have also played a role in holding down inflation because, together with low wage inflation, they have markedly restrained the rise in firms' production costs. With resource slack likely to diminish only gradually over the next few years, it seems reasonable to anticipate that underlying inflation will remain subdued for some time, provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well contained. Longer-Run Inflation ExpectationsIn this regard, surveys and financial market data indicate that longer-run inflation expectations remain reasonably well anchored even though near-term inflation expectations have jumped in the wake of the surge in commodity prices. For example, the Thomson Reuters/ University of Michigan Survey of Consumers indicates that median inflation expectations for the coming year moved up about 1-1/4 percentage points in March, whereas the median expectation for inflation over the next 5 to 10 years increased only 1/4 percentage point. While such movements obviously bear watching, I would note that such a combination--namely, a substantial jump in near-term inflation expectations coupled with a relatively modest uptick in longer-run expectations--has often accompanied previous sharp increases in gasoline prices, and when it did, those movements were largely reversed within a few months.4 Information derived from the Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) market also suggests that financial market participants' longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored even as the near-term outlook for inflation has shifted upward. In particular, while the carry-adjusted measure of inflation compensation for the next five years has increased about 1/4 percentage point since earlier this year, forward inflation compensation at longer horizons is roughly unchanged on net. Much of the increase in five-year inflation compensation has been associated with the surge in food and energy prices, and the level of this measure appears consistent with a normal cyclical recovery after adjusting for those effects. Commodity Prices and InflationNow I would like to explain in further detail why I anticipate that recent increases in commodity prices are likely to have only transitory effects on headline inflation. The current configuration of quotes on futures contracts--which can serve as a reasonable benchmark in gauging the outlook for commodity prices--suggests that these prices will roughly stabilize near current levels or even decline in some cases. If that outcome materializes, the prices of gasoline and heating oil are likely to flatten out fairly soon, and retail food prices are likely to continue rising briskly for only a few more months. Consequently, the direct effects of the surge in commodity prices on headline consumer inflation should diminish sharply over coming months. Over time, I anticipate that the recent surge in commodity prices will also affect the prices of a broader range of consumer goods and services that use these commodities as inputs. Many firms are seeing such costs escalate and will pass along at least part of these increased raw materials costs to their customers. Nevertheless, I expect the overall inflationary consequences of these pass-through effects to be modest and transitory, provided that longer-run inflation expectations remain well anchored. Moreover, labor costs per unit of output--the single largest component of the unit cost of producing goods and services in the business sector--are essentially unchanged since 2007, owing to both moderate wage increases and solid productivity gains. I expect that nominal wage growth and labor costs will continue to be restrained by slack in resource utilization. Indeed, it would be difficult to get a sustained increase in inflation as long as growth in nominal wages remains as low as we have seen recently. My expectation regarding the transitory effects of commodity price shocks on consumer inflation is supported by simulation results from the FRB/US model--a macroeconometric model developed at the Federal Reserve Board and used extensively for policy analysis. Starting from a situation in which inflation is running at 2 percent and households and firms expect the FOMC to keep it there in the longer run, the model predicts that a persistent increase of $25 per barrel in the price of crude oil--that is, a rise similar to what we've experienced since last summer--would cause the PCE price index to rise at an annual rate of nearly 4 percent over the first two quarters following the shock. Beyond that horizon, however, total PCE inflation drops quickly to about 2-1/4 percent and then declines gradually back to its longer-run rate of 2 percent. These fairly modest and transitory effects of an oil price shock are also consistent with the response of the U.S. economy to the dramatic run-up in commodity prices from 2002 to 2008. Indeed, while oil prices more than quadrupled over that period, measures of underlying inflation remained close to 2 percent. In my view, that outcome was crucially dependent on the stability of longer-run inflation expectations, which in turn limited the pass-through of higher production costs to consumer prices. Risks to the Inflation OutlookI have argued that recent commodity price shocks are likely to have only a transitory effect on inflation. But even if such a trajectory for inflation is most likely, some specific risks must be considered. First, while futures markets suggest that commodity prices will stabilize near current levels, these prices cannot be predicted with much confidence. For example, oil prices could move markedly higher or lower as a consequence of geopolitical developments, changes in production capacity, or shifts in the growth outlook of the EMEs. In addition, the indirect effects of the commodity price surge could be amplified substantially if longer-run inflation expectations started drifting upward or if nominal wages began rising sharply as workers pressed employers to offset realized or prospective declines in their purchasing power. Indeed, a key lesson from the experience of the late 1960s and 1970s is that the stability of longer-run inflation expectations cannot be taken for granted. At that time, the Federal Reserve's monetary policy framework was opaque, its measures of resource utilization were flawed, and its policy actions generally followed a stop-start pattern that undermined public confidence in the Federal Reserve's commitment to keep inflation under control. Consequently, longer-term inflation expectations became unmoored, and nominal wages and prices spiraled upward as workers sought compensation for past price increases and as firms responded to accelerating labor costs with further increases in prices. That wage-price spiral was eventually arrested by the Federal Reserve under Chairman Paul Volcker, but only at the cost of a severe recession in the early 1980s. Since then, the Federal Reserve has remained determined to avoid those mistakes and to keep inflation low and stable. It will be important to closely monitor the state of longer-term inflation expectations to ensure that the Federal Reserve's credibility, which has been built up over the past three decades, remains fully intact. The Outlook for the Real EconomyTurning now to the real economy, real gross domestic product (GDP) has been rising since mid-2009 and now exceeds its level just prior to the onset of the recession. While GDP growth during late 2009 and early 2010 was largely the result of inventory restocking and fiscal stimulus, private final sales growth has picked up over the past six months‑‑an encouraging sign. At the same time, measures of business sentiment have generally returned to pre-recession levels, factory output has been expanding apace, and the unemployment rate has dropped by a percentage point over the past few months. Real consumer spending--which had been rising at a brisk pace in the fall‑‑slowed somewhat around the turn of the year, and measures of consumer sentiment declined in March. Those developments may partly reflect the extent to which higher food and energy prices have sapped households' purchasing power. More generally, however, as the improvement in the labor market deepens and broadens, households should regain some of the confidence they lost during the recession, providing an important boost to spending. Broad Contours of the OutlookNonetheless, a sharp rebound in economic activity--like those that often follow deep recessions--does not appear to be in the offing. One key factor restraining the pace of recovery is the construction sector, which continues to be hampered by a considerable overhang of vacant homes and commercial properties and remains in the doldrums. In addition, spending by state and local governments seems likely to remain limited by tight budget conditions. Moreover, while the labor market has recently shown some signs of life, job opportunities are still relatively scarce. The unemployment rate is down from its peak, but at 8.8 percent, it still remains quite elevated. And even the decline that we've seen to date partly reflects a drop in labor force participation, because people are counted as unemployed only if they are actively looking for work. Some observers have argued that the high unemployment rate primarily reflects structural factors such as a longer duration of unemployment benefits and difficulties in matching available workers with vacant jobs rather than a deficiency of aggregate demand. In my view, however, the preponderance of available evidence and research suggests that these alternative structural explanations cannot account for the bulk of the rise in the unemployment rate during the recession. For example, if mismatches were of central importance, we would not expect to see high rates of unemployment across the vast majority of occupations and industries. Instead, I see weak demand for labor as the predominant explanation of why the rate of unemployment remains elevated and rates of resource utilization more generally are still well below normal levels. Commodity Prices and the Real EconomyAs I have indicated, the recent run-up in commodity prices is likely to weigh somewhat on consumer spending in coming months because it puts a painful squeeze on the pocketbooks of American households.5In particular, higher oil prices lower American income overall because the United States is a major oil importer and hence much of the proceeds are transferred abroad. Monetary policy cannot directly alter this transfer of income abroad, which primarily reflects a change in relative prices driven by global demand and supply balances, not conditions in the United States. Thus, an increase in the price of crude oil acts like a tax on U.S. households, and like other taxes, tends to have a dampening effect on consumer spending.6 The surge in commodity prices may also dampen business spending. Higher food and energy prices should boost investment in agriculture, drilling, and mining but are likely to weigh on investment spending by firms in other sectors. Assuming these firms are unable to fully pass through higher input costs into prices, they will experience some compression in their profit margins, at least in the short run, thereby causing a decline in the marginal return on investment in most forms of equipment and structures.7Moreover, to the extent that higher oil prices are associated with greater uncertainty about the economic outlook, businesses may decide to put off key investment decisions until that uncertainty subsides. Finally, with higher oil prices weighing on household income, weaker consumer spending could discourage business capital spending to some degree. Fortunately, considerable evidence suggests that the effect of energy price shocks on the real economy has decreased substantially over the past several decades. During the period before the creation of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), cheap oil encouraged households to purchase gas-guzzling cars while firms had incentives to use energy-intensive production techniques. Consequently, when oil prices quadrupled in 1973-74, that degree of energy dependence resulted in substantial adverse effects on real economic activity. Since then, however, energy efficiency in both production and consumption has improved markedly. Consequently, while the recent run-up in commodity prices is likely to weigh somewhat on consumer and business spending in coming months, I do not anticipate that those developments will greatly impede the economic recovery as long as these trends do not continue much further. For example, the simulation of the FRB/US model that I noted earlier indicates that a persistent increase of $25 per barrel in oil prices would reduce the level of real GDP about 1/2 percent over the first year and a bit more thereafter. The magnitude of that effect seems broadly consistent with the estimates of professional forecasters; for example, the Blue Chip consensus outlook for real GDP growth has edged down only modestly in recent months. Monetary Policy ConsiderationsLet me now turn to the stance of monetary policy. As you know, monetary policy has been highly accommodative since the financial crisis intensified. In December 2008, the FOMC lowered the target federal funds rate to near zero and started to provide forward guidance concerning its likely future path. As in its statements since March 2009, the Committee reiterated last month that "economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period." In addition, the FOMC has purchased a substantial volume of agency debt, agency mortgage-backed securities, and longer-term Treasury securities. The Committee initiated a second round of Treasury purchases last November and has indicated that it intends to complete those purchases by the end of June. My reading of the evidence is that these securities purchases have proven effective in easing financial conditions, thereby promoting a stronger pace of economic recovery and checking undesirable disinflationary pressures. I believe this accommodative policy stance is still appropriate because unemployment remains elevated, longer-run inflation expectations remain well anchored, and measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low relative to the rate of 2 percent or a bit less that Committee participants judge to be consistent over the longer term with our statutory mandate. However, there can be no question that sometime down the road, as the recovery gathers steam, it will become necessary for the FOMC to withdraw the monetary policy accommodation we have put in place. That process will involve both raising the target federal funds rate over time and gradually normalizing the size and composition of our security holdings. Importantly, we are confident that we have the tools in place to withdraw monetary stimulus, and we are prepared to use those tools when the right time comes. Of course, there are risks to the outlook that may affect the timing and pace of monetary policy firming. In my view, however, even additional large and persistent shocks to commodity prices might not call for any substantial change in the course of monetary policy as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored and measures of underlying inflation continue to be subdued. As I noted earlier, a surge in commodity prices unavoidably impairs performance with respect to both aspects of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate: Such shocks push up unemploymentandraise inflation. A policy easing might alleviate the effects on employment but would tend to exacerbate the inflationary effects; conversely, policy firming might mitigate the rise in inflation but would contribute to an even weaker economic recovery. Under such circumstances, an appropriate balance in fulfilling our dual mandate might well call for the FOMC to leave the stance of monetary policy broadly unchanged. That said, in light of the experience of the 1970s, it is clear that we cannot be complacent about the stability of inflation expectations, and we must be prepared to take decisive action to keep these expectations stable. For example, if a continued run-up in commodity prices appeared to be sparking a wage-price spiral, then underlying inflation could begin trending upward at an unacceptable pace. Such circumstances would clearly call for policy firming to ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored. ConclusionIn summary, the surge in commodity prices over the past year appears to be largely attributable to a combination of rising global demand and disruptions in global supply. These developments seem unlikely to have persistent effects on consumer inflation or to derail the economic recovery and hence do not, in my view, warrant any substantial shift in the stance of monetary policy. However, my colleagues and I are paying close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations, and we are prepared to act as needed to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with our statutory mandate. 1.I am indebted to Board staff membersChristopher Erceg,Steven Kamin,David Lebow,Andrew Levin,Trevor Reeve,David Reifschneider,Stacey Tevlin, andWilliam Wascherfor their assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2.Longer-dated futures suggest that the prices of some important commodities, such as cotton, are expected to fall or at least remain flat in coming years; there is little incentive to speculate in commodities whose prices are not expected to increase further.Return to text 3.Overall inflation and core inflation regularly deviate from one another. When this has occurred over the past 25 years, the tendency has been for overall inflation to subsequently converge to core inflation, and not the other way around.Return to text 4.An example of this pattern was seen in the months following Hurricane Katrina in 2005.Return to text 5.It should be noted that commodity price increases do boost the incomes of commodity producers. For example, the recent surge in food prices has generally boosted the incomes of farmers and others with ties to the agricultural sector.Return to text 6.Staff analysis at the Federal Reserve Board indicates that a dollar increase in retail gasoline prices--a little more than has occurred over the last year--reduces real household disposable income by nearly 1 percent and hence tends to exert a significant drag on consumer spending.Return to text 7.Increased investment in energy-conserving technologies would likely provide a partial offset to the various factors damping capital spending outside the commodity-producing sectors.Return to text
Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin At the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Community Bankers Conference, New York, New York Thank you for the opportunity to join you this morning. Let me begin by saying that it's a pleasure for me to be among community bankers. I used to be the banking commissioner in Maryland and will always be grateful to the community bankers there who were crucial to informing my views on effective bank regulation. At the height of the mortgage crisis, those same community bankers partnered with regulators like me to survey the wreckage and to stabilize our communities as best we could. Together, we confronted and weathered that searing experience and learned many lessons along the way. I'm here today to share with you some of those lessons. Although decisive action by policymakers has been successful in containing the crisis, we should not presume that the experience of the crisis is over. To be sure, the frantic days of rushed mergers of major financial institutions; emergency applications of nonbanks to become bank holding companies; and large-scale, targeted Federal Reserve programs to stabilize markets and restore the flow of credit are behind us. If we were doctors, we'd say that we had successfully treated the worst symptoms of the illness. But as we've learned from the other crises that are buffeting our world today, both natural and man-made, rescue and containment are only the first steps. Now we must address the aftershocks of the subprime mortgage meltdown: dislocation, joblessness, and loss of confidence. From a regulatory and supervisory perspective, we will certainly be dealing with the long-term consequences of the crisis for years to come. And, as we head toward an increasingly healthy, but still highly complex and concentrated, post-crisis financial system, we must strive to find the appropriate balance of responsibility between banks and supervisors. I'm hoping to open the dialogue about that today. A significant backdrop to the post-crisis financial architecture is the expansive federal legislation that is known as the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank). Broadly speaking, Dodd-Frank gives us a roadmap for updating the regulatory framework of our financial system post-crisis, but it does not give us turn-by-turn directions for how to incorporate the new requirements into our supervisory processes. To that end, the Federal Reserve and other federal regulators are devoting considerable time to implementing the requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act. Translating all of the new legislative requirements into rules and regulations, and then into an effective supervisory and examination program, is a massive undertaking, but it is essential to moving beyond the stabilization phase of crisis recovery and into that phase where we address the underlying fault lines in our financial institution landscape. As we work through Dodd-Frank implementation, we will need to ask: What constitutes effective supervision in the post-crisis world? I expect that the answer will be the subject of debate for months and possibly years. The process of identifying the factors most important to constructing an effective supervisory and examination program has already begun. For America's community banks, the vast majority of which did not contribute to the subprime crisis, the contours of this program will be of critical importance. As we have learned all too well, a financial system dominated by a handful of large institutions is unlikely to be resilient in the face of a crisis. My view is that a diffuse financial system--one with a diverse range of institutions of varying size and complexity--is preferable to a system that is highly concentrated. In fact, the need for diversification is one of the great lessons of the crisis. Indeed, we found that, irrespective of size, those banks most likely to weather the crisis were those with diverse loan portfolios, management information systems capable of monitoring concentrations, reasonably diversified funding sources and liquidity management processes, and forward-looking analyses that considered how loan portfolios might perform and affect bank conditions under periods of stress. We need many, many more banks with these characteristics because these are the banks that absorbed the shocks of the crisis, remained relatively healthy, and, most significantly, now have the potential to thrive as robust sources of credit in their communities after the crisis. As I see it, we need to create within the Dodd-Frank regulatory architecture a supervisory and examination program that encourages diversification and forward-looking strategies as a means to ensuring a healthy financial system and a steady flow of loans to creditworthy borrowers. Am I saying that it is the responsibility of examiners, in essence, to guarantee that the banking system becomes more resilient and incapable of failure? No. A regulatory system that guarantees against bank failures is not in my mind desirable, even if such a system could be established in a cost-effective manner. To illustrate, I'll borrow a concept from the field of statistics. When drawing conclusions based on test results, statisticians and scientists often factor in the possibility of erroneous results, or "false negatives" and "false positives." Some economists have extended this concept to assessing the effectiveness of regulation. Imagine that you visit your doctor for an annual checkup and have your cholesterol level tested. When the results come back from the lab, they show that all is well. But what if your cholesterol actually was high and an error in the test resulted in a clean bill of health? That would be a false negative, and I'm sure you can see the problems it would pose. You might not change your diet and exercise habits, and your doctor probably wouldn't refer you for further testing or give you that firm lecture that they like to give about the importance of taking better care of yourself. Instead, your rising cholesterol levels would go undetected and untreated until your next checkup, or even worse, until you suffer a heart attack. In the context of bank supervision, a false negative occurs when an examiner does not identify and address a deteriorating or failing bank in a timely manner. History has shown that the costs of these false negatives can balloon during times of broad economic and financial stress, which results in a significant drag on the economy and weakens banks' ability to lend. There were clearly too many of these false negatives in the recent crisis, particularly among the largest financial firms, both here and abroad. In addition to the billions of dollars of direct costs to the Deposit Insurance Fund as a result of bank failures, the deep recession of 2007 to 2009 most likely would have been mitigated had the risk of exposure to real estate at many banks been recognized earlier. Many of the reform efforts that regulators and the Congress have undertaken--reforms that are clearly needed--are aimed at improving regulators' ability to identify and address troubled institutions earlier, and to limit the impact of failures when they do happen. Now, returning to the medical analogy, imagine that your test results show that your cholesterol level is worryingly high, only in this case you are actually the picture of health. This is a false positive, and it poses problems of its own. While there may be some ancillary benefits to improving your diet and exercise habits, the inaccurate test result likely would cause you undue angst and, in an abundance of caution, subject you to a series of expensive, and ultimately unnecessary, follow-up measures. A false positive in banking supervision occurs when examiners inaccurately identify a sound bank as having significant problems. When this happens, we may then take the step of accelerating onsite examinations even though the bank remains in satisfactory condition. To be clear, we err on the side of accepting some false positives because, as we saw during the crisis, the costs of missing too many problems are so high. Having said that, we recognize that false positives are not free: They impose a real cost on examiners in the form of resource use and also on banks in terms of imposing the burden of an onsite review. In one way, effective supervision is striking a balance between false negatives and false positives, recognizing the costs of each. As we look forward, I think policymakers will need to find a similar balance between the responsibilities of examiners and the responsibilities of banks to ensure compliance with laws and regulations and to maintain a safe and sound banking system. Make no mistake, the crisis made clear that more effective regulations and more consequential examiner reviews of banks are needed. But, at the same time, banks have a fundamental--arguablythefundamental--role to play in improving financial system resilience. So, how do the responsibilities of banks and examiners meet to maximize safety and soundness? When I imagine the model of a healthy bank--no matter its size or complexity--I picture a series of concentric circles. The inner circles are composed of the systems and functions that keep the bank healthy and allow it to meet the credit needs of its community while remaining financially sound and compliant with its legal and regulatory obligations. Inner circle systems and functions help the bank identify, monitor, and remedy the various problems that arise in its ordinary course of business. These would include, among other things, internal audit, executive management committees, governance by a board of directors, policies and procedures, and critical reporting relationships. The outer circle, then, is effective supervision. This layering of circles implies that there are multiple internal and external checks on behavior that make timely identification and resolution of problems more likely. We could probably spend the day arguing about the proper order of the outward progression of these circles, but I think we can all agree that at the core of a healthy bank is an effective corporate governance structure. A bank's board of directors should understand the bank's exposure to risk, and its members should be willing and able to critically question senior management about important matters affecting those risks. In my experience, specific technical financial expertise--which may be somewhat more difficult to find in smaller communities--is not nearly as important in this regard as board members' ability to exercise sound and effective judgment regarding different risks confronting the bank and to take seriously their responsibility for the long-term interests of the bank. The board of directors, along with a strong senior management team, can contribute substantially to the safe and sound operation of the bank by setting the "tone at the top" regarding activities and behaviors that are either encouraged or frowned upon. Well-informed managers and staff constitute another inner circle. Customer-facing employees who know their business and know their customer base can play a critical role in catching problems at inception. And institutional knowledge of this kind is an area of relative strength for community banks. Successful business lines are profitable because they are run by those who understand and can manage risk. Risk is best understood, I believe, by those who are engaged in the day-to-day business of the bank. A bank in which every employee understands his or her responsibility for managing risk is likely to be more sound than a bank in which risk management is always seen as someone else's responsibility. While risk management starts at the business-line level, a well-run bank also has in place an effective program for enterprise-wide risk management that is supported by strong internal controls. I know that many smaller community banks may not have the resources to establish a separate risk management function, but that is not necessarily a problem if senior management and other key personnel establish a system of internal, independent checks and balances to ensure that risks are regularly identified, controlled or otherwise managed, and monitored. These systems include not only core functions such as credit administration, effective reporting of information to senior management and the board, and policies and procedures that are documented and implemented, but also processes that try to look ahead to potential risks on the horizon. Another of the inner circles is a strong internal audit function that reviews the bank's operations, risk management, and internal controls. In particular, an effective internal audit function will: identify processes to be audited based on risk exposure, establish a schedule and frequency for performing internal audits, ensure that there is accountability for fixing problems identified in the audit, and escalate significant unresolved issues to the board of directors or its audit committee. This concentric circle model illustrates my belief that problem identification is first and foremost the responsibility of the bank. A safe and sound banking system starts with banks that take seriously the importance of sound governance, business judgment, risk management, internal controls, and compliance. Banking supervision provides another level of protection, but it was never intended to be a substitute for a bank's own risk management processes, nor should it be.1 And this brings us to the outer circle: banking supervision. First and foremost, examiners need to understand and work within the scope of their role. For example, examiners should not substitute their judgment for that of bank management. A bank's board and senior management are responsible for running the bank, and it is not appropriate for examiners to be overly engaged in the routine business of a healthy bank. There will of course be times when examiners are justified in questioning decisions or requiring action when a bank may be operating in an unsafe and unsound manner or is not in compliance with law. In that regard, we have heard from some community bankers that pressure from examiners may affect a bank's willingness to lend to creditworthy small businesses and consumers. We have worked hard to ensure that our examiners are well-trained and employ a balanced approach to reviewing banks' credit policies and practices. We will continue to monitor this closely. I would also suggest that examiners are regulators and as such should not view banks as their customers or clients. There are times when the interests of banks and regulators are aligned, and there are many instances where our objectives diverge. This doesn't mean that examiners and banks will inevitably have a contentious relationship. Indeed, I think many banks, particularly those that are well run, would characterize their relationship with examiners as professional and constructive, and would agree that examination findings are not arbitrary and in fact help them to improve their internal systems. That is as it should be. A regulator's relationship with a supervised bank must not get in the way of his or her willingness and ability to make tough calls. At the end of the day, some regulatory failures may be inevitable. Examiners are smart, well-trained, diligent, and conscientious. They are committed to public service and take their responsibilities seriously. But even the best examiners are no more prescient than the managers of the banks they oversee and cannot be expected to head off every problem or detect every risk. The risk management systems and functions that comprise those inner concentric circles must be the primary mechanisms for heading off problems and detecting risks before they grow. Unfortunately, there is no panacea to eliminating risk: Even the combination of appropriately designed risk management tools and thorough supervision can not completely eliminate the risk of low-probability, high-impact events. While I realize this sounds somewhat pessimistic, in fact I am quite optimistic about examiners' ability to play a strong and effective role in a healthy banking system. In that regard, let me return to the concentric circle model and describe what we should expect from bank supervisors in the outermost circle. One of the most important functions of supervisors in a healthy banking system is to set high standards through the establishment of policies and through the design of a strong supervisory program. Of course we should be vigilant about avoiding policies and practices that add little value and impose great burdens on banks, and I can assure you that we take that responsibility seriously, especially as it regards community banks. But we also should set the bar high when it comes to our expectations for acceptable bank risk management and business practices. We should be--and I believe we are--tough but fair. In addition to setting high expectations, examiners should strive for balance and consistency throughout the business cycle--that is, we should be careful not to be too hands-off when times are good and not to overreact when times are bad. If you're driving a car on a curving mountain road, accelerating too fast on the straight stretches leaves you with three choices when the road bends: either you slam on the brakes, end up in a ditch on the side of the road, or get lucky and make it through. It's far safer to maintain a relatively steady speed, accelerating and decelerating gently as necessary, than to swing between extremes. So it is with examination. If examiners do not evaluate banks' practices with sufficient rigor during the boom years, then it may be necessary to take a more draconian approach during the bust years, when problems are revealed. It has emerged that a number of regulators and examiners became concerned about concentrations in commercial real estate lending several years before the financial crisis. Despite the red flags raised by this lending, it was difficult for examiners to challenge bank management at a time when these loans were performing well and banks were generating record profits. There was also strong pushback from the industry when the banking regulators began raising alarms about the potential risks of excessive concentrations. Regulators finally issued guidance on concentrations in commercial real estate in late 2006, but in retrospect I think it is fair to wonder whether action should have been taken sooner. That brings me to my next point, which is that examiners have a key role to play in reviewing and assessing the quality of a bank's internal controls, compliance, internal audit, et cetera. A central element of the Federal Reserve's supervisory programs is assessing the effectiveness of these processes and functions. We should understand where a bank's primary risks arise and use enforcement tools as necessary to ensure that management is sufficiently focused on these risks. Examiners should clearly communicate their findings to banks and maintain a regular dialogue about their risks and their risk management processes. When examiners find weaknesses in any of these areas, we expect that banks will address them in a timely manner. One thing I would note here is that if done properly, effective examination requires looking behind the numbers. The crisis made clear that a bank that appears to be in sound financial condition may actually have a ticking time bomb on its books. As I said before, it can be difficult for an examiner to tell a profitable bank with strong financial indicators that there are management weaknesses. But that is exactly what we should empower our examiners to do because we know that the seeds of financial crisis are planted during the good times. When conducting an examination, an examiner should be attuned to weaknesses in governance, risk management, and internal controls that may not pose a current problem but that may expose the bank to losses in the future. And ultimately, as you know, it is easier to fix a problem during the good times. Finally, one of the key roles that examiners play in a healthy financial system is to provide context and perspective. This is natural given the number of banking organizations that we examine and inspect, and I believe the Federal Reserve's renewed financial stability mandate under the Dodd-Frank Act will enhance our ability to assess not just individual banks, but also the system as a whole. Examiners have a longstanding practice of assessing a bank's performance and practices relative to its peers. This should not be a purely mechanical exercise where the examiner demands that a bank meet or exceed financial indicators for its peer group. Instead, we should use these assessments to understand a bank's performance relative to peers in the context of its own unique facts and circumstances. The expectations that I have described for both banks and examiners are not just hypothetical. You may haveheardmuch more about the banks that faltered under intense credit and liquidity pressures, but the Federal Reserve has also been focused on the performance of those community banks that have remained in sound condition throughout the crisis. Many of the community banks supervised by the Federal Reserve that entered the crisis with a supervisory rating of "1" or "2"--the highest ratings on the 1-to-5 scale used by bank supervisors--have managed to keep these ratings. Most of these banks entered the crisis with moderate exposures to commercial real estate, and continued to report strong earnings and net interest margins throughout the crisis. They reported very limited reliance on noncore funding and strong capital levels as they entered the crisis. They earned solid, though not spectacular, returns and they reported steady performance. And, while this is less quantifiable, many of these banks have effective boards of directors and strong and experienced management teams. It is important that examiners keep this in mind as they evaluate and refine their supervisory processes in the wake of the crisis. ConclusionI certainly don't claim to have all the answers when it comes to delineating the appropriate roles and responsibilities between management and examiners in a healthy bank, but I hope my remarks today will at least start a conversation about how best to structure a regulatory and supervisory framework for the banking system that effectively supports the real economy and encourages sound and sustained lending to creditworthy borrowers. We know that those community banks that weathered the storm during the crisis are already doing this in their own communities and we can learn from their experience. In order to sustain the economic recovery, we need strong, well-run community banks that operate in a framework of smart and effective supervision. I commend you for the work that you are doing every day in your communities, and I look forward to continuing the dialogue on our respective priorities and concerns. 1. Although not discussed here because I would like to focus my brief remarks on the balance of responsibilities between banks and supervisors, market discipline--when appropriate transparency exists--can also play an important role in creating incentives for banks to identify and mitigate risks.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Community Affairs Research Conference, Arlington, Virginia Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. As always, I'm pleased to join you at the Federal Reserve's biennial Community Affairs Research Conference. This meeting brings together researchers, community development professionals, and public-sector officials to explore how best to strengthen struggling communities. Needless to say, that endeavor is more crucial than ever. The past few years have been very difficult. Weak economic conditions at the national level have translated into hardships in many communities at the same time that communities have fewer resources available for stabilization and revitalization. Considerable good work is going on nonetheless, and I will offer a few examples of that today. At the national level, the economy is recovering at a moderate pace. In particular, the labor market has been gradually improving and the unemployment rate has declined somewhat. But unemployment remains quite high, particularly among minorities, the young, and those with less education. What's more, long-term unemployment remains at historically high levels. Nearly half of the unemployed have been out of work for six months or more. The housing market is also holding back the recovery. The foreclosure rate remains very high, and many homeowners who have avoided foreclosure find themselves "under water," meaning their mortgage debt exceeds the value of their homes. Obviously, the problems in the labor market and the housing market are not unrelated. In particular, lost income from unemployment is causing many families to fall behind on their mortgage payments. The Challenges to CommunitiesAs families have struggled, so have their communities. In some areas, for example, high foreclosure rates have produced significant numbers of vacant properties, depressing surrounding home prices, attracting crime, and creating financial burdens for local governments. Thus, some community development groups now are simply trying to hold onto past progress that they have made in building up the physical infrastructure and human capital of their communities, while others have lost ground and are beginning the process of rebuilding. While the scale of the problems has been exceptional, many of the problems themselves are not new for lower-income families and communities that were already struggling. People who were vulnerable to begin with--those with low incomes, few assets, and less education--have had a more difficult time weathering the financial storm or recovering from setbacks. The same is true for communities that were already relatively poor, with fewer community assets and insufficient drivers of economic growth. To solve problems, we must first understand them. Like many of you here today, the Federal Reserve has been engaged for some time in research and analysis of the economic challenges faced by neighborhoods and communities as well as by individuals and families. For example, in 2008, the Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors, in partnership with the Brookings Institution, published a study of the effects of concentrated poverty on communities.1The communities studied included older inner cities in the North, smaller cities in the South and West, Native American reservations, "gateway" neighborhoods that are entry points for immigrants, and rural areas in Appalachia and the Mississippi Delta. What these diverse communities had in common was that they did not share in our country's general prosperity, even in good times. Our research identified some of the barriers to economic progress shared by these communities, including inadequate schools and workforce skills, lack of investment in infrastructure and business development, and limited institutional capacity. Not surprisingly, these communities were particularly ill-equipped to deal with the recession. Of course, economic conditions in a given community both affect and are affected by the economic status of the individuals and families in that community. One of the most valuable sources of data on family finances is the Federal Reserve Board's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances.2To better understand the effects of the crisis on households, the Board, in a special update to its 2007 survey, asked the participants about their financial and personal circumstances two years later, in 2009.3The findings help illustrate the challenges facing families and communities. According to this special survey, lower-income households continued to experience significantly more unemployment than higher-income households. In 2009, nearly one-fourth of the families in the bottom half of the income distribution had at least one member who was out of work for some portion of the year prior to the survey; this rate was about double that of higher-income households. Declines in the values of homes and stocks sharply reduced the wealth of many Americans during the crisis. Three-fifths or more of families across all income groups reported a decline in wealth between 2007 and 2009, and the typical household lost nearly one-fifth of its wealth, regardless of income group. Moreover, one in eight of the households in the panel started the crisis with zero or negative net worth and thus had scant resources to fall back on to maintain their standard of living during bouts of unemployment. Unemployment and declines in wealth obviously can make it difficult for a household to pay its debts on time. The survey update found that lower-income households fell behind on their payments at a substantially higher rate than higher-income households. Among households with debt, about 11 percent of those with incomes in the bottom half of the income distribution fell 60 days or more behind on at least one of their obligations in 2009, compared with nearly 3 percent of those in the highest tenth of the income distribution. Just as lower-income households weather financial storms with more difficulty, the same is true of communities. Even before the crisis, some neighborhoods, towns, and cities were in distress. Those areas already lacked sufficient assets such as strong public schools and community facilities, and rising unemployment and falling tax revenues reduced the funds available for public services even as needs increased. Often, residents were disproportionately unbanked or underbanked and relied on expensive alternative financial service providers. In communities with already low housing values--due, for instance, to oversupply caused by population shifts--the wave of foreclosures that began in 2007 sent the number of vacant properties soaring, causing additional problems. In short, the financial crisis and recession touched many families and communities. But those that were struggling before the crisis were often disproportionately affected. Responding to the ChallengesThe challenges for those working to address the many evident problems in troubled communities can be daunting. When so many social and economic problems are interconnected--high unemployment, foreclosures, crime, loss of tax revenues and social services, lack of economic opportunity--deciding where to start to improve the situation can be quite difficult. Certainly no single program or approach will address all of the problems. But realistically, we have to pick places to begin, with the expectation that finding solutions in one area will confer wider benefits. For example, providing responsible credit for individuals and small businesses through community development financial institutions can stimulate economic activity that generates local tax revenues. Those tax revenues can be spent on programs to put vacant properties back into active use, helping to reduce crime, or on job training or economic development programs, leading to more employment and wage income that can help homeowners avoid foreclosures. As the Board's eyes and ears around the country, the Federal Reserve Banks have kept us well informed of the variety of ways local communities are meeting the challenges of tough times in troubled communities. Though the following is only a small sampling of the work going on around the country, I'd like to share a few of these stories with the hope that one community's success may lead others to emulate it. In Massachusetts, for example, a community development financial institution called Boston Community Capital is pursuing an innovative strategy to prevent occupied homes from becoming vacant and creating a strain on the community. Through special financing entities, it buys foreclosed-upon but still occupied homes from lenders at market value. The initiative, dubbed Stabilizing Urban Neighborhoods, or SUN, is focused on six low-income neighborhoods in Boston that have the city's highest concentration of foreclosures. Taking advantage of the diminished home values, the group buys the properties and then resells them at affordable prices to existing occupants‑-both owners and tenants--who can demonstrate that they have suffered hardship. This program prevents properties from becoming vacant and provides families with a sustainable and affordable housing situation; it is designed to start small and expand as needed. In the South, ACCION Texas-Louisiana, a nonprofit organization, has been focused on assisting entrepreneurs start small businesses and helping existing small businesses to expand. ACCION lends to entrepreneurs whose businesses are too small or too new to qualify for a regular bank loan. Minority-owned businesses receive more than 80 percent of its loans, and almost half of the lending goes to women-owned businesses. Since 2009, the organization has expanded from Texas into Louisiana to respond to small businesses affected by Hurricane Katrina. The recession put extra pressure on ACCION, as existing borrowers were having increasing trouble paying back their loans. At the same time, demand for its services increased, as newly laid-off workers were seeking loans to start their own businesses. The organization responded by expanding its services--opening a business support center and business incubators, providing more comprehensive technical assistance, developing new business partnerships, reaching into new markets, and strengthening its underwriting platform to reduce waiting time for applicants and reduce its own costs. In my home state of South Carolina, as in many parts of the country, the effects of the crisis varies from community to community. For instance, the city of Charleston, a popular tourist destination known for its historic architecture and fine cuisine, is faring relatively well overall. Even so, both unemployment and poverty in the greater Charleston area increased significantly between 2007 and 2009.4Median income in the nearby city of North Charleston, which has struggled ever since a naval base closed in 1996, is about three-fourths that of Charleston. In some older neighborhoods, families have moved out, leaving behind many vacant properties. Some parts of the metropolitan area are experiencing economic growth, but the benefits of that growth do not reach all communities. While some major corporations have expanded into the area, inadequate education and training, as well as the lack of public transportation, make it difficult for many residents of low-income and minority communities to take advantage of new jobs. Local development groups have been working to ameliorate the situation. For example, Metanoia CDC, a community development corporation, is located in the heart of the old naval communities of North Charleston, and its work has visibly improved the hardest hit communities. Its holistic range of programs--in community leadership, quality affordable housing, and economic development--appears to be contributing to decreasing crime, rising student grades, and homes for first-time homebuyers. The group focuses on building assets--both physical and human--such as transforming vacant buildings into homes for families and helping students in a Young Leaders program improve their performance in school. In the San Joaquin Valley of California, the unemployment rate hovers around 18 percent. In 2009, in response to the ongoing foreclosure crisis, nonprofit agencies; local, state, and federal agencies; academics; real estate professionals; financial institutions; small business and workforce development professionals; and loan servicers organized the San Joaquin Valley Foreclosure Task Force. The original intent was to coordinate efforts on a regional scale to avoid preventable foreclosures. This work continues, and the group is now expanding its efforts to also help families that have already gone through a foreclosure. This year, the task force is beginning a series of foreclosure recovery workshops across the valley. Families will learn about local programs and assistance, including job training and employment assistance. Credit counselors will help them begin repairing their damaged credit. And, in cases in which they may be victims of fraud, they will receive guidance and referrals to legal aid attorneys. As a final example, in Cleveland, local leaders in the Slavic Village neighborhood have been dealing with some of the highest foreclosure rates in the nation since the 1990s. Cleveland saw population loss for five successive decades, resulting in an oversupply of housing. With the onset of the financial crisis, the problem began to worsen dramatically. By 2007, Slavic Village was the Zip code with the highest number of foreclosures in the nation. By 2010, more than 1,500 properties in a neighborhood of 11,000 homes needed to be demolished. This community has a history of strong neighborhood organizations, and as might be expected, its residents, community leaders, nonprofits, local governments, and companies stepped up their efforts. In one partnership, community groups are using data provided by a local university to identify borrowers at risk of foreclosure and are reaching out to them, door to door, to see what might be done to prevent a foreclosure. In another example, residents and community leaders in Slavic Village alerted county prosecutors to fraudulent lending in the neighborhood. As the crisis continues to play out, community leaders have found ways to reuse vacant land, adding gardens, yard expansions, and bike trails among the neighborhood's declining number of homes, making it safer and more attractive. Business leaders are helping as well by purchasing and demolishing properties adjacent to the gardens and trails and supporting the renovation and expansion of a nearby school and recreation center. I have cited just a few examples of work that is making a difference at the grassroots level all around the country. They show that, though the challenges in troubled communities are indeed daunting, we are far from helpless, and much good work is being accomplished. For our part, we at the Federal Reserve will remain closely attuned to the economic health of all communities, including low- and moderate-income communities. Each of our Federal Reserve Banks works with local leaders and community groups to provide relevant research, data, and support, with the Board backing up these efforts across the country. The broader economy is in a moderate recovery, and we have recently seen some welcome, if gradual, improvement in the labor market. But our economy is far from where we would like it to be, and many people and neighborhoods are in danger of being left behind. The work of community groups, local leaders and businesses, and others is a critical component to a national economic recovery. In addition to our work in regulating banks and in conducting monetary policy so as to achieve maximum employment with price stability, the Federal Reserve will continue to assist these efforts through local community outreach, by using its convening power, and through research like that being discussed at this conference. If we work together, I believe we can find effective ways to repair the damage done by the crisis to the economic prospects of families and communities. Until vulnerable families and troubled communities have regained lost progress, the economic recovery will remain incomplete. 1.David Erickson, Carolina Reid, Lisa Nelson, Anne O'Shaughnessy, and Alan Berube, eds. (2008),The Enduring Challenge of Concentrated Poverty in America: Case Studies from Communities across the U.S.(Washington: Federal Reserve System and Brookings Institution).Return to text 2.The Survey of Consumer Financesis available on the Board's website.Return to text 3.For a summary, see Jessie Bricker, Brian Bucks, Arthur Kennickell, Traci Mach, and Kevin Moore (2011), "Surveying the Aftermath of the Storm: Changes in Family Finances from 2007 to 2009," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-17 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Board, March).Return to text 4.For the Metropolitan Statistical Area, the poverty rate increased from 12.5 percent to 15.6 percent between 2007 and 2009 (for one-year estimates, see U.S. Census Bureau (2007), American Community Survey (Washington: Census Bureau); and U.S. Census Bureau (2009), American Community Survey(Washington: Census Bureau)) The unemployment rate in the area rose from roughly 4.5 percent to about 11 percent between December 2007 and June 2009 (Bureau of Labor Statistics and Haver Analytics).Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the 2011 Federal Reserve Community Affairs Research Conference, Arlington, Virginia The Federal Reserve is best known for its role in the national economy and monetary policy. But through the 12 Federal Reserve Banks across the country, it also gets involved in efforts to support local communities and their economies. This work helps to enhance our understanding of the pace of economic recovery and further creates a backdrop for a national dialogue about common problems and their potential solutions. Over the last several years, every community across the country has felt the effects of the financial crisis. Foreclosed, vacant, and abandoned properties threaten neighborhoods nationwide, and community leaders are working to stabilize those neighborhoods. While the problem touches every community, it doesn't look the same in each because it's shaped by the circumstances that prevailed in those neighborhoods before the crisis hit. Neighborhood stabilization efforts are critical, now more than ever, as not all communities will be stabilized without intervention. This is because the market will not correct equally in all places. Through the 12 Reserve Banks and the Board, the Federal Reserve System facilitates community development activities as communities strive to repair the damage wrought by the financial crisis. We participate in local collaboration efforts, help evaluate what's working and what's not, and highlight promising practices. We do this by combining research and local outreach, and also by bringing together financial institutions, policymakers, and community leaders. Introduction of Three Federal Reserve Community Development VideosWhile the Fed conducts all kinds of research analyzing economic trends, we're also looking for new ways to identify and showcase replicable models. To that end, I'd like to share with you a series of stories we've produced that highlight various challenges faced by communities and targeted strategies to deal with them. Everyone has heard about the foreclosure crisis, but it helps to see what it really looks like. So, we're featuring three very different cities in a series of video reports that will be accessible on the Federal Reserve's website. These "Reports from the Field" showcase three promising stabilization efforts that highlight grassroots innovation and collaboration. ClevelandCleveland neighborhoods face five decades of population loss, outmigration of jobs, and urban sprawl, in addition to the more recent wave of foreclosures. Despite these persistent challenges, city leaders have responded with dynamic leadership. In Cleveland, public and private partners have created an innovative stabilization strategy that uses targeted data to help community leaders focus scarce resources on the neighborhoods that have the best chance for success. This is a model that has great potential to be replicated in other cities. Let's watchCleveland's story. As the video highlights, Cleveland's success is built around both on-the-ground community outreach and intensive data collection that helps to identify block-level and community-level trends. It showcases strong collaboration among city and county officials; nonprofits like Neighborhood Progress, Inc.; local foundations; and universities. The Northeast Ohio Community and Neighborhood Data for Organizing (NEO CANDO) provides cutting-edge analytical mapping tools, and these data help steer resources into neighborhoods where the money will have the greatest impact. This "tipping point" strategy relies on the comprehensive investment of public and private resources for sustained stabilization. PhoenixThe crisis looks different in western states. Phoenix reminds us that the foreclosure problem has hit suburban as well as urban areas. The vacant homes here tend to be newer than in many parts of the country, but overbuilding has left a high proportion of foreclosed homes in a community that has never dealt with these issues at scale before. Here, public-private partnerships have reached out to real estate professionals to help connect eligible families with affordable homes. Let's take a look atPhoenix. Given that the problem in Phoenix has largely been shaped by overbuilding and falling home prices, Phoenix faces a much different set of post-foreclosure crisis issues than older industrial cities such as Cleveland or Detroit. In Phoenix, houses and sometimes entire subdivisions are often purchased by investors armed with cash and able to move faster than individual homebuyers. The challenge for those trying to revitalize neighborhoods is to ensure that qualified homeowners and non-profits are in a position to compete with investors for these now affordable homes, and the city and private sector have come together to achieve this goal. DetroitWhile population growth may eventually aid the recovery in places like Phoenix, communities like Detroit are faced with the opposite problem. In Detroit, the nexus between decades of population loss and the foreclosure crisis has created a pivotal moment in which the city must reinvent itself. With extensive economic challenges and an infrastructure designed for a much larger population, few easy solutions exist. The city is partnering with community leaders to bring together thousands of residents to help make the tough choices that will shape Detroit's future. Let's turn toDetroit. As the video illustrates, Detroit is finding new solutions to the decades-long problem of stabilizing its neighborhoods and attracting new residents. The Detroit Works Project aims to reimagine the city's geographic footprint and service range, based on the current smaller population. Detroit's story reminds us that when ideas are controversial and hard choices must be made, community input and buy-in is critical for success. To this end, the project has hosted extensive community meetings and created a leadership taskforce to map out future growth and investment areas. ConclusionAt the Federal Reserve, we have been working to understand the issues, help craft national policies, and collect data that can be used by government agencies and nonprofits. But sometimes a research paper or a speech doesn't give you a true picture of what the foreclosure crisis really looks like. When I began my role as a Governor, I travelled to the 12 Reserve Bank Districts to see firsthand what was happening across the country. It was an eye-opening experience--one that has informed my perspective as a Governor. And these stories from around the country can help provide the same type of context for researchers and policymakers. Here at the Federal Reserve we are learning more each day about the complex task of stabilizing communities in the wake of the crisis, and research and analysis of what is working is critical. From these video "Reports from the Field," we've learned that collaborations and partnerships help achieve success; strategic targeting of limited resources may be necessary; data can help focus a strategy; community input and buy-in are critical for long-term planning; and different approaches will work for diverse challenges and places. The Fed will continue to identify the needs and challenges facing communities by fostering a dialogue for a better understanding of community development practices. As the research conference unfolds over the next two days, we'll learn more about what community development may look like going forward. While research and evaluation remain central to the Fed's contribution, the System is equally well positioned to share best practices and foster partnerships: connecting at the local level, building networks, raising awareness of successes, and using data and research to evaluate what's working and to suggest improvements. We are looking forward to a lively conversation, and we thank you for joining us.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the appointment of Richard "Dick" A. Anderson as director of the Management Division and as the Board's chief operating officer, effective April 18, 2011. Anderson will oversee the Management Division, the Division of Information Technology, and the Office of Staff Director. Additionally, he will direct the day-to-day activities of the Management Division and provide counsel and guidance to other division directors regarding the development of short- and long-term strategic goals for the Board's administrative functions. Anderson succeeds H. Fay Peters, who retired after 29 years of service in the Federal Reserve System. Anderson had a long career in telecommunications, serving in leadership positions for Bell South from 1981 to June 2007, including president of customer markets, vice chairman over corporate staff functions, and group president of global business services. Since 2007, he has served as executive director of the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority. Anderson holds a Bachelor of Science degree in marketing and an M.B.A., both from Murray State University in Murray, Kentucky.
On April 4, 2011, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $5 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were pro-rated at 11.62 percent. Resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 except that all awards below $10,000 were rounded up to $10,000. The awarded deposits will settle on April 7, 2011, and will mature on May 5, 2011. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded deposits.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached table summarizing the economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents for the April 26-27 meeting of the Committee. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released on May 18 with the minutes of the April 26-27 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximately quarterly schedule.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued a request for public information and comment on two bankruptcy-related studies that it is required to conduct under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Section 216 of the Dodd Frank Act requires the Board, in consultation with the Administrative Office of the United States Courts (AOUSC), to study the resolution of financial companies under Chapter 7 or Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code. Section 217 of the act requires the Board, in consultation with the AOUSC, to study international coordination of the resolution of systemically important financial companies under the Bankruptcy Code and applicable foreign law. Section 216 and Section 217 each identifies specific issues that are to be studied. The Board is seeking public comment on how to address the specific issues that are required to be included in the studies. It is also seeking public comment on any studies, research or other empirical data or information that it should take into account, as well as on any additional factors or considerations that should be addressed. Comments must be submitted within 30 days from the date of publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. Comments:Submit|View
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced formal enforcement actions requiring 10 banking organizations to address a pattern of misconduct and negligence related to deficient practices in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. These deficiencies represent significant and pervasive compliance failures and unsafe and unsound practices at these institutions. The Board is taking these actions to ensure that firms under its jurisdiction promptly initiate steps to establish mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processes that treat customers fairly, are fully compliant with all applicable law, and are safe and sound. The 10 banking organizations are: Bank of America Corporation; Citigroup Inc.; Ally Financial Inc.; HSBC North America Holdings, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; MetLife, Inc.; The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.; SunTrust Banks, Inc.; U.S. Bancorp; and Wells Fargo & Company. Collectively, these organizations represent 65 percent of the servicing industry, or nearly $6.8 trillion in mortgage balances. All 10 actions require the parent holding companies to improve holding company oversight of residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing conducted by bank and nonbank subsidiaries. In addition, the enforcement actions order the banking organizations that have servicing entities regulated by the Federal Reserve (Ally Financial, SunTrust, and HSBC) to promptly correct the many deficiencies in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. Those deficiencies were identified by examiners during reviews conducted from November 2010 to January 2011. The Federal Reserve believes monetary sanctions in these cases are appropriate and plans to announce monetary penalties. These monetary penalties will be in addition to the corrective actions that the banking organizations are expected to take pursuant to the enforcement actions. The enforcement actions complement the actions under consideration by the federal and state regulatory and law enforcement agencies, and do not preclude those agencies from taking additional enforcement action. The Federal Reserve continues to work with other federal and state authorities to resolve these matters. The actions taken Wednesday require each servicer to take a number of actions, including to make significant revisions to certain residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing practices. Each servicer must, among other things, submit plans acceptable to the Federal Reserve that: The Federal Reserve will closely monitor progress at the firms in addressing these matters and will take additional enforcement actions as needed. In addition to the actions against the banking organizations, the Federal Reserve on Wednesday announced formal enforcement actions against Lender Processing Services, Inc. (LPS), a domestic provider of default-management services and other services related to foreclosures, and against MERSCORP, Inc. (MERS), which provides services related to tracking and registering residential mortgage ownership and servicing, acts as mortgagee of record on behalf of lenders and servicers, and initiates foreclosure actions. These actions address significant compliance failures and unsafe and unsound practices at LPS and its subsidiaries, and at MERS and its subsidiary. The action requires LPS to address deficient practices related primarily to the document execution services that LPS, through its subsidiaries DocX, LLC, and LPS Default Solutions, Inc., provided to servicers in connection with foreclosures. MERS is required to address significant weaknesses in, among other things, oversight, management supervision, and corporate governance. The LPS action is being taken jointly with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision, while the MERS action is being taken jointly with those agencies and the Federal Housing Finance Agency. The Federal Reserve Board based its enforcement actions on the findings of the interagency reviews of the major mortgage servicers, LPS, and MERS. A summary of the findings from the reviews of the mortgage servicers is available in theInteragency Review of Foreclosure Policies and Practices,which is simultaneously being released by the Federal Reserve Board and the other agencies. Attachments:
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday requested public comment on a proposed rule under Regulation Z that would require creditors to determine a consumer's ability to repay a mortgage before making the loan and would establish minimum mortgage underwriting standards. The revisions to the regulation, which implements the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), are being made pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The proposal would apply to all consumer mortgages (except home equity lines of credit, timeshare plans, reverse mortgages, or temporary loans). Consistent with the act, the proposal would provide four options for complying with the ability-to-repay requirement. The proposal would also implement the Dodd-Frank Act's limits on prepayment penalties. The Board is soliciting comment on the proposed rule until July 22, 2011. General rulemaking authority for TILA is scheduled to transfer to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau on July 21, 2011. Accordingly, this rulemaking will not be finalized by the Board. The Board's notice for the proposed rule is attached. Federal Registernotice:HTML|681 KB PDF Comments:Submit|View
The Federal Reserve Board has redesigned and expanded theCurrent FAQs(frequently asked questions) section of its website. New questions and answers address the Federal Reserve's roles and actions, currency and coin, consumer issues, the banking and financial system, and the economy. Many answers link to related information and resources, and videos accompany some answers. Users can navigate the FAQs by topic. Questions and answers will be updated regularly and new entries will be added as needed. Users may submit ideas for new questions using anonline form. To access theCurrent FAQs, visit:www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/faq.htm.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday requested comment on a proposed rule to repeal the Board's Regulation Q, which prohibits the payment of interest on demand deposits by institutions that are member banks of the Federal Reserve System. The proposed rule would implement Section 627 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, which repeals Section 19(i) of the Federal Reserve Act in its entirety effective July 21, 2011. The repeal of that section of the Federal Reserve Act on that date eliminates the statutory authority under which the Board established Regulation Q. The proposed rule would also repeal the Board's published interpretation of Regulation Q and would remove references to Regulation Q found in the Board's other regulations, interpretations, and commentary. The Board is seeking comment on whether the repeal of Regulation Q is expected to have implications for balance sheets and income of depository institutions, short-term funding markets such as overnight federal funds market, the demand for interest-bearing demand deposits, and competitive burden on smaller depository institutions. Comments on the proposal must be submitted within 30 days from the date of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF (61 KB) Comments:View
The Federal Reserve Board is seeking comment on a notice that outlines how it intends to apply certain parts of its current consolidated supervisory program for bank holding companies to savings and loan holding companies (SLHCs) after assuming supervisory responsibility for SLHCs. Under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, supervisory and rule-writing authority for SLHCs and their non-depository subsidiaries will transfer from the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) to the Board on July 21, 2011. The notice identifies three elements of the Board's current supervisory program that are particularly critical to the effective evaluation of the consolidated condition of holding companies: The notice discusses the Board's expectation that application of consolidated capital requirements to SLHCs will be addressed in the Basel III rulemaking process. The notice also states that the Board anticipates that it will assess SLHC capital using supervisory methods similar to those currently employed by the OTS until consolidated capital standards are finalized. The Board requests comments on the notice, which will be published soon in theFederal Register, by May 23, 2011. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF (60 KB) Comments:Submit|View
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that the economic recovery is proceeding at a moderate pace and overall conditions in the labor market are improving gradually. Household spending and business investment in equipment and software continue to expand. However, investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector continues to be depressed. Commodity prices have risen significantly since last summer, and concerns about global supplies of crude oil have contributed to a further increase in oil prices since the Committee met in March. Inflation has picked up in recent months, but longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable and measures of underlying inflation are still subdued. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The unemployment rate remains elevated, and measures of underlying inflation continue to be somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. Increases in the prices of energy and other commodities have pushed up inflation in recent months. The Committee expects these effects to be transitory, but it will pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations. The Committee continues to anticipate a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue expanding its holdings of securities as announced in November. In particular, the Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings and will complete purchases of $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the current quarter. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings in light of incoming information and is prepared to adjust those holdings as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Charles L. Evans; Richard W. Fisher; Narayana Kocherlakota; Charles I. Plosser; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Daniel K. Tarullo; and Janet L. Yellen.
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Protection, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Corker, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the challenges and opportunities facing community banks. As a former examiner and former head of banking supervision at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, which has one of the highest numbers of community banks in the Federal Reserve System, I am keenly aware of the critical role that community banks play in their local communities. Community banks also provide valuable insights into the health of their local economies, which the Federal Reserve finds invaluable in determining the appropriate path of monetary policy and in taking actions to preserve the nation's financial stability. Accordingly, I and my colleagues at the Federal Reserve value our connection with community banks and take very seriously our responsibility for the supervision of these banks. The Federal Reserve, in conjunction with our colleagues at the state banking supervisory agencies, is responsible for supervising approximately 830 state member banks. The vast majority of these banks are community banks1that provide traditional banking services and loans to small businesses and consumers. In addition, the Federal Reserve supervises more than 4,700 community bank holding companies, which together control more than $2 trillion in assets and a significant majority of the number of commercial banks operating in the United States. Beginning in July 2011, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) will transfer responsibility from the Office of Thrift Supervision to the Federal Reserve for the supervision of more than 425 savings and loan holding companies, most of which operate community thrifts. Given these supervisory responsibilities--as well as the Federal Reserve's need to fully understand regional economic conditions--we closely monitor the condition and performance of community banks and appreciate the opportunity to discuss with you today some of the factors affecting their operations. We gain considerable insight into community banking through our supervisory, research, and outreach activities both at the Reserve Banks and at the Board of Governors. Moreover, the Federal Reserve has undertaken several recent initiatives to better understand the perspectives of community banks and the challenges they face. The Board recently established a special supervision subcommittee of Board members that provides leadership and oversight on a variety of matters related specifically to our supervision of community and smaller regional banks.2This subcommittee is chaired by Governor Elizabeth Duke, a former longtime community banker, and also includes Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin, previously the Maryland state banking commissioner. A key role of this subcommittee is to review policy proposals to better understand the effect that these policies and their implementation could have on smaller institutions, both in terms of safety and soundness and potential regulatory burden. The Federal Reserve also has undertaken an initiative to formalize and expand its dialogue with community banks. In October 2010, the Board announced the formation of the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) to provide the Board with direct insight and information from community bankers about the economy, lending conditions, supervisory matters, and other issues of interest to community banks.3Council members share first-hand knowledge and experience regarding the challenges they and their communities face, as well as their plans to address these challenges. Each Reserve Bank has its own local advisory council comprising representatives from banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions, and one member from each local council serves on the national council that meets with the Board twice a year in Washington. Each of the local advisory councils has held its first meeting, and the first meeting of the CDIAC with all of the members of the Federal Reserve Board took place on Friday, April 1. We expect these ongoing discussions will provide a particularly useful and relevant forum for improving our understanding of the effect of legislation, regulation, and examination activities on small banking organizations. State of Community BankingThe economic downturn has had a significant impact on community banks and, unfortunately, many continue to struggle. Although community banks recorded an aggregate profit for 2010, one in every five community banks reported a loss. This weakness stemmed mainly from elevated loan losses and the need to bolster reserves in anticipation of future loan deterioration. Provisions for loan losses were down considerably from 2009 but remained near historically high levels. There are some positive signs, however. For example, the pace of deterioration in loan quality continued to slow during the fourth quarter of 2010 and nonperforming assets4fell for the third straight quarter. However, the nonperforming assets ratio is still higher than the levels that prevailed during the significant credit downturn in the early 1990s. Loans secured by real estate continue to be the main contributors behind poor asset quality, particularly loans for construction and land development. Although community banks have sharply reduced exposures to commercial real estate lending--sometimes through heavy write-offs of problem loans--many remain vulnerable to further deterioration in real estate markets. The continued weaknesses in real estate markets offer particular challenges to community banks, which secure much of their lending with properties in their local markets. This has reduced a significant source of revenue and has caused many banks to rethink their operating models and seek alternative sources of revenue in new lending segments. As they seek to work through loan problems with their borrowers and implement guidance issued by the supervisory agencies in 2009, community banks have continued to actively restructure loans to creditworthy borrowers who are experiencing financial difficulties. During the past year, loans restructured and in compliance with modified terms have increased more than 30 percent to $15.1 billion. This includes $3.5 billion in restructured residential mortgages. We believe these efforts will contribute to the recovery of many struggling banks and the preservation of many small businesses, but significant improvement in financial conditions will likely take considerable time for many community banks. Indeed, although banks have been aggressive in charging off losses on problem loans and restructuring loans to borrowers experiencing financial difficulties, the adequacy of loan loss reserves remains an ongoing supervisory focus. As a consequence, reserves may require further strengthening and loan loss provisions will likely continue to weigh on earnings in future quarters at many banks. Disappointingly, outstanding loan balances have declined for nine consecutive quarters for community banks as a group, as they have for the banking system as a whole. However, we have seen evidence that many healthy community banks have continued to lend to creditworthy borrowers. While lending contracted overall from mid-2008 through 2010, this contraction was not uniform; a significantly higher proportion of smaller banks (in this case, those with assets of $1 billion or less) actually increased their lending during this period than was the case for larger banks. Community banks have reported a number of potential causes for the low level of lending, including reduced loan demand, a tightening of underwriting standards, a lack of creditworthy borrowers, declining collateral values, and high levels of problem loans. They have also frequently raised concerns about what they characterize as heightened supervisory expectations for capital, liquidity, and the management of concentrations in loans secured by commercial real estate, which some bankers say are leading them to make fewer loans. We take these concerns seriously and have worked hard to ensure that examiners are well-trained and employ a balanced approach to bank supervision. For example, following the issuance of the interagencyPolicy Statement on Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workoutsin October 2009,5an intensive training effort was conducted for examiners across the Federal Reserve System to promote consistency and balance in reviewing bank workouts of troubled commercial real estate loans. We have also undertaken a number of initiatives through our community affairs functions across the Federal Reserve System to encourage lending to creditworthy small businesses and consumers. On a final note, community bankers and their supervisors have also been increasing their attention to other areas where lending concentrations may exist. For instance, both the Federal Reserve and many community banks are monitoring developments in agricultural lending to ensure that underwriting standards are consistent with assessments of potential exposures to fluctuations in commodity prices and land values. Effects of Recent LegislationIn our interactions with community bankers, we consistently hear that the changing regulatory environment is a key challenge and concern for community banks. Even though recent reforms are directed principally at the largest and most complex U.S. financial firms and explicitly exempt small banks from the most stringent requirements, community bankers remain concerned that expectations being set for the largest institutions will ultimately be imposed in a burdensome manner on smaller institutions or will otherwise adversely affect the community bank model. For example, bankers have brought several provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act to our attention as particular areas of concern for community banks. One such provision is the requirement that the Federal Reserve issue a rule to limit debit card interchange fees and to prohibit network exclusivity arrangements and merchant routing restrictions. Many community bankers have also expressed a sense of uncertainty about the rulemaking authority of the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau formed by the Dodd-Frank Act. Another concern is that the more-stringent prudential standards6that the Federal Reserve is required to develop for banking firms with assets greater than $50 billion and all nonbank financial firms designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council might ultimately filter down to smaller banks. In this regard, some concerns have been raised that the new, international Basel III prudential framework for large, globally active banks--which will require large banks to hold more and better-quality capital and more-robust liquidity buffers--may be applied to banks that are not systemic or internationally active. More generally, community banks have raised concerns that the cost of compliance with new regulations and requirements may fall disproportionately on smaller banks that do not benefit from the economies of scale of larger institutions, and that this may exacerbate consolidation of the banking sector. In this regard, the Federal Reserve and the other federal financial supervisory agencies will be publishing all of the Dodd-Frank proposed rulemakings for public comment. For example, last week the Federal Reserve, in conjunction with other federal agencies,7issued a proposed rule that would require sponsors of asset-backed securities to retain at least 5 percent of the credit risk of the assets underlying the securities and would not permit sponsors to transfer or hedge that credit risk. We are aware that some community banks have expressed concerns about the potential impact this proposed rule might have on the availability of credit. We encourage public comments from community banks and other commenters on this and all proposals, and will carefully consider comments in drafting final rules. Before concluding my remarks on the effects of recent legislation, let me say a few words about the transfer of savings and loan holding company supervisory authority to the Federal Reserve. We have been working in close coordination with the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to prepare for this transfer. Our intent--to the maximum extent possible and consistent with the Home Owners' Loan Act and other laws--is to create an oversight regime for savings and loan holding companies that is consistent with our comprehensive consolidated supervision regime for bank holding companies, and we intend to issue a public notice to this effect shortly. We appreciate that savings and loan and bank holding companies differ in important ways and will remain governed by different statutes. Federal Reserve staff have been engaged in an active and constructive outreach effort to savings and loan holding companies to better understand their unique features and to help them understand our supervisory approach to holding companies. Resilience of Community BanksThese regulatory changes will provide a new set of challenges for community banks. However, community banks have faced similar challenges in the past and have performed effectively and continued to meet the needs of their communities. Indeed, while much of the focus in recent years has been on the inability of many community banks to withstand intense credit and liquidity pressures, it is important to note that many community banks supervised by the Federal Reserve remained in sound condition throughout the crisis. Most of these banks entered the crisis with moderate exposures to commercial real estate, moderate loan-to-deposit ratios, and ample investment securities. They tended to report solid earnings and net interest margins, very limited reliance on noncore funding, and generally strong capital levels throughout the crisis. In summary, the banks that weathered the crisis most effectively were those that adhered to the traditional community banking model. The performance of these banks provides perhaps the best example of the resilience of the community bank model. Looking back over the crisis, these banks operated safely, soundly, and profitably despite the most challenging financial climate since the Great Depression. This speaks to the skill of their management and the soundness of their business models. ConclusionCommunity banks will continue to face a challenging environment for some time as they work through financial difficulties brought on by the economic downturn and face challenges that arise from a rapidly changing regulatory environment. The unique connection between community banks and the communities they serve is clear. The bankers who live and work in these communities know their customers and understand their local economies, and that knowledge is not easily replaced or replicated. This relationship banking is crucial to the community banking model and an important part of its viability. The Federal Reserve will continue to listen to the concerns of community banks and carefully weigh the impact of regulatory and policy changes on them, while at the same time working with them to address the future challenges they may face. Thank you again for inviting me to appear before you today on this important subject. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have. 1.For supervisory purposes, the Federal Reserve defines banking organizations with assets of $10 billion or less as community banking organizations.Return to text 2.For supervisory purposes, the Federal Reserve generally considers banking organizations with assets between $10 billion and $50 billion to be regional banking organizations.Return to text 3.The CDIAC replaces the former Thrift Institutions Advisory Council, which provided the Board with information from the perspective of thrift institutions and credit unions.Return to text 4.Defined as nonaccruing loans plus other real estate owned.Return to text 5.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2009), "Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workouts," Supervision and Regulation Letter 09-7 (October 30).Return to text 6.These more-stringent standards for large institutions will include stronger capital and leverage requirements, liquidity requirements, and single-counterparty credit limits, as well as requirements to periodically produce resolution plans and conduct stress tests.Return to text 7.The other agencies are the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Housing Finance Agency, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Securities and Exchange Commission. For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "Agencies Seek Comment on Risk Retention Proposal," joint press release, March 31.Return to text
J. Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research Before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member Capuano, and other members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve Board's role as a member of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). The Federal Reserve is committed to working with the other Council members to advance the objectives that the Congress established for the Council and, more broadly, to implement effectively the regulatory reform measures set forth in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). Financial Stability Oversight CouncilThe Dodd-Frank Act created the FSOC and charged it with the important tasks of identifying and mitigating risks to the stability of the U.S. financial system, among other duties. The FSOC members represent a number of regulatory agencies that oversee a broad range of participants in U.S. financial markets. The Council is composed of 10 voting members and 5 nonvoting members. The Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is a voting member.1I am here testifying on behalf of the Chairman, as the director of the Board's recently created Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research. As stated by the act, the purpose of the FSOC is "(A) to identify risks to the financial stability of the United States that could arise from the material financial distress or failure, or ongoing activities, of large, interconnected bank holding companies or nonbank financial companies, or that could arise outside the financial services marketplace; (B) to promote market discipline, by eliminating expectations on the part of shareholders, creditors, and counterparties of such companies that the Government will shield them from losses in the event of failure; and (C) to respond to emerging threats to the stability of the United States financial system."2In carrying out its duties to mitigate risks, the FSOC is well-placed to address risks that do not fall clearly within the jurisdiction of a single agency. The FSOC also is expected to monitor domestic and international financial regulatory developments, as well as to advise the Congress and make recommendations to enhance the integrity, efficiency, competitiveness, and stability of the U.S. financial markets. The FSOC has made meaningful progress in a number of areas since the act was passed less than a year ago. It has taken a number of important steps to promote interagency collaboration and has established the organizational structure and processes necessary to execute its duties. Importantly, the FSOC's internal organizational structure has been designed to leverage the expertise of the member agencies, and to promote a shared responsibility among the agencies for executing the duties of the FSOC. Special consideration has been given to promoting the sharing of information to help identify risks that could have the potential to become systemic, and facilitating coordination among the member agencies with respect to policy development, rulemaking, examinations, reporting requirements, and enforcement actions. The FSOC's internal organizational structure consists of a Deputies Committee, which is composed of staff from all of the voting and nonvoting members, and six other standing committees, each charged with carrying out specific duties of the FSOC. The duties of these committees include: identifying nonbank financial firms and financial market utilities that could pose a systemic risk, making recommendations to financial regulatory agencies regarding heightened prudential standards for financial firms, making recommendations to enhance the prospects for orderly resolution of systemically important financial firms, collecting data and improving data reporting standards, and monitoring the financial system to identify potential threats to the financial stability of the United States. The Deputies Committee, under the direction of the FSOC members, coordinates and oversees the work of the other committees and aims to ensure that the FSOC fulfills its duties in an effective and timely manner. In meeting its responsibilities under the Dodd-Frank Act, the FSOC and its member agencies have completed studies on limits on proprietary trading and investments in hedge funds and private equity funds by banking firms (the Volcker rule), on financial sector concentration limits, on the macroeconomic effects of risk retention, and on the economic effects of systemic risk regulation. It also has made progress toward establishing an analytical framework and processes to identify nonbank financial firms that could pose a threat to financial stability, including through the issuance of advance notices of proposed rulemakings on the designation of nonbank financial institutions and financial market utilities. Additionally, the FSOC currently is working on preparing the inaugural FSOC annual financial stability report, scheduled to be publicly released later this year. As required by the statute, the annual report will discuss major financial and regulatory developments, potential risks to the financial system, and recommendations to mitigate potential risks. Implementation of Regulatory Reform at the Federal ReserveIn addition to the Federal Reserve's role as a member of the FSOC, the Dodd-Frank Act gives the Federal Reserve other new important responsibilities. These responsibilities include supervising nonbank financial firms that are designated as systemically important by the Council, supervising thrift holding companies, and developing enhanced prudential standards--including those for capital, liquidity, stress tests, single-counterparty credit limits, and living will requirements--for large bank holding companies and systemically important nonbank financial firms designated by the Council. The Federal Reserve is working assiduously to meet its obligations under the Dodd-Frank Act. The act requires the Federal Reserve to complete more than 50 rulemakings and sets of formal guidelines as well as numerous reports and studies. We also have been assigned formal responsibilities to consult and collaborate with other agencies on a substantial number of additional rules, provisions, and studies. In order to meet our obligations in a timely manner, we are drawing on expertise and resources from across the Federal Reserve System in the areas of banking supervision, economic research, financial markets, consumer protection, payment systems, and legal analysis. Members of the Federal Reserve's staff are working closely with the FSOC and the other regulators to strengthen systemic oversight. We are assisting the Council in the development of its analytical framework and procedures under which it will identify systemically important nonbank firms and financial market utilities and its systemic risk monitoring and evaluation processes. We are contributing to numerous studies and rulemakings. We are helping the new Office of Financial Research to develop potential data reporting standards to support the duty of the FSOC to monitor and evaluate systemic risk factors. We also are meeting regularly with staff of the other FSOC member agencies to discuss emerging risks to financial institutions and markets. The Federal Reserve has made some internal changes to better carry out its responsibilities. Prior to the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act, we had begun to reorient our supervisory structure to strengthen supervision of the largest, most complex financial firms, through the creation of the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee, a centralized, multidisciplinary body. Relative to previous practices, this body makes greater use of horizontal, or cross-firm, evaluations of the practices and portfolios of firms. It relies more on additional and improved quantitative methods for evaluating the performance of firms, and it employs the broad range of skills of the Federal Reserve staff more efficiently. In addition, we have reorganized to more effectively coordinate and integrate policy development for and supervision of systemically important financial market utilities. As the act recognizes, supervision should take into account the overall financial stability of the United States, in addition to the safety and soundness of each individual firm. Our revised internal organizational structure facilitates our implementation of this macroprudential approach to oversight. More recently, we created an Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research at the Federal Reserve Board. This office contributes to the Federal Reserve System's multidisciplinary approach to the supervision of large, complex institutions. It helps identify and analyze potential risks to the broader financial system and the economy stemming from, among other things, potential asset price misalignment, excessive leverage, outsized financial flows, and structural vulnerabilities in financial markets. In addition, the office helps evaluate policies to promote financial stability. It is also important that U.S. financial reforms be implemented in coordination with international efforts to establish consistent and complementary standards and to ensure effective oversight of internationally active firms and markets. We continue to work actively with our international counterparts on enhanced prudential standards for large financial institutions, to ensure that efforts to implement the Dodd-Frank Act are well aligned with efforts of the Group of Twenty, the Financial Stability Board, and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. In closing, the Congress has given the FSOC an important mandate to identify and mitigate systemic risks. The Federal Reserve will work closely with our fellow regulators, the Congress, and the Administration to help the FSOC execute its responsibilities and promote financial stability in the United States. 1.The U.S. Secretary of the Treasury serves as the FSOC chairman. Other voting members include the heads of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the National Credit Union Administration, the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, and an independent insurance expert appointed by the President. The latter two seats are in the process of being filled. The five nonvoting seats are represented at present by participants from the Missouri Department of Insurance, Financial Institutions, and Professional Registration; the California Department of Financial Institutions; the North Carolina Department of the Secretary of State, Securities Division; the Federal Insurance Office; and the Office of Financial Research.Return to text 2.Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1394 (2010), available atwww.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-111publ203/pdf/PLAW-111publ203.pdf (2.2 MB PDF).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from February 7 through March 14, 2011. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on March 15, 2011. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 15, 2011:255 KB PDF|HTML
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the 2011 International Factoring Association Conference, Washington, D.C. It's a pleasure to be here this morning. I appreciate the opportunity to take part in this conference and to talk with you about credit conditions--especially conditions in the small business lending market. Credit availability is a necessary component of economic recovery, and factoring represents an important source of credit for large and small businesses. Credit markets normally recover slowly following financial crises, and the most recent episode was no exception. However, after declining throughout 2009 and much of 2010, recent measures of aggregate credit outstanding have shown some signs of improvement. Nonrevolving consumer credit outstanding, which includes auto and student lending, has increased for the past seven months. Issuance of corporate bonds has been robust for several quarters, and new issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities picked up in the first quarter of 2011, albeit from very low levels. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans outstanding have resumed growing modestly on average. While credit availability seemed to improve for large companies throughout the past year, small businesses still complained of difficulty in gaining access to credit. Recent anecdotes lead me to believe that conditions are improving for small businesses, but data are scarce for this market. Today I will pull together information from a variety of sources, including surveys of small businesses and surveys of lenders, to paint a picture of the credit conditions currently facing small businesses. Sources of Financing for New and Existing Small BusinessesSmall businesses are central to creating jobs and to restoring our economic prosperity. The economic importance of small businesses is due in part to the fact that about one-half of all Americans are employed by firms with fewer than 500 employees. In addition, business start-ups are a critical component of the experimentation process that contributes to restructuring and growth in the United States on an ongoing basis. Indeed, each wave of firm start-ups creates a substantial number of jobs. Over the past two decades, firms less than two years old accounted for about one-fourth of gross job creation even though such enterprises employed less than 10 percent of the workforce.1But, as a note of caution, these young firms also have high job destruction rates; within five years of starting up, about 40percent of the jobs initially created have been eliminated by the firms' exit from their market. The "up or out" dynamics of start-ups and young firms are consistent with the innovation, learning, and market selection that is associated with entrepreneurship. Given the key role that start-up and established small businesses play in job creation, it is useful to consider how start-ups are typically funded and how the owners of more-mature, but still small, businesses tend to support their ongoing operations. To this end, the Federal Reserve's 2010 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) provides some new and very preliminary data regarding the primary sources of money used to start, acquire, or expand closely held businesses.2The survey was conducted largely over the second half of 2010. In this discussion, I will focus on the responses by owners of businesses with fewer than 500 employees that were in operation at the time of our survey. For these small and nascent businesses, more than 70 percent were initiated using personal savings or assets, about 6 percent were initiated using a personal loan from a bank or savings institution, about 3 percent were initiated using a personal or business credit card, and just 3 percent were initiated using a business loan from a bank or savings institution. Even smaller percentages of start-up small businesses appear to have received funding from credit unions, other institutions, or investors. In short, our survey data suggest that the personal resources of entrepreneurs are the most important funding source for small business formation. The importance of personal resources in financing small businesses is supported by other recent survey evidence. In our 2009 panel SCF, we found that families make loan guarantees for their businesses using personal assets as collateral, and that loans between business owners and their businesses are common in both directions.3Moreover, according to the most recently available data from the U.S. Census Bureau's Survey of Business Owners, 6 in 10 small business owners use personal savings or assets to finance or expand their businesses. These responses highlight the role personal wealth plays in business formation. Looking back at wealth outcomes in 2009, we found that 43 percent of families saw a wealth decline equal to or greater than six months of their usual income, and almost one-third saw a loss greater than an entire year of the usual income.4Such wealth declines would, of course, reduce the likelihood that such households would start a small business. Over the same period, however, about one-fifth of families saw a gain in wealth that was greater than six months of their usual income. Moreover, a higher percentage of business owners who participated in the survey saw larger wealth gains relative to their incomes than was the case for the overall population. These findings suggest that there just might be a pool of potential entrepreneurs who have both the resources and relevant experience to start successful businesses. Turning to the funding needs of more-mature businesses, in the 2010 SCF, we asked small business owners whether and to what extent external sources of money were used to finance the ongoing operations of or improvements to their primary businesses in the past year. Focusing again on only businesses with fewer than 500 employees, the preliminary survey data suggest that for such purposes, slightly less than one-half of these businesses did not use any external funding. Consistent with the funding information on the start-up phase for small businesses, a significant proportion of small business owners--about one-third--used their personal savings or assets to fund operations or make improvements. And only small percentages of small business owners obtained credit from a bank or savings institution for such purposes: Among these small business owners, about 5 percent used personal or business credit cards, slightly less than 5percent used business loans, and about 3 percent used personal loans. Taken together, these survey data suggest that many small business owners do not tap the credit markets, but instead use their own wherewithal to start and fund their businesses. Indeed, a bit less than 80 percent of small business owner survey respondents with fewer than 500 employees indicated that they had not even applied for business loans in the past five years. This is not to say that loans are not important--far from it--but that for a broad range of businesses, personal finances may be the determining factor in starting a business, and personal finances may also be most important in sustaining the health of a business once started. So what happened to the small business owners who did apply for loans? The turndown rate was fairly modest--about 12 percent. Moreover, for those small business owners who received credit, more than 90 percent of those surveyed actually received as much credit as they had requested. These results are perhaps surprising given that two of the past five years were ones with very tight credit conditions by historical standards, and anecdotal evidence suggests that many lines of credit, for businesses and for households, were cut during the recent financial crisis. Furthermore, small business lending is an important part of overall bank lending, especially at community banks. According to regulatory data, small loans to businesses, a proxy for loans to small businesses, constituted 23 percent of total business loans outstanding at commercial banks at the end of 2010.5Over the past several years, this share has fluctuated between 22 and 27 percent of banks' business lending. In addition, at community banks with less than $1 billion in assets, the share is higher--around 66 percent--whereas at larger banks with more than $10 billion in assets, the share is lower--16 percent. Small Business ConcernsThe foregoing survey data on turndown rates and credit constraints for small business owners are consistent with other survey evidence collected by the National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB). In fact, over the past five years, small business owners identified weak demand, taxes, and government regulations more frequently than interest rates and credit conditions as their most important problem. During that period, less than 5 percent of small business respondents typically identified interest rates and credit conditions as their most important problem. In contrast, 25 percent or more of small business owners considered weak demand the most important concern during much of the past three-year period (figure 1). In considering responses to this question, however, it is important to remember that the survey allows owners to identify only their most important problem, not a set of problems. It is possible that financing was the second-most-important problem, but we would not know it from this set of data. Even if tight credit is not the most important concern, perceptions of tight credit still might significantly influence the decisions made by current and prospective small business owners. Among the small business borrowers surveyed by the NFIB, a fairly high net percentage--about 8 percent in March--continues to report that credit is more difficult to obtain than it was three months ago (figure 2). This level of self-reported perceptions of tighter credit for small businesses is about the same as was observed in 2007--a period prior to the recent business cycle peak. It is also well below the 16percent of small business respondents, on net, who perceived that credit had become more difficult to obtain in 2009. Looking back to 2009, a Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation longitudinal study of small businesses that were founded in 2004 and tracked since then found that 89 percent of the surviving firms that were denied loans in that year felt that banks' heightened requirements played a role in their denials.6Among the small businesses that were tracked, 21 percent had chosen not to apply for loans for fear of being denied credit, and 5 percent also refrained from seeking external equity financing for fear of being denied such financing. So it seems that perceptions of credit tightness may lead some small business owners to decide not even to try to obtain additional funding. At this time, however, the net percentage of survey respondents telling the NFIB that they expect credit conditions to become tighter over the next three months has come down considerably from what small business owners reported during 2009. This decrease suggests that, compared with the previous few years, far fewer small business owners are expecting that credit conditions will remain tight. Overall, what seems to matter most with regard to funding, from the small business owner's viewpoint, is one's personal savings or assets, the internally generated funds derived from operating the business, expected sales, and the fact that credit conditions seem to be less tight, so money is available, if and when it is needed. Business Conditions for Small BusinessesCurrently, expectations about future sales seem to be more important than expectations about the availability of credit in driving business spending decisions and demand for business loans. Recently, small business owners appear to have become more optimistic about their outlook for sales. For example, in recent NFIB surveys, the net percentage of respondents who expected their sales to increase rose to levels not seen since mid-2007 (figure 3). More generally, small business owners surveyed by the NFIB indicate that they currently expect business conditions to improve in the near future. In fact, the net percentage of small business respondents who expected business conditions to improve six months from now climbed in February to its highest level in several years (figure 4). Even with some backtracking in March, this barometer of business conditions remains at a level not seen since mid-2007. Other survey data collected by the NFIB are also consistent with more-favorable conditions for small businesses. The percentages of small business respondents who believe it is a good time to expand, and who plan to make capital expenditures over the next three to six months, have recently risen to levels not seen since mid-2007. The Bankers' Perspective on Lending to Small BusinessesMirroring small business respondents views with respect to credit conditions are bankers' views on credit standards and their terms of credit. To consider the bankers' perspective, I will draw on two other Federal Reserve surveys: the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) and the Survey of Terms of Business Lending (STBL). With regard to credit standards, we found that about 5percent of banks, on net, reported in January that they had eased their bank's lending standards on commercial and industrial loans to small firms in the fourth quarter of last year (figure 5).7A similar net fraction of banks reported having eased standards in the previous survey. This finding is consistent with small business owners' perceptions that credit conditions have eased somewhat. For those small business owners whose loans or credit lines were approved, the terms of credit--the interest rate spread over the bank's cost of funds, the cost of a credit line, the maturity, and the size of a loan--are practical measures that can be used to assess credit availability. The January SLOOS indicates that about one-third of banks, on net, reported that they had trimmed the spreads of C&I loan rates over their costs of funds on loans to small firms (figure 6). Somewhat smaller net fractions of these loan officers reported that they had lowered the costs of credit lines and lengthened the maximum maturities of loans to small firms. Despite the fact that such terms of credit were eased for small firms, the banks reported that the maximum sizes of C&I loans, and limits on credit lines and business credit card accounts, remained unchanged over the past two surveys. This result means that such lines were not being cut as they were during the first half of 2010. Easing of credit conditions usually does not occur until banks see improvement in the credit metrics of existing portfolios. In the January SLOOS, 77 percent of bankers reported having seen an improvement in the quality of existing loans to small firms. The SLOOS does not distinguish between commercial real estate loans to small firms and such loans to others, but we know that real-estate-secured lending is an important source of credit for small businesses. The respondents to the January SLOOS indicated that there was little movement, on net, in domestic banks' lending standards for commercial real estate loans over the past two surveys (figure 7). Such standards remain relatively tight even though more than one-half of banks expect an improvement in the quality of commercial real estate loans. And, importantly for small business owners, the commercial bank Call Reports indicated that as of the end of last year, the loans secured by owner-occupied property had continued to outperform other commercial real estate loans. Information contained in the February STBL also indicated a recent easing of terms on bank loans. More specifically, recent loan rate spreads on C&I loans at domestic banks were lower, on average, regardless of the bank's size, and the average number of days to maturity had lengthened. The recent easing in banks' lending policies and banks' improved expectations with respect to credit quality are indications that financing conditions for at least some small businesses are likely improving. By and large, small business owners' perceptions about the tightness of credit conditions seem to be aligned fairly well with bankers' perceptions of late. Such perceptions are also consistent with recent turndown statistics. According to the National Small Business Association (NSBA), the percentage of small business owners reporting an inability to obtain adequate financing declined to 36 percent at year-end from 41 percent in July 2010.8These data, of course, apply to members of the NSBA, whereas the SCF data I discussed earlier apply in principle to all small business owners, even owners of quite small businesses who might be unlikely to join an association. This may explain the much higher credit use among NSBA members. Lending to Small BusinessesSo far, I have discussed measures of business credit. But, as I noted earlier, small businesses also rely on personal accounts and loans, household credit cards, trade credit from other nonfinancial firms, and other sources, including factoring. The effect of these other sources of funding on businesses' finances is even more difficult to determine from available data. Changes in personal wealth during the downturn were not uniform across households, and there were some big winners and losers. While the households that disproportionately increased their wealth are more likely to start businesses, those that disproportionately lost wealth are less likely to do so. In particular, the recent housing downturn has made it more difficult to use cash-out refinancing or home equity lending as a funding vehicle for small business formation. It has also made it more difficult for some small business owners to fund the purchase of equipment or to cover business operating expenses. Even though our survey data suggest that only 3 to 5 percent of small business owners tend to rely on personal or business credit cards, the decline in bank credit card outstandings over most of the past two years indicates that this source of credit may still be quite limited. While balance sheet data for financial institutions are readily available, the relative contributions to changes in outstanding balances of new lending, paydowns, and write-downs and the levels of line usage are not available. To focus on the link between lending and new business activity, we need measures of loan originations. Indeed, a loan or lease origination is what typically generates an investment in equipment and signals business growth.9 To explore recent loan and lease originations to small businesses, we can look at the PayNet/Thomson Reuters Small Business Lending Index (SBLI). For inclusion in this index, a loan or lease must be originated to a business borrower who has total loan outstandings across all qualifying lenders of less than $1 million at both the start and the end of the month in question. While some such loans and leases may be to established firms that employ more than 500 workers, small businesses are generally viewed as much more likely to borrow in these relatively small loan denominations. The lenders that provide the data used to construct the index are banks and finance companies. The year-over-year changes in the SBLI are consistent with a view that loan originations are a pro-cyclical indicator (figure 8). Strikingly, such year-over-year changes were mainly positive, but smaller through time, until the recent business cycle peak in December 2007. During the recession, however, the year-over-year changes in the SBLI were increasingly negative until the business cycle trough, which occurred in June 2009. Then, shortly after the recent business cycle trough, the year-over-year negative changes in the index became smaller until they turned positive in early 2010. In February, the most recent month for which data are available, the SBLI measure of business loan and lease originations rose 15 percent from a year earlier. The seasonally adjusted index, which is normalized to 100 in January 2005, provides a different take on small business originations (figure 9). This measure of lending, which allows comparisons across different months, has not yet rebounded to its level in mid-2007 even though many of the measures of small business owners' and bankers' perspectives have returned to their pre-recession levels. Despite the magnitude of the rebound, there has been an apparent turnaround in loan and lease originations using the seasonally adjusted SBLI measure. These data add to the evidence that credit availability to small businesses is gradually improving. While at first glance stronger demand for bank loans by large and medium-sized firms may seem irrelevant for analyzing credit to small businesses, that perception would ignore the fact that such demand may signal that larger firms are becoming more willing to provide trade credit to smaller firms that are their suppliers or customers. In the most recent SLOOS, the net percentage of respondents reporting higher loan demand by large and medium-sized firms rose above 20 percent for the first time since 2005 (figure 10). That said, banks report that loan demand from smaller firms remains fairly weak. Only a small net percentage of banks reported stronger demand from such firms. ConclusionTo sum up, the financial conditions that would be necessary for small businesses to start up and thrive would include positive conditions for personal wealth building and a full range of consumer and business credit availability. In the wake of the financial crisis, small business owners and potential small business owners likely experienced a substantial reduction in the personal resources necessary to start or sustain a business. At the same time, small business loans became harder to get, and when they were available, both price and nonprice credit terms were likely quite restrictive. Many small business owners were so convinced that their requests would be denied that they did not even apply for credit. Despite this restricted credit availability, small business owners, by a large margin, still considered their most significant problem to be weak sales. Although no definitive data source exists, the combination of a variety of recent survey results paints a picture of increasing optimism about future sales and business conditions and a corresponding easing of credit availability for small businesses. 1.See John C. Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2010), "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs. Young," NBER Working Paper Series 16300 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August).Return to text 2.The report with the results of the 2010 SCF is expected to be released in early 2012 after all data from the survey have been assessed and analyzed.Return to text 3.Unlike the 2010 Survey of Consumer Finances, which is a point-in-time cross-sectional survey, the 2009 survey is based on follow-up interviews with participants in the 2007 SCF that update their information. For a research paper that provides an overview of the 2009 data, see Jesse Bricker, Brian Bucks, Arthur Kennickell, Traci Mach, and Kevin Moore (2011), "Surveying the Aftermath of the Storm: Changes in Family Finances for 2007 to 2009," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-17 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March).Return to text 4.See Elizabeth A. Duke (2011), "Changed Circumstances: The Impact of the Financial Crisis on the Economic Condition of Workers Near Retirement and of Business Owners," speech delivered at the Virginia Association of Economists Sandridge Lecture, Richmond, Va., March 24.Return to text 5.The data are from the quarterly Call Reports, which ask banks to report their holdings of C&I loans made in original amounts of less than $1 million.Return to text 6.See Alicia Robb and E.J. Reedy (2011),An Overview of the Kauffman Firm Survey: Results from 2009 Business Activities(Kansas City, Mo.: Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, March).Return to text 7.In this and later figures, shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research.Return to text 8.National Small Business Association (2011),2010 Year-End Economic Report(1.7 MB PDF)(Washington: NSBA).Return to text 9.Thomson Reuters provides some statistical tests showing that changes in the prior month's Small Business Lending Index values can predict the current month's change in the U.S. Leading Economic Indicators Index. See Andrew Clark and Thomas Ware (2010), "Looking into the Future with the Thomson Reuters/PayNet Small Business Lending Index (SBLI)," white paper (Thomson Reuters, May).Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to provide the Federal Reserve Board's views on the implementation of title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). The Board's responsibilities with respect to over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives fall into three broad areas: consultation and coordination with other authorities, both domestic and international; efforts to strengthen the infrastructure of derivatives markets; and supervision of many derivatives dealers and market participants. Consultation and CoordinationThe Dodd-Frank Act requires that the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) consult with the Board on the rules they are crafting to implement several provisions of title VII. Immediately after passage of the act, the staff from the commissions and the Board met to fashion a process for this consultation; at the Board, we identified members of the staff with relevant expertise, both here and across the Federal Reserve System. Our staff have commented on proposed rules of the commissions at each stage of the development process to date. In providing feedback, we have tried to bring to bear our experience from supervising dealers and market infrastructure as well as our familiarity with markets and data sources to assist the commissions. Important coordination activities related to derivatives regulation also are occurring within international groups. Most prominently, the Group of Twenty (G-20) leaders have set out commitments related to reform of the OTC derivatives markets that, when implemented by national authorities, will form a broadly consistent international regulatory approach. Work on the G-20 commitments is being done by numerous groups of technical and policy experts, and staff members from the Federal Reserve are actively participating in these groups. More generally, the Board participates in many international groups that serve as vehicles for coordinating policies related to the participants and the infrastructure of derivatives markets. These groups include the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee), which has recently enhanced international capital, leverage, and liquidity standards for derivatives, and the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, which is working with the International Organization of Securities Commissions to update international standards for systemically important clearing systems, including central counterparties that clear derivatives instruments, and trade repositories. Public consultation on these revised international standards is currently under way. The goal of all of these efforts is to develop a consistent international approach to the regulation and supervision of derivatives products and market infrastructures as well as to the sound implementation of the agreed-upon approaches. Our aim is to promote both financial stability and fair competitive conditions to the fullest extent possible. Infrastructure IssuesThe Dodd-Frank Act addressed both the infrastructure of the derivatives markets and the regulation and supervision of its dealers and major participants. Central counterparties are given an expanded role in the clearing and settling of swap and security-based swap (hereafter referred to as "swap") transactions, and the Board believes benefits can flow from this reform. Since 2005, Federal Reserve staff members have worked with market participants to strengthen the infrastructure for OTC derivatives, including developing and broadening the use of central clearing mechanisms and trade repositories. Market participants have already established central counterparties that provide clearing services for some OTC interest rate, energy, and credit derivatives contracts. If properly designed, managed, and overseen, central counterparties offer an important tool for managing counterparty credit risk, and thus they can reduce risk to market participants and to the financial system. Both central counterparties and trade repositories also support regulatory oversight and policymaking by providing more-comprehensive data on the derivatives markets. The Board is committed to continuing to work with other authorities, both in the United States and abroad, to ensure that a largely consistent international approach is taken to central counterparties and trade repositories and that their risk-reducing benefits are realized. Title VIII of the act complements the role of central clearing in title VII through heightened supervisory oversight of systemically important financial market utilities, including systemically important facilities that clear swaps. This heightened oversight is important because financial market utilities such as central counterparties concentrate risk and thus have the potential to transmit shocks throughout the financial markets. The Financial Stability Oversight Council is responsible for designating utilities as systemically important. Through its role on the council, the Board helped develop the designation process that was released for comment in March. Separately, the Board is also seeking comment on proposed risk-management standards that would apply to those designated utilities supervised by the Board under title VIII.1As part of title VIII, the Board was given new authority to provide designated utilities with access to Reserve Bank accounts, payment services, and emergency collateralized liquidity in unusual and exigent circumstances. We are carefully considering ways to implement this authority in a manner that protects taxpayers and limits any rise in moral hazard. Supervisory IssuesAlthough central counterparties will provide an additional tool for managing counterparty credit risk, enhancements to the risk-management policies and procedures for individual market participants will continue to be a high priority for supervisors. As the reforms outlined in the act are implemented, the most active firms in bilateral OTC markets likely will become active clearing members of central counterparties. As such, the quality of risk management at these firms importantly affects the ability of the central counterparty to manage its risks effectively and to deliver risk-reducing benefits to the markets. Capital and margin requirements are central to the prudential regulation of financial institutions active in derivatives markets as well as to the internal risk-management processes of such firms. Title VII requires that the CFTC, the SEC, and prudential regulators adopt capital and margin requirements for the noncleared swap activity of swap dealers and major swap participants. The Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and the Farm Credit Administration are responsible for adopting capital and margin requirements for swap dealers and major swap participants that are banks or other prudentially regulated entities. The commissions are responsible for adopting capital and margin requirements for swap dealers and major swap participants that are not supervised by a prudential regulator. The prudential regulators and the commissions are consulting in developing the rules, and all agencies must, to the maximum extent practicable, adopt comparable standards. Earlier today, the Board and the other prudential regulators released for public comment a proposed rule on capital and margin requirements. Our proposal will be open for public comment for 60 days, and we look forward to receiving the public's comments. For capital, our proposal relies on the existing regulatory capital requirements, which already specifically address the unique risks of derivatives transactions. Beyond the current requirements, the Board and the other U.S. banking agencies played an active role in developing the recent Basel III enhancements to capital requirements agreed to by the Basel Committee in December 2010. Basel III will, among other things, strengthen the prudential framework for OTC derivatives by increasing OTC derivatives' risk-based capital and leverage requirements and by requiring banking firms to hold an additional buffer of high-quality, liquid assets to address potential liquidity needs resulting from their derivatives portfolios. Our proposal for margin imposes initial and variation margin requirements on the noncleared swaps held by swap dealers or major swap participants that have a prudential regulator. For swaps with a nonfinancial end-user counterparty, the proposed rule would not specify a minimum margin requirement. Rather, it would allow a banking organization that is a dealer or major participant to establish a threshold, based on a credit exposure limit that is approved and monitored as part of the credit approval process, below which the end user would not have to post margin. For swaps with other counterparties, the proposal would cap the allowable threshold for unsecured credit exposure on noncleared swaps. In addition, the proposal would only apply a margin requirement to contracts entered into after the new requirement becomes effective. A much discussed part of the act is the requirement that banks push portions of their swap activity into affiliates or face restrictions on their access to the discount window or deposit insurance. Under the push-out provisions, banking organizations with deposit insurance or access to the Federal Reserve's discount window will have to reorganize some of their derivatives activity, pushing certain types of swaps out of subsidiary banks and into distinct legal entities that will require their own capitalization and separate documentation of trades with existing customers. The act permits domestic banks to continue to engage in derivatives activities that have been a traditional focus of banks, including hedging activities and dealing in interest rate swaps, currency swaps, certain cleared credit default swaps, and other swaps that reference assets that banks are eligible to hold. However, because of the specific language contained in the act, this exemption for traditional bank derivatives activities does not apply to U.S. branches of foreign banking firms that by law have access to the Federal Reserve's discount window. A possibly unintended effect of the act's push-out provision may be to require some foreign firms to reorganize their existing U.S. derivatives activities to a greater extent than U.S. firms. Proposed rules to implement this section are still under development by the banking agencies. ConclusionAs the implementation process for the act continues, the challenge facing the Board is to enhance supervision, oversight, and prudential standards of major derivatives market participants in a manner that promotes more-effective risk management and reduces systemic risk, yet retain the significant benefits of derivatives to the businesses and investors who use them to manage financial market risks. The Board is working diligently to achieve these goals. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "Federal Reserve Seeks Comment on Proposed Rule Related to Supervision of Designated Financial Market Utilities," press release, March 30.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Termination of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's web site,http://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/enforcementactions/, as they occur.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Termination of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Tradition Bancshares, Inc. and Tradition Bank, both of Houston, TexasWritten Agreement dated June 1, 2009Terminated April 4, 2011