Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Earlier today, Standard & Poor's rating agency lowered the long-term rating of the U.S. government and federal agencies from AAA to AA+. With regard to this action, the federal banking agencies are providing the following guidance to banks, savings associations, credit unions, and bank and savings and loan holding companies (collectively, banking organizations). For risk-based capital purposes, the risk weights for Treasury securities and other securities issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government, government agencies, and government-sponsored entities will not change. The treatment of Treasury securities and other securities issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government, government agencies, and government-sponsored entities under other federal banking agency regulations, including, for example, the Federal Reserve Board's Regulation W, will also be unaffected.
Kevin M. Bertsch, Associate Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives , Newnan, Georgia Chairwoman Capito, Chairman Bachus, Ranking Member Maloney, and members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the Federal Reserve's efforts to ensure a consistent approach to the examination of community banking organizations.1Developments over the past few years have been particularly challenging for these institutions, and the Federal Reserve recognizes that within this context supervisory actions must be well considered and carefully implemented. Currently, the Federal Reserve supervises more than 5,000 bank holding companies and 825 state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System (state member banks). As of July 21, the Federal Reserve also assumed responsibility for the supervision of more than 430 savings and loan holding companies. Although these supervised institutions include some of the largest diversified financial firms in the world, most are small community banking organizations focused on traditional banking activities. In my remarks, I will start with a brief overview of the examination and enforcement policies that guide the Federal Reserve's supervisory activities for these institutions. I will then touch briefly on the recent performance of community banking organizations, highlighting the main sources of recent problems for these companies. In concluding, I will describe the steps that the Federal Reserve is taking to help ensure a consistent and balanced examination process across all of its Reserve Banks. Examination and Enforcement Policies and ProceduresThe Federal Reserve conducts its supervisory activities through its 12 Federal Reserve Banks across the country. This means that supervision is guided by policies and procedures established by the Board, but is conducted day-to-day by the Reserve Banks and their examiners, many of whom have lived and worked within the districts they serve for many years. We believe this approach ensures that Federal Reserve supervision of community banks is consistent and disciplined, and that it also reflects a local perspective that takes account of differences in regional economic conditions. For example, in the Midwest, where many community banks specialize in agricultural lending, Federal Reserve examiners maintain a special expertise in agricultural markets and associated lending practices. They also draw frequently on the expertise of regional and agricultural economists in the districts to maintain an up-to-date understanding of local conditions. This helps ensure that examiners are familiar with the unique features of their local economies and that they apply examination policies in a manner that is sensitive to local conditions or business practices. Examination and enforcement policies followed by Federal Reserve examiners are set forth in supervision manuals published by the Board.2In addition, the Board regularly publishes supervisory letters to address emerging supervisory issues and provide guidance to examiners and banking organizations.3Many recent supervisory letters, for example, have addressed commercial real estate--an area of concern for many community banks. To promote consistency in examination practices across federal banking agencies, the Federal Reserve also participates in the interagency Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, which has long-established task forces that address supervision, regulatory reporting, surveillance, and other common regulatory activities. Safety and soundness bank-examination guidance covers a broad range of issues, but it focuses primarily on providing examiners with the guidance and procedures necessary to assess capital adequacy, asset quality, management and board oversight, earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity to market risk. Examiners use this guidance to assign a supervisory CAMELS rating at on-site examinations, which are required at least once every 18 months.4The examination guidance outlines procedures for conducting a thorough review of a bank's loan and investment portfolio, a comprehensive assessment of funds-management practices, an evaluation of the quality and level of capital, the adequacy of internal controls, and the accuracy of regulatory reporting. In addition, examiners are directed to review various bank policies, board of directors' activities, and compliance with laws and regulations. Guidance governing inspections of bank holding companies addresses issues similar to those highlighted for bank examinations, but also focuses on specific issues related to the parent company and its nonbank affiliates. These include the extent to which leverage is used to support bank subsidiary activities, intercompany transactions and their impact on bank subsidiaries, nonbank activities and their effect on the consolidated financial condition of the organization, and the parent company's ability to serve as a source of strength to its insured depository institutions. The Federal Reserve has a broad range of enforcement powers over financial institutions and the individuals associated with them. Formal actions, which are used to address significant issues, are governed by statute and administered from the Board in consultation with the Reserve Banks. These include written agreements and cease-and-desist orders. Informal actions, which are used to address less severe issues, are administered by the Reserve Banks and include board resolutions and memorandums of understanding. Bank Performance in the Current Financial MarketIn recent quarters, earnings for community banks have improved notably, and asset quality has largely stabilized and begun to improve. However, earnings remain quite weak by historical standards, and high levels of problem loans and charge-offs continue to strain bank resources. Revenue growth has also been held back, as loan balances at community banks have declined for 11 consecutive quarters. Most of the asset quality and earnings problems in community banks stem from relatively high concentrations in construction and other commercial real estate loans that were built up during the real estate boom that started in the early part of the last decade. As real estate markets began weakening in 2007, cash flows supporting commercial real estate loans fell, and banks experienced a significant increase in weak and impaired assets. Community banks in all regions of the country have experienced problems stemming from the weakened real estate market, but those operating in regions that experienced the greatest run-ups in real estate prices--the Southeast, Southwest, and West Coast--have been most significantly affected. Consistent with this, of the 388 failures of insured banks and thrifts since early 2007, 140--or nearly 40 percent--occurred in the Southeastern states, with many failures here in Georgia. A significant number of Georgia banks that failed held large concentrations of loans related to land acquisition, development, and construction--many tied to the region's housing boom in the years leading up to the economic downturn. When real estate markets softened, the level of problem loans increased rapidly for these banks and ultimately overwhelmed their available capital. The commercial banks that continue to operate in the Georgia market generally have an elevated level of non-current real estate loans, which in turn have reduced earnings and strained capital levels. Through the second quarter of 2011, 41percent of Georgia's insured commercial banks were unprofitable. Though an improvement over last year, this contrasts significantly with results for the nation as a whole, where only 15percent were unprofitable. Similarly, the aggregate Return on Assets for Georgia's banks was 0.07 percent, well below the 0.87 percent nationally. Achieving Consistency in the Supervisory ProcessThere has been much discussion recently about whether examiners are unnecessarily restricting the activities of community banks. The Federal Reserve takes seriously its responsibility to address these concerns, and working with the other agencies, the Board has issued several pieces of examination guidance over the past years to stress the importance of taking a balanced approach to supervision. More recently, examples of such guidance include the November 12, 2008, "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers,"5and an October 30, 2009, interagency statement designed to encourage prudent workouts of commercial real estate loans and to facilitate a balanced approach by field staff to evaluating commercial real estate credits.6On February 5, 2010, the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies issued a joint statement on lending to creditworthy small businesses.7The Federal Reserve has complemented these statements with training programs for examiners and outreach to the banking industry to underscore the importance of sound lending practices. In addition, the Federal Reserve continues to strongly reinforce the importance of these interagency statements with its examiners and has taken several steps to evaluate compliance with the guidance as part of its regular monitoring of the examination process. First, all examination findings must go through a thorough review process before being finalized. Local management teams vet the examination findings at the district Reserve Banks to ensure that common issues are addressed consistently, findings are fully supported, and supervisory determinations conform with Federal Reserve policies. If these vetting sessions identify policy issues requiring clarification, Reserve Banks contact the Board staff in Washington for guidance. Vettings for complex or problem banks often include participation from Board staff. In addition, Board analysts assigned to monitor community bank supervision activities in the districts sample recently completed examination reports to assess compliance with policies. Potential deviations from policy requirements that are identified through this process are discussed with the Reserve Banks and corrected as needed. Board analysts also review quarterly off-site financial surveillance reports with the Reserve Banks to ensure identified issues are consistently and promptly addressed. Board staff also conduct periodic reviews of specific examination activities. For example, recently we undertook a focused review of commercial real estate loan-classification practices in the districts. We initiated this review to assess whether Federal Reserve examiners were implementing the interagency policy statement on commercial real estate loan workouts as intended. As part of this effort, we reviewed documentation for more than 300 commercial real estate loans with identified weaknesses in six Federal Reserve districts. Based on this review, we concluded that Federal Reserve examiners were appropriately implementing the guidance and were consistently taking a balanced approach in determining loan classifications. We further noted that the documentation indicated that examiners were carefully considering the full range of information provided by bankers when evaluating these loans. In this regard, workpapers often indicated that examiners were taking into account mitigating factors noted by bankers, where appropriate, in determining the regulatory treatment for the loans. Overall, our monitoring efforts to date suggest that Federal Reserve examiners are following established guidance in evaluating supervised institutions. However, if any banking organizations are concerned about supervisory actions that they believe are inappropriate, we continue to encourage them to contact Reserve Bank or Federal Reserve Board supervisory staff to discuss their concerns. Any specific instances of possible undue regulatory constraints are evaluated by both Reserve Bank and Board staff. In addition, the Board maintains an Ombudsman, independent of the supervisory process, who handles any such concerns on a confidential basis.8 ConclusionWe at the Federal Reserve are acutely aware of the need for a strong and stable community banking industry that can make credit available to creditworthy borrowers across the country. We want banks to deploy capital and liquidity, but in a responsible way that avoids past mistakes and does not create new ones. The Federal Reserve is committed to working to promote the concurrent goals of fostering credit availability and maintaining a safe and sound banking system. Through our ongoing communication with Reserve Banks and bankers, the Federal Reserve will continue to strive to ensure our guidance is applied in a fair, balanced, and consistent manner across all institutions. I would be pleased to take your questions. 1.For supervisory purposes, the Federal Reserve defines banking organizations with assets of $10 billion or less as community banking organizations.Return to text 2.The Board's supervision manuals are available atwww.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/supmanual.Return to text 3.Active supervision and regulation letters are available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/srletters.Return to text 4.To assess the bank's performance and summarize its overall condition, examiners use the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System (UFIRS), which is commonly referred to as the CAMELS rating system. The acronym CAMELS is derived from six key areas of examination focus: Capital Adequacy, Asset Quality, Management and board oversight, Earning, Liquidity, and Sensitivity to market risk.Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," press release, November 12.Return to text 6.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Adopts a Policy Statement Supporting Prudent Commercial Real Estate (CRE) Loan Workouts," press release, October 30.Return to text 7.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2010), "Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small Businesses," joint press release, February 5.Return to text 8.For more information and for contact information for the Ombudsman, seewww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/ombudsman.htm.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive againstBank of the Eastern Shore (PDF), Cambridge, Maryland, a state-chartered member bank dated August 8, 2011. The Federal Reserve Board also on Thursday announced the execution of a written agreement againstTexas Coastal Bank (PDF), Pasadena, Texas, a state-chartered member bank, dated August 4, 2011. Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Mesaba Bancshares, Inc. (PDF), Grand Rapids, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated August 3, 2011 Reliance Bancshares, Inc. (PDF), Des Peres, MissouriWritten Agreement dated July 14, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Suburban Illinois Bancorp, Inc. (PDF), Elmhurst, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated July 27, 2011 The First Bank of Baldwin (PDF), Baldwin, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated July 26, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued an interim final rule establishing regulations for savings and loan holding companies (SLHCs). The rule will take effect once it is published in theFederal Register, which is expected soon. Under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, supervisory and rulemaking authority for SLHCs and their nondepository subsidiaries transferred from the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) to the Board on July 21, 2011. Last month, the Board sought comment on a notice identifying regulations previously issued by the OTS that the Federal Reserve will continue to enforce. The interim final rule issued Friday implements the transfer of those regulations from the OTS to the Board. The Board on Friday also issued an Order delegating to staff and to the Reserve Banks the authority to take certain actions with respect to SLHCs. The Board will accept comments on the interim final rule through October 27, 2011. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The credit quality of large loan commitments owned by U.S. banking organizations, foreign banking organizations (FBOs), and nonbanks improved in 2011 for the second consecutive year, according to the Shared National Credits (SNC) Review for 2011. A loan commitment is the obligation of a lender to make loans or issue letters of credit pursuant to a formal loan agreement. Total criticized loans declined more than 28 percent to $321 billion in 2011, although the percentage of criticized assets remained high compared to pre-financial crisis levels. A criticized loan is rated special mention, substandard, doubtful, or loss. Loans rated as doubtful or loss--the two weakest categories--fell 50 percent to $24 billion in 2011. Reasons for improvement in credit quality included better operating performance among borrowers, debt restructurings, bankruptcy resolutions, and ongoing access to bond and equity markets. Industries that led the improvement in credit quality were real estate and construction, media and telecommunications, and finance and insurance. Despite this progress, poorly underwritten loans originated in 2006 and 2007 continued to adversely affect the SNC portfolio. Approximately 60 percent of criticized assets were originated in these years. Refinancing risk remained elevated as nearly $2 trillion, or 78 percent of the SNC portfolio, matures by the end of 2014. Of this maturing amount, $204 billion was criticized. Although nonbank entities, such as securitization pools, hedge funds, insurance companies, and pension funds, owned the smallest share of loan commitments, they owned the largest share (58 percent) of classified credits (rated substandard, doubtful, or loss). In other highlights of the review: Federal banking agencies expect banks and thrifts to underwrite syndicated loans using prudential underwriting standards, regardless of the intent to hold or sell the loans. Poorly underwritten syndicated loan transactions are subject to regulatory criticism. The SNC program was established in 1977 to provide an efficient and consistent review and analysis of SNCs. A SNC is any loan or formal loan commitment, and any asset such as real estate, stocks, notes, bonds, and debentures taken as debts previously contracted, extended to borrowers by a federally supervised institution, its subsidiaries, and affiliates that aggregates to $20 million or more and is shared by three or more unaffiliated supervised institutions. Many of these loan commitments are also shared with FBOs and nonbanks, including securitization pools, hedge funds, insurance companies, and pension funds. In conducting the 2011 SNC Review, agencies reviewed $910 billion of the $2.5 trillion credit commitments in the portfolio. The sample was weighted toward non-investment grade and criticized credits. The results of the review are based on analyses prepared in the second quarter of 2011 using credit-related data provided by federally supervised institutions as of December 31, 2010, and March 31, 2011. Attachments
D. Nathan Sheets, director of the Division of International Finance, is stepping down after 18 years of service with the Federal Reserve Board, including nearly 4 years as the director of the division. In addition to overseeing the operations of the division, he has been responsible for advising the Federal Open Market Committee on economic and financial developments in foreign countries and on the U.S. external sector. Sheets also has regularly represented the Board at international meetings and in its contacts with foreign central banks. "Nathan has provided invaluable insight and stellar leadership at a time of great volatility in the world economy," said Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. "We thank him for his dedicated service and wish him well." Sheets began his career at the Board in 1993 as an economist. He became a section chief within the Division of International Finance in 1999 and was appointed to the official staff in 2001. He was named division director in September 2007. Sheets has also served as a senior adviser to the U.S. executive director at the International Monetary Fund. Sheets holds a bachelor's degree from Brigham Young University and a PhD in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Steven B. Kamin, currently a deputy director of the International Finance Division, will serve as acting director of the division. Kamin has been responsible for monitoring and analyzing developments in international financial markets and has published research on a range of topics including global finance and monetary policy, capital flows, exchange rates, and current account imbalances. He has also served as a visiting economist at the Bank for International Settlements, a senior economist for international financial affairs at the Council of Economic Advisers, and as a consultant for the World Bank. Kamin received a PhD in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the location for a public meeting in Washington, D.C., on the notice by Capital One Financial Corporation, McLean, Virginia, to acquire ING Bank, Wilmington, Delaware, and indirectly to acquire shares of Sharebuilder Advisors, LLC, and ING Direct Investing, Inc., both of Seattle, Washington. The public meeting in Washington will be held on Tuesday, September 20, 2011, at the Renaissance Hotel, 999 Ninth Street, NW, Washington, D.C., and will begin at 8:30 a.m. EDT. As previously announced, additional meetings will be held in Chicago on Tuesday, September 27, 2011, beginning at 8:30 a.m. CDT, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and in San Francisco on Wednesday, October 5, 2011, beginning at 8:30 a.m. PDT, at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.Public comments and materials relating to Capital One Financial Corporation and ING Bank hearing (comments will be updated as received). Agenda for September 20, 2011 meeting Live webcasts of the meetings will be available on the Board's website and atwww.ustream.tv/federalreserve. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that it will hold three public meetings on the notice by Capital One Financial Corporation, McLean, Virginia, to acquire ING Bank, Wilmington, Delaware, and indirectly to acquire shares of Sharebuilder Advisors, LLC, and ING Direct Investing, Inc., both of Seattle, Washington (collectively, "ING"). The Federal Reserve Board also announced that it is extending the period for public comment on the proposal through Wednesday, October 12. The purpose of these meetings, to be held in Washington, D.C., Chicago, and San Francisco, is to collect information related to the factors the Board is required to consider under the Bank Holding Company Act. These factors are whether the acquisition can be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, and gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, and risk to the stability of the U.S. banking or financial system. The Federal Reserve's review also includes an evaluation of the financial and managerial resources of the acquiring firm. In addition, in acting on a notice to acquire a savings association, the Board also reviews the records of performance of the relevant insured depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act. Meeting details are: All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting in Washington must submit a written request to Kimberly Zeuli, Vice President and Community Affairs Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 701 East Byrd Street, Richmond, VA 23261 (email:[email protected]; facsimile: 804/697-5460) no later than 5:00 p.m. EDT on September 9, 2011. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting in Chicago must submit a written request to Alicia Williams, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, IL 60604 (email:[email protected]; facsimile: 312/913-2626) no later than 5:00 p.m. CDT on September 15, 2011. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting in San Francisco must submit a written request to Scott Turner, Vice President and Community Affairs Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 101 Market Street, Mail Stop 215, San Francisco, CA 94105 (email:[email protected]; facsimile: 415/393-1920) no later than 5:00 p.m. PDT, September 23, 2011. The request to testify must include the following information: (i) the location of the meeting the participant wishes to attend; (ii) a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony (including whether the testimony will support or oppose the proposed transaction or provide other comment on the proposal) and the estimated time required for the presentation; (iii) the address and telephone number (and e-mail address and facsimile number, if available) of the individual testifying; and (iv) the identification of any special needs, such as translation services, physical disabilities requiring assistance, or presentations requiring visual aids. Translators will be provided to the extent available if noted in the request to testify. Individuals interested only in attending a meeting, but not testifying, need not submit a written request. The Federal Reserve will prepare a schedule for participants wishing to testify from the requests received for each meeting and establish the order of presentation. To ensure an opportunity for all interested commenters to present their views, the Federal Reserve may limit the amount of time allotted to each presentation. Persons not listed on the schedule may be permitted to speak at the public meeting, if time permits, at the conclusion of the schedule of witnesses, in the discretion of the Federal Reserve. Copies of testimony may, but need not, be filed before a participant's presentation. Public comments and materials relating to Capital One Financial Corporation and ING Bank hearing (comments will be updated as received). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Coastal Bankshares, Inc. (PDF), Savannah, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated August 10, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: CB Holding Corp. (PDF), Aledo, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated August 23, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Texas Bancshares, Inc. (PDF), Snyder, TexasWritten Agreement dated August 17, 2011 Flagship Financial Group, Inc. (PDF), Eden Prairie, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated August 19, 2011 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board is proposing a two-year phase-in period for most savings and loan holding companies (SLHCs) to file Federal Reserve regulatory reports with the Board and an exemption for some SLHCs from initially filing Federal Reserve regulatory reports. Under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, supervisory and rulemaking authority for SLHCs and their nondepository subsidiaries transferred from the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) to the Board on July 21, 2011. On February 3, 2011, the Federal Reserve Board sought comment on its notice of intent to require SLHCs to submit the same reports as bank holding companies, beginning with the March 31, 2012, reporting period. After consideration of the comments received on the notice of intent, the Federal Reserve Board proposes to exempt a limited number of SLHCs from initial regulatory reporting using the Federal Reserve's existing regulatory reports and a two-year phase-in period for regulatory reporting for all other SLHCs. Exempt SLHCs would continue to submit Schedule HC, which is currently a part of the Thrift Financial Report, and the OTS H-(b)11 Annual/Current Report. The Federal Reserve Board will accept comments on the proposal through November 1, 2011. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2977. Federal Registernotice
The Federal Reserve Board is seeking comment on a proposed rule outlining the procedures for securities holding companies (SHCs) to elect to be supervised by the Federal Reserve. An SHC is a nonbank company that owns at least one registered broker or dealer. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act eliminated the previous securities holding company supervision framework under the Securities and Exchange Commission and permitted SHCs to be supervised by the Federal Reserve. An SHC may seek supervision by the Federal Reserve to meet requirements by a regulator in another country that the firm be subject to comprehensive, consolidated supervision in the United States in order to operate in the country. The proposal specifies the information that an SHC will need to provide to the Board as part of registration for supervision, including information related to organizational structure, capital, and financial condition. An SHC's registration would generally become effective 45 days after the Board receives all required information. The proposal provides that upon an effective registration, an SHC would be supervised and regulated as if it were a bank holding company. Consistent with the Dodd-Frank Act, the restrictions on nonbanking activities in the Bank Holding Company Act would not apply to a supervised SHC. The Board will accept comments on the proposal through October 11, 2011. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June indicates that economic growth so far this year has been considerably slower than the Committee had expected. Indicators suggest a deterioration in overall labor market conditions in recent months, and the unemployment rate has moved up. Household spending has flattened out, investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector remains depressed. However, business investment in equipment and software continues to expand. Temporary factors, including the damping effect of higher food and energy prices on consumer purchasing power and spending as well as supply chain disruptions associated with the tragic events in Japan, appear to account for only some of the recent weakness in economic activity. Inflation picked up earlier in the year, mainly reflecting higher prices for some commodities and imported goods, as well as the supply chain disruptions. More recently, inflation has moderated as prices of energy and some commodities have declined from their earlier peaks. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee now expects a somewhat slower pace of recovery over coming quarters than it did at the time of the previous meeting and anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, downside risks to the economic outlook have increased. The Committee also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee's dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate further. However, the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations. To promote the ongoing economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that economic conditions--including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run--are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. The Committee also will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate. The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. It will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ these tools as appropriate. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Charles L. Evans; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Daniel K. Tarullo; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the action were: Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, who would have preferred to continue to describe economic conditions as likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on August 9, 2011 and of the conference call held on August 1, 2011. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 1 andAugust 9, 2011:PDF|HTML
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming Good morning. As always, thanks are due to the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City for organizing this conference. This year's topic, long-term economic growth, is indeed pertinent--as has so often been the case at this symposium in past years. In particular, the financial crisis and the subsequent slow recovery have caused some to question whether the United States, notwithstanding its long-term record of vigorous economic growth, might not now be facing a prolonged period of stagnation, regardless of its public policy choices. Might not the very slow pace of economic expansion of the past few years, not only in the United States but also in a number of other advanced economies, morph into something far more long-lasting? I can certainly appreciate these concerns and am fully aware of the challenges that we face in restoring economic and financial conditions conducive to healthy growth, some of which I will comment on today. With respect to longer-run prospects, however, my own view is more optimistic. As I will discuss, although important problems certainly exist, the growth fundamentals of the United States do not appear to have been permanently altered by the shocks of the past four years. It may take some time, but we can reasonably expect to see a return to growth rates and employment levels consistent with those underlying fundamentals. In the interim, however, the challenges for U.S. economic policymakers are twofold: first, to help our economy further recover from the crisis and the ensuing recession, and second, to do so in a way that will allow the economy to realize its longer-term growth potential. Economic policies should be evaluated in light of both of those objectives. This morning I will offer some thoughts on why the pace of recovery in the United States has, for the most part, proved disappointing thus far, and I will discuss the Federal Reserve's policy response. I will then turn briefly to the longer-term prospects of our economy and the need for our country's economic policies to be effective from both a shorter-term and longer-term perspective. Near-Term Prospects for the Economy and PolicyIn discussing the prospects for the economy and for policy in the near term, it bears recalling briefly how we got here. The financial crisis that gripped global markets in 2008 and 2009 was more severe than any since the Great Depression. Economic policymakers around the world saw the mounting risks of a global financial meltdown in the fall of 2008 and understood the extraordinarily dire economic consequences that such an event could have. As I have described in previous remarks at this forum, governments and central banks worked forcefully and in close coordination to avert the looming collapse. The actions to stabilize the financial system were accompanied, both in the United States and abroad, by substantial monetary and fiscal stimulus. But notwithstanding these strong and concerted efforts, severe damage to the global economy could not be avoided. The freezing of credit, the sharp drops in asset prices, dysfunction in financial markets, and the resulting blows to confidence sent global production and trade into free fall in late 2008 and early 2009. We meet here today almost exactly three years since the beginning of the most intense phase of the financial crisis and a bit more than two years since the National Bureau of Economic Research's date for the start of the economic recovery. Where do we stand? There have been some positive developments over the past few years, particularly when considered in the light of economic prospects as viewed at the depth of the crisis. Overall, the global economy has seen significant growth, led by the emerging-market economies. In the United States, a cyclical recovery, though a modest one by historical standards, is in its ninth quarter. In the financial sphere, the U.S. banking system is generally much healthier now, with banks holding substantially more capital. Credit availability from banks has improved, though it remains tight in categories--such as small business lending--in which the balance sheets of potential borrowers remain impaired. Companies with access to the public bond markets have had no difficulty obtaining credit on favorable terms. Importantly, structural reform is moving forward in the financial sector, with ambitious domestic and international efforts underway to enhance the capital and liquidity of banks, especially the most systemically important banks; to improve risk management and transparency; to strengthen market infrastructure; and to introduce a more systemic, or macroprudential, approach to financial regulation and supervision. In the broader economy, manufacturing production in the United States has risen nearly 15 percent since its trough, driven substantially by growth in exports. Indeed, the U.S. trade deficit has been notably lower recently than it was before the crisis, reflecting in part the improved competitiveness of U.S. goods and services. Business investment in equipment and software has continued to expand, and productivity gains in some industries have been impressive, though new data have reduced estimates of overall productivity improvement in recent years. Households also have made some progress in repairing their balance sheets--saving more, borrowing less, and reducing their burdens of interest payments and debt. Commodity prices have come off their highs, which will reduce the cost pressures facing businesses and help increase household purchasing power. Notwithstanding these more positive developments, however, it is clear that the recovery from the crisis has been much less robust than we had hoped. From the latest comprehensive revisions to the national accounts as well as the most recent estimates of growth in the first half of this year, we have learned that the recession was even deeper and the recovery even weaker than we had thought; indeed, aggregate output in the United States still has not returned to the level that it attained before the crisis. Importantly, economic growth has for the most part been at rates insufficient to achieve sustained reductions in unemployment, which has recently been fluctuating a bit above 9 percent. Temporary factors, including the effects of the run-up in commodity prices on consumer and business budgets and the effect of the Japanese disaster on global supply chains and production, were part of the reason for the weak performance of the economy in the first half of 2011; accordingly, growth in the second half looks likely to improve as their influence recedes. However, the incoming data suggest that other, more persistent factors also have been at work. Why has the recovery from the crisis been so slow and erratic? Historically, recessions have typically sowed the seeds of their own recoveries as reduced spending on investment, housing, and consumer durables generates pent-up demand. As the business cycle bottoms out and confidence returns, this pent-up demand, often augmented by the effects of stimulative monetary and fiscal policies, is met through increased production and hiring. Increased production in turn boosts business revenues and household incomes and provides further impetus to business and household spending. Improving income prospects and balance sheets also make households and businesses more creditworthy, and financial institutions become more willing to lend. Normally, these developments create a virtuous circle of rising incomes and profits, more supportive financial and credit conditions, and lower uncertainty, allowing the process of recovery to develop momentum. These restorative forces are at work today, and they will continue to promote recovery over time. Unfortunately, the recession, besides being extraordinarily severe as well as global in scope, was also unusual in being associated with both a very deep slump in the housing market and a historic financial crisis. These two features of the downturn, individually and in combination, have acted to slow the natural recovery process. Notably, the housing sector has been a significant driver of recovery from most recessions in the United States since World War II, but this time--with an overhang of distressed and foreclosed properties, tight credit conditions for builders and potential homebuyers, and ongoing concerns by both potential borrowers and lenders about continued house price declines--the rate of new home construction has remained at less than one-third of its pre-crisis level. The low level of construction has implications not only for builders but for providers of a wide range of goods and services related to housing and homebuilding. Moreover, even as tight credit for some borrowers has been one of the factors restraining housing recovery, the weakness of the housing sector has in turn had adverse effects on financial markets and on the flow of credit. For example, the sharp declines in house prices in some areas have left many homeowners "underwater" on their mortgages, creating financial hardship for households and, through their effects on rates of mortgage delinquency and default, stress for financial institutions as well. Financial pressures on financial institutions and households have contributed, in turn, to greater caution in the extension of credit and to slower growth in consumer spending. I have already noted the central role of the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009 in sparking the recession. As I also noted, a great deal has been done and is being done to address the causes and effects of the crisis, including a substantial program of financial reform, and conditions in the U.S. banking system and financial markets have improved significantly overall. Nevertheless, financial stress has been and continues to be a significant drag on the recovery, both here and abroad. Bouts of sharp volatility and risk aversion in markets have recently re-emerged in reaction to concerns about both European sovereign debts and developments related to the U.S. fiscal situation, including the recent downgrade of the U.S. long-term credit rating by one of the major rating agencies and the controversy concerning the raising of the U.S. federal debt ceiling. It is difficult to judge by how much these developments have affected economic activity thus far, but there seems little doubt that they have hurt household and business confidence and that they pose ongoing risks to growth. The Federal Reserve continues to monitor developments in financial markets and institutions closely and is in frequent contact with policymakers in Europe and elsewhere. Monetary policy must be responsive to changes in the economy and, in particular, to the outlook for growth and inflation. As I mentioned earlier, the recent data have indicated that economic growth during the first half of this year was considerably slower than the Federal Open Market Committee had been expecting, and that temporary factors can account for only a portion of the economic weakness that we have observed. Consequently, although we expect a moderate recovery to continue and indeed to strengthen over time, the Committee has marked down its outlook for the likely pace of growth over coming quarters. With commodity prices and other import prices moderating and with longer-term inflation expectations remaining stable, we expect inflation to settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below the rate of 2 percent, or a bit less, that most Committee participants view as being consistent with our dual mandate. In light of its current outlook, the Committee recently decided to provide more specific forward guidance about its expectations for the future path of the federal funds rate. In particular, in the statement following our meeting earlier this month, we indicated that economic conditions--including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run--are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. That is, in what the Committee judges to be the most likely scenarios for resource utilization and inflation in the medium term, the target for the federal funds rate would be held at its current low levels for at least two more years. In addition to refining our forward guidance, the Federal Reserve has a range of tools that could be used to provide additional monetary stimulus. We discussed the relative merits and costs of such tools at our August meeting. We will continue to consider those and other pertinent issues, including of course economic and financial developments, at our meeting in September, which has been scheduled for two days (the 20th and the 21st) instead of one to allow a fuller discussion. The Committee will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. Economic Policy and Longer-Term Growth in the United StatesThe financial crisis and its aftermath have posed severe challenges around the globe, particularly in the advanced industrial economies. Thus far I have reviewed some of those challenges, offered some diagnoses for the slow economic recovery in the United States, and briefly discussed the policy response by the Federal Reserve. However, this conference is focused on longer-run economic growth, and appropriately so, given the fundamental importance of long-term growth rates in the determination of living standards. In that spirit, let me turn now to a brief discussion of the longer-run prospects for the U.S. economy and the role of economic policy in shaping those prospects. Notwithstanding the severe difficulties we currently face, I do not expect the long-run growth potential of the U.S. economy to be materially affected by the crisis and the recession if--and I stressif--our country takes the necessary steps to secure that outcome. Over the medium term, housing activity will stabilize and begin to grow again, if for no other reason than that ongoing population growth and household formation will ultimately demand it. Good, proactive housing policies could help speed that process. Financial markets and institutions have already made considerable progress toward normalization, and I anticipate that the financial sector will continue to adapt to ongoing reforms while still performing its vital intermediation functions. Households will continue to strengthen their balance sheets, a process that will be sped up considerably if the recovery accelerates but that will move forward in any case. Businesses will continue to invest in new capital, adopt new technologies, and build on the productivity gains of the past several years. I have confidence that our European colleagues fully appreciate what is at stake in the difficult issues they are now confronting and that, over time, they will take all necessary and appropriate steps to address those issues effectively and comprehensively. This economic healing will take a while, and there may be setbacks along the way. Moreover, we will need to remain alert to risks to the recovery, including financial risks. However, with one possible exception on which I will elaborate in a moment, the healing process should not leave major scars. Notwithstanding the trauma of the crisis and the recession, the U.S. economy remains the largest in the world, with a highly diverse mix of industries and a degree of international competitiveness that, if anything, has improved in recent years. Our economy retains its traditional advantages of a strong market orientation, a robust entrepreneurial culture, and flexible capital and labor markets. And our country remains a technological leader, with many of the world's leading research universities and the highest spending on research and development of any nation. Of course, the United States faces many growth challenges. Our population is aging, like those of many other advanced economies, and our society will have to adapt over time to an older workforce. Our K-12 educational system, despite considerable strengths, poorly serves a substantial portion of our population. The costs of health care in the United States are the highest in the world, without fully commensurate results in terms of health outcomes. But all of these long-term issues were well known before the crisis; efforts to address these problems have been ongoing, and these efforts will continue and, I hope, intensify. The quality of economic policymaking in the United States will heavily influence the nation's longer-term prospects. To allow the economy to grow at its full potential, policymakers must work to promote macroeconomic and financial stability; adopt effective tax, trade, and regulatory policies; foster the development of a skilled workforce; encourage productive investment, both private and public; and provide appropriate support for research and development and for the adoption of new technologies. The Federal Reserve has a role in promoting the longer-term performance of the economy. Most importantly, monetary policy that ensures that inflation remains low and stable over time contributes to long-run macroeconomic and financial stability. Low and stable inflation improves the functioning of markets, making them more effective at allocating resources; and it allows households and businesses to plan for the future without having to be unduly concerned with unpredictable movements in the general level of prices. The Federal Reserve also fosters macroeconomic and financial stability in its role as a financial regulator, a monitor of overall financial stability, and a liquidity provider of last resort. Normally, monetary or fiscal policies aimed primarily at promoting a faster pace of economic recovery in the near term would not be expected to significantly affect the longer-term performance of the economy. However, current circumstances may be an exception to that standard view--the exception to which I alluded earlier. Our economy is suffering today from an extraordinarily high level of long-term unemployment, with nearly half of the unemployed having been out of work for more than six months. Under these unusual circumstances, policies that promote a stronger recovery in the near term may serve longer-term objectives as well. In the short term, putting people back to work reduces the hardships inflicted by difficult economic times and helps ensure that our economy is producing at its full potential rather than leaving productive resources fallow. In the longer term, minimizing the duration of unemployment supports a healthy economy by avoiding some of the erosion of skills and loss of attachment to the labor force that is often associated with long-term unemployment. Notwithstanding this observation, which adds urgency to the need to achieve a cyclical recovery in employment, most of the economic policies that support robust economic growth in the long run are outside the province of the central bank. We have heard a great deal lately about federal fiscal policy in the United States, so I will close with some thoughts on that topic, focusing on the role of fiscal policy in promoting stability and growth. To achieve economic and financial stability, U.S. fiscal policy must be placed on a sustainable path that ensures that debt relative to national income is at least stable or, preferably, declining over time. As I have emphasized on previous occasions, without significant policy changes, the finances of the federal government will inevitably spiral out of control, risking severe economic and financial damage.1The increasing fiscal burden that will be associated with the aging of the population and the ongoing rise in the costs of health care make prompt and decisive action in this area all the more critical. Although the issue of fiscal sustainability must urgently be addressed, fiscal policymakers should not, as a consequence, disregard the fragility of the current economic recovery. Fortunately, the two goals of achieving fiscal sustainability--which is the result of responsible policies set in place for the longer term--and avoiding the creation of fiscal headwinds for the current recovery are not incompatible. Acting now to put in place a credible plan for reducing future deficits over the longer term, while being attentive to the implications of fiscal choices for the recovery in the near term, can help serve both objectives. Fiscal policymakers can also promote stronger economic performance through the design of tax policies and spending programs. To the fullest extent possible, our nation's tax and spending policies should increase incentives to work and to save, encourage investments in the skills of our workforce, stimulate private capital formation, promote research and development, and provide necessary public infrastructure. We cannot expect our economy to grow its way out of our fiscal imbalances, but a more productive economy will ease the tradeoffs that we face. Finally, and perhaps most challenging, the country would be well served by a better process for making fiscal decisions. The negotiations that took place over the summer disrupted financial markets and probably the economy as well, and similar events in the future could, over time, seriously jeopardize the willingness of investors around the world to hold U.S. financial assets or to make direct investments in job-creating U.S. businesses. Although details would have to be negotiated, fiscal policymakers could consider developing a more effective process that sets clear and transparent budget goals, together with budget mechanisms to establish the credibility of those goals. Of course, formal budget goals and mechanisms do not replace the need for fiscal policymakers to make the difficult choices that are needed to put the country's fiscal house in order, which means that public understanding of and support for the goals of fiscal policy are crucial. Economic policymakers face a range of difficult decisions, relating to both the short-run and long-run challenges we face. I have no doubt, however, that those challenges can be met, and that the fundamental strengths of our economy will ultimately reassert themselves. The Federal Reserve will certainly do all that it can to help restore high rates of growth and employment in a context of price stability. 1.See Ben S. Bernanke (2011), "Fiscal Sustainability," speech delivered at the Annual Conference of the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, Washington, June 14.Return to text