Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--Advertising and other outreach efforts are kicking off around the country to remind eligible borrowers of the December 31 deadline to request a free, impartial review through the Independent Foreclosure Review. Print, radio, television, and online advertising will target the communities hardest hit by mortgage foreclosures. Outreach includes direct contact with eligible borrowers by mail, e-mail, and telephone. Outreach also includes coordinated activity by community, housing, and faith-based groups. In August, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System directed mortgage servicers to conduct this additional outreach to increase awareness of the Independent Foreclosure Review. The advertising and outreach is based on input from a variety of community groups and subject matter experts with particular expertise in reaching minority communities. In addition to English, advertising and informational materials will be made available in Spanish, Mandarin, Korean, Vietnamese, Hmong, Russian, Creole, and Tagalog. As part of enforcement actions issued in April 2011, the agencies required 14 large mortgage servicers to retain independent consultants to conduct a comprehensive review of foreclosure activity in 2009 and 2010 to identify borrowers who may have been financially injured due to errors, misrepresentations, or other deficiencies in the foreclosure process. If the review finds that financial injury occurred, the borrower may receive remediation such as lump-sum payments, suspension or rescission of a foreclosure, a loan modification or other loss mitigation assistance, correction of credit reports, or correction of deficiency amounts and records. Lump-sum payments can range from smaller amounts for less serious errors to $125,000 plus equity in the most egregious cases. Eligible borrowers included those people whose primary homes were involved in a foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010 and whose mortgages were serviced by one of the participating mortgage companies listed athttp://www.independentforeclosurereview.com. Reviews are free and federal regulators are monitoring the process to ensure they are conducted in a thorough and impartial manner. Requesting a review does not preclude borrowers from taking other actions related to their foreclosures. Servicers are not permitted to require a borrower to sign a waiver of the borrower's ability to pursue claims against the servicer in order to receive compensation under the Independent Foreclosure Review. There are no costs associated with being included in the review. More information, including how to apply online, is available athttp://www.independentforeclosurereview.com. Community groups wishing to promote awareness of this program may use materials available online athttps://independentforeclosurereview.com/Toolkit.aspx.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemConsumer Financial Protection Bureau The Federal Reserve Board (Board) and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) today announced increases in the dollar thresholds in Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) for exempt consumer credit and lease transactions. These increases are consistent with the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) amendments to the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to adjust these thresholds annually by the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers. Transactions at or below the thresholds are subject to the protections of the regulations. The adjustments to the thresholds reflect the annual percentage increase in the consumer price index as of June 1, 2012 and will take effect on January 1, 2013. Based on the adjustments announced today, the protections of the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act generally will apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases of $53,000 or less in 2013. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property (such as mortgages) are subject to the Truth in Lending Act regardless of the amount of the loan. Although the Dodd-Frank Act generally transferred rulemaking authority under the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to the CFPB, the Board retains authority to issue rules for certain motor vehicle dealers. Therefore, the agencies are issuing these adjustments jointly. In addition, the CFPB is separately adjusting the dollar amount that triggers additional protections for certain home mortgages under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994 (HOEPA), as required by statute. Consistent with the increase in the consumer price index, the dollar amount of the HOEPA fee trigger will increase to $625 for 2013. The notices that will be published in theFederal Registerare attached. Federal Register Notices Board Votes
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (the agencies) recognize the continuing impact of Hurricane Sandy on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and encourage institutions to consider all reasonable and prudent steps to assist customers in communities affected by recent storms. Therefore, the agencies are issuing supplemental guidance to their October 30, 2012, statements about financial institutions and borrowers affected by Hurricane Sandy. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found atwww.fema.gov. Prudent Relief EffortsPrudent efforts by institutions to meet customers' cash and financial needs generally will not be subject to examiner criticism. When consistent with safe and sound banking and credit union practices, these efforts may include: Loan ModificationsThe agencies realize the effects of natural disasters on local businesses and individuals are often transitory, and prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas should not be subject to examiner criticism. Financial institutions should perform a comprehensive review of an affected borrower's financial condition in an effort to implement a prudent loan workout arrangement. When conducting examinations and other supervisory activities, examiners will consider the unusual circumstances institutions are facing in the affected areas. An institution that implements prudent loan workout arrangements will not be subject to criticism for engaging in these efforts even if the restructured loans have weaknesses that result in adverse classification or credit risk grade downgrade. The agencies remind financial institutions that all restructured loans should be evaluated to determine whether a loan should be reported as a troubled debt restructuring (TDR). This evaluation should be based on the facts and circumstances of each borrower and loan; this requires judgment since not all modifications are TDRs. Financial institutions should refer to the instructions for the Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income (for banks and savings associations) and the 5300 Call Report (for credit unions); Accounting Standards Codification Subtopic 310-40, "Receivables – Troubled Debt Restructurings by Creditors"; and other supervisory guidance for the accounting and reporting of TDRs. Community Reinvestment Act ConsiderationsFinancial institutions2may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, institutions should review theInteragency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestmentathttp://www.ffiec.gov/cra/pdf/2010-4903.pdf. Customer IdentificationThe agencies recognize that many persons displaced or adversely affected by a disaster or emergency may not have access to their normal identification and personal records. Under the Customer Identification Program (CIP) requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), financial institutions must obtain, at a minimum, an individual's name, address, date of birth, and taxpayer identification number or other acceptable identification number before opening an account. The agencies encourage institutions to be reasonable in their approach to verifying the identity of individuals temporarily displaced by Hurricane Sandy. Recognizing the urgency of this situation, the agencies remind institutions that the CIP requirements of the BSA provide organizations the flexibility to use documents, non-documentary methods, or a combination to verify a customer's identity. Moreover, the regulation provides that verification of identity may be completed within a reasonable time after the account is opened. An institution in an affected area, or dealing with new customers from the affected area, may amend its Customer Identification Program immediately and obtain required board approval for program changes as soon as practicable. To help protect the interests of customers and communities in the affected areas, institutions should continue to be alert to indications of fraud or other criminal activities and report suspicious activity in accordance with existing protocols. Institutions may wish to refer to the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network's Advisory FIN-2006-A001 (available athttp://www.fincen.gov/statutes_regs/guidance/pdf/hurricanebenefitfraud.pdf), which provides guidance to financial institutions about potential fraudulent schemes during natural disasters. MonitoringThe agencies note that the measures described above could help customers recover financial strength and contribute to the health of the local community and the long-term interests of institutions and their customers when undertaken in a prudent manner. The agencies recognize that the needs and situation of each financial institution and its community and customers are unique. These suggested actions may not be feasible or desirable for all institutions and many institutions may provide services in addition to those identified above. The agencies will continue to closely monitor the situation and provide additional guidance, as required, to help address the needs of financial institutions and their customers. Institutions requiring assistance in dealing with customers affected by Hurricane Sandy should contact their primary supervisors. 1.Note, however, that if a withdrawal is permitted within six days after the date of deposit without an early withdrawal penalty, that deposit should not be reported as a time deposit, but as either a savings deposit, if it meets the requirements for such deposits, or a transaction account deposit.Return to text 2.Federal credit unions are not subject to CRA requirements.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The U.S. federal banking agencies issued three notices of proposed rulemaking in June that would revise and replace the current regulatory capital rules. The proposals suggested an effective date of January 1, 2013. Many industry participants have expressed concern that they may be subject to a final regulatory capital rule on January 1, 2013, without sufficient time to understand the rule or to make necessary systems changes. In light of the volume of comments received and the wide range of views expressed during the comment period, the agencies do not expect that any of the proposed rules would become effective on January 1, 2013. As members of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the U.S. agencies take seriously our internationally agreed timing commitments regarding the implementation of Basel III and are working as expeditiously as possible to complete the rulemaking process. As with any rule, the agencies will take operational and other considerations into account when determining appropriate implementation dates and associated transition periods.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Operation HOPE Global Financial Dignity Summit, Atlanta, Georgia Good afternoon. I'd like to thank John Bryant and Operation HOPE for inviting me to speak today. I'd also like to congratulate Operation HOPE and the Ebenezer Baptist Church on the grand opening of the HOPE Financial Dignity Center, which holds the promise of becoming a tremendous resource for the people of Atlanta and sits next to Martin Luther King's home church. Dr. King's legacy to our society is strong and enduring, and the new center is very much in the spirit of his work. The past few years have been difficult for many Americans and their communities. At the Federal Reserve, we understand the depth of the problem and the need for action, and we will continue to use the policy tools that we have to help support economic recovery. We also know that the burdens of a weak economy and the benefits of economic growth often are not equally shared, and that, to be truly effective, policymakers must take into account how their decisions affect the least advantaged, not just the economy as a whole. My remarks today will focus on an important part of our economy, the housing sector. Housing and housing finance played a central role in touching off the financial crisis and the associated recession, and the ensuing wave of foreclosures wreaked great damage on communities across the country. As I will discuss, for the first time in a number of years, the housing sector is improving, adding to growth and jobs. But the housing revival still faces significant obstacles, and the benefits of that revival remain quite uneven. Strengthening and broadening the housing recovery remain a critical challenge for policymakers, lenders, and community leaders. The degree to which that challenge is met will help determine the strength and sustainability of the economic recovery and the extent to which its benefits are broadly felt. Developments in Housing and Housing FinanceThe multiyear boom and bust in housing prices of the past decade, together with the sharp increase in mortgage delinquencies and defaults that followed, were among the principal causes of the financial crisis and the ensuing deep recession--a recession that cost some 8 million jobs. And continued weakness in housing--reflected in falling prices, low rates of new construction, and historic levels of foreclosure--has proved a powerful headwind to recovery. It is encouraging, therefore, that we are seeing signs of improvement in the housing market in most parts of the country. House prices nationally have increased for nine consecutive months, residential investment has risen about 15 percent from its low point, and sales of both new and existing homes have edged up.1Homebuilder sentiment has improved considerably over the past year, and real estate agents report a substantial rise in homebuyer traffic. The growing demand for homes has been underpinned by record levels of affordability, the result of historically low mortgage rates and house prices that are 30 percent or more below their peaks in many areas. To be sure, the housing sector is far from being out of the woods. Construction activity, sales, and prices remain much lower than they were before the crisis. About 20 percent of mortgage borrowers remain underwater--that is, they owe more than their homes are worth. Despite marked improvements in overall credit quality, 7 percent of mortgages are either more than 90 days overdue or in the process of foreclosure.2And, although the number of homes in foreclosure has edged down since cresting in 2010, that number remains in excess of 2 million, three times the historical norm. Meanwhile, the national homeownership rate has slipped nearly 4 percentage points from its 2004 high of 69 percent, and it now stands at a 15-year low.3So, although there are good reasons to be encouraged by the recent direction of the housing market, we should not be satisfied with the progress we have seen so far. Lower-income and minority communities are often disproportionately affected by problems in the national economy, and the effects of the housing bust have followed that unfortunate pattern. Indeed, as a result of the crisis, most or all of the hard-won gains in homeownership made by low-income and minority communities in the past 15 years or so have been reversed. For example, among all income groups, between 2007 and 2010, homeownership rates fell the most for households with income of $20,000 or less, according to the Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances.4Data from the Census Bureau show that, over the period from 2004 to 2012, the homeownership rate fell about 5 percentage points for African Americans, compared with about 2 percentage points for other groups.5 Homeownership rates fall when existing homeowners lose or leave their properties, when barriers to homeownership increase, or both. In recent years, both factors have been important. As I mentioned, home loss through foreclosure, though down from its peaks, remains an important problem, with lower-income and minority homeowners often being the hardest hit. Importantly, foreclosures can inflict economic damage beyond the personal suffering and dislocation that accompany them. Foreclosed properties that sit vacant for months (or years) often deteriorate from neglect, adversely affecting not only the value of the individual property but the values of nearby homes as well. Concentrations of foreclosures have been shown to do serious damage to neighborhoods and communities, reducing tax bases and leading to increased vandalism and crime. Thus, the overall effect of the foreclosure wave, especially when concentrated in lower-income and minority areas, is broader than its effects on individual homeowners. A strengthening housing market will help to gradually undo that damage, but the process has only begun. Homeownership rates have also declined because fewer households have chosen, or have been able, to become new homeowners in recent years. Buying a home usually means obtaining a mortgage, and the data show that the pace of mortgage lending has fallen considerably on a national basis; the extension of first-lien mortgages to purchase homes fell by more than half from 2006 to 2011 and now stands at the lowest level since 1995.6Again, the contraction in mortgage originations has been particularly severe for minority groups and those with lower incomes: Since the peak in mortgage lending in 2006, the number of home-purchase loans extended to African Americans and Hispanics has fallen more than 65 percent, whereas lending to non-Hispanic whites has fallen less than 50 percent. Home-purchase originations in lower-income neighborhoods have fallen about 75 percent, compared with around 50 percent for middle- and upper-income neighborhoods. To be clear, the reduction in mortgage originations and home purchases for all groups relative to the pre-crisis period partly reflects weakness in the effective demand for housing rather than the unavailability of mortgage credit. Unemployment, income loss, and income insecurity prevent many households from purchasing homes, and concerns about the future direction of the labor market, housing prices, and the economy more generally keep other potential buyers on the sidelines. In addition, the fall in home prices means that many current homeowners cannot rely as much as they could in the past on tapping their existing home equity to trade up to larger or better homes, while underwater homeowners may be financially unable to move from their current homes. Although the decline in the number of willing and qualified potential homebuyers explains some of the contraction in mortgage lending of the past few years, I believe that tight credit nevertheless remains an important factor as well. The Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices indicates that lenders began tightening mortgage credit standards in 2007 and have not significantly eased standards since.7Terms and standards have tightened most for borrowers with lower credit scores and with less money available for a down payment. For example, in April nearly 60 percent of lenders reported that they would be much less likely, relative to 2006, to originate a conforming home-purchase mortgage to a borrower with a 10 percent down payment and a credit score of 620--a traditional marker for those with weaker credit histories.8As a result, the share of home-purchase borrowers with credit scores below 620 has fallen from about 17 percent of borrowers at the end of 2006 to about 5 percent more recently.9Lenders also appear to have pulled back on offering these borrowers loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). When lenders were asked why they have originated fewer mortgages, they cited a variety of concerns, starting with worries about the economy, the outlook for house prices, and their existing real estate loan exposures. They also mention increases in servicing costs and the risk of being required by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) to repurchase delinquent loans (so-called putback risk). Other concerns include the reduced availability of private mortgage insurance for conventional loans and some program-specific issues for FHA loans as reasons for tighter standards. Also, some evidence suggests that mortgage originations for new purchases may be constrained because of processing capacity, as high levels of refinancing have drawn on the same personnel who would otherwise be available for handling loans for purchase. Importantly, however, restrictive mortgage lending conditions do not seem to be linked to any insufficiency of bank capital or to a general unwillingness to lend. Certainly, some tightening of credit standards was an appropriate response to the lax lending conditions that prevailed in the years leading up to the peak in house prices. Mortgage loans that were poorly underwritten or inappropriate for the borrower's circumstances ultimately had devastating consequences for many families and communities, as well as for the financial institutions themselves and the broader economy. However, it seems likely at this point that the pendulum has swung too far the other way, and that overly tight lending standards may now be preventing creditworthy borrowers from buying homes, thereby slowing the revival in housing and impeding the economic recovery. Policy ResponsesThe factors contributing to reduced mortgage lending and lower rates of homeownership are varied and complex; no simple solutions exist that can, on their own, restore the housing market to health. Since the extent of the crisis became apparent, a range of initiatives has been undertaken. For example, a number of public and private efforts have been made to help avoid unnecessary foreclosures and to enable underwater and other borrowers to refinance at lower interest rates. Alternatives to foreclosure, including short sales and deed-in-lieu arrangements, have become more common. The recent settlement with a group of large servicers includes provisions to improve the process for working with delinquent borrowers and to compensate foreclosed-upon homeowners who were unfairly treated in the past. As I have noted, vacant foreclosed homes lose value and create problems for neighborhoods. The overhang of empty homes also slows the recovery of the housing market by keeping prices low and limiting the need for new construction. To explore ways to address the number of foreclosed homes standing empty, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which supervises the GSEs, undertook a pilot initiative that made it easier for qualified investors to purchase pools of foreclosed properties from Fannie Mae; the acquired properties would then be rented for a specified number of years. For our part, the Federal Reserve is encouraging the institutions we supervise to manage their inventories of foreclosed homes in ways that do not exacerbate problems in local neighborhoods, including renting them out, where appropriate, rather than leaving the properties vacant.10 Policymakers have also taken steps to remove barriers to the flow of mortgage credit. The Federal Housing Finance Agency recently announced new rules that will provide mortgage lenders greater clarity about the conditions under which they will be required to buy back defaulted mortgages from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac or otherwise address origination problems. This greater clarity may result in reduced concern about putback risk, which in turn should increase the willingness of lenders to make new loans. In its rulemakings and supervision, the Federal Reserve, along with other bank supervisors, has worked with lenders to try to achieve an appropriate balance between reasonable prudence and ensuring that qualified borrowers are not denied access to credit. Although regulatory policy will be important for restoring a fully functioning housing and mortgage market, the strength of the overall economic recovery is crucial as well. Obviously, loss of employment or income makes it more difficult for families to pay their mortgages, maintain good credit histories, refinance their mortgages at lower rates, and avoid foreclosure. People who are worried about their jobs are understandably more reluctant to purchase homes, and households who have suffered hits to their incomes face difficulty qualifying for a mortgage and saving for a down payment. Concerns about the financial strength of households and about the economic recovery also make lenders more cautious. At the Federal Reserve, we have sought to support the economic recovery and maintain price stability--the two goals given to us by the Congress--by keeping both short-term and longer-term interest rates historically low. Low interest rates reduce the cost to households of buying homes, cars, and other consumer durables while increasing the attractiveness of new capital investments by firms. Increased demand in turn leads to faster economic growth and more jobs. My colleagues and I have been and remain quite concerned about the stubbornly high level of unemployment--particularly long-term unemployment. We have taken strong actions throughout the financial crisis and recovery to help stabilize the economy. In September, we took the added step of stating that we will continue actions to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates until the outlook for the job market improves substantially in a context of price stability. Our hope is that our statement provides individuals, families, businesses, and financial markets greater confidence about the Federal Reserve's commitment to promoting a sustainable recovery with price stability and that, as a result, they will become more willing to invest, hire and spend. In addition, of course, the historically low mortgage rates that have resulted from the Federal Reserve's policies are directly supporting the housing market by putting homeownership within the reach of more people. While the economic recovery and regulatory policy affect access to credit for all households, some potential borrowers may face the added burden of discrimination. In our role as a banking regulator, the Federal Reserve strives to ensure that the banks we supervise obey laws that prohibit illegal discrimination in lending. I am reminded here that fair treatment in housing was a significant focus of Dr. King's, and the Fair Housing Act of 1968--still one of the nation's cornerstone laws to prohibit discrimination--was passed only a week after his assassination and stands among his legacies. Two types of discrimination continue to have particular significance to mortgage markets: One is redlining, in which mortgage lenders discriminate against minority neighborhoods, and the other is pricing discrimination, in which lenders charge minorities higher loan prices than they would to comparable nonminority borrowers. The Federal Reserve has been vigilant in identifying and stopping such abuses, and we remain committed to vigorous enforcement of the nation's fair lending laws. We currently co-chair, with the Department of Justice, an interagency task force to promote robust fair lending supervision and enforcement. Government policies, both microeconomic and macroeconomic, have an important role to play in restoring the health of the housing sector. However, government can only be part of the solution; in the remainder of my remarks I will discuss what others can do, including potential homeowners themselves. Financial Preparedness and HomeownershipOne lesson of the past few years is that the desire to own a home is not enough. Although many foreclosures resulted from job loss or other economic hardships, others occurred because people bought more of a house than they could afford, took out a loan that was not appropriate to their circumstances, or did not manage their resources well. Future homeownership must be built on a more solid foundation. And while much of the responsibility for building that foundation must lie with lenders and with regulators, consumers must do their part as well by acquiring the information and financial knowledge they need to make sound decisions. Operation HOPE has made this point frequently and forcefully. Effective financial education--aimed at both youths and adults--can provide people with the knowledge they need. Some of the skills that prospective homeowners need are relatively basic--for example, knowing how to shop for the lowest interest rate and fees, understanding the difference between a fixed-rate and an adjustable-rate mortgage, and, very importantly, knowing how to find trustworthy information and advice. More generally, the decision to buy a home must be consistent with a family's longer-term objectives, needs, and resources. Good financial planning--including effective budgeting, adequate saving, and sensible investing--can help families maintain homeownership while also pursuing other important objectives, such as preparing for retirement or financial emergencies. And financially informed households will have a better chance to build wealth, reducing--in the case of minority households--the large wealth gap that exists between minorities and other groups. At the Federal Reserve, we appreciate the benefits to families of acquiring basic information and skills about managing their money. But we see another important advantage of financial education, which is that an economy with financially knowledgeable households is likely to be stronger, more equal, and more stable. As such, we all gain from efforts to increase financial literacy. Although basic knowledge about money management and decisionmaking is extremely useful, it is not practical, of course, for everyone to be a financial expert. Sometimes a professional can help, and people should not be afraid to seek advice at appropriate times. For example, an individual may be involved in buying a home--a complex and intimidating experience for many people--only once or twice in a lifetime. That's why advice from a housing counselor at the right point in the process can make all the difference. Nonprofit organizations can help prospective homeowners assess their readiness to purchase. And, by providing useful information about how to search for a home, apply for financing, handle home maintenance, and prevent delinquency, these nonprofits can help aspiring homebuyers find the right home and maintain their mortgage payments.11We have also seen that counseling can help consumers who are facing delinquency or default. Borrowers in trouble who receive foreclosure counseling are relatively more likely to subsequently become current on their mortgage, receive a loan modification, and, ultimately, keep their home.12 Financial preparedness is important not only for prospective homebuyers. It ought to be a lifelong undertaking, starting with children and teenagers. Organizations around the country--including Operation HOPE--help people across a range of ages develop their skills. Despite, or perhaps because of, the broader economic challenges we face, it now seems to be a time of creativity and innovation in this field. We are seeing experimentation, knowledge sharing, public-private collaborations, "bottom up" community-driven approaches, and state- and local-government efforts to promote family financial security and opportunity. More generally, community organizations like Operation HOPE have played an important role in helping low-income and minority communities weather the storm of the past few years. Besides promoting financial literacy and providing counseling (and sometimes credit) for homebuyers, community organizations have helped build small businesses through investment and technical assistance. Organizations such as NeighborWorks America (and as an aside, Federal Reserve Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin currently chairs its board) have been leaders in fighting the blight in neighborhoods with high rates of foreclosure. Unfortunately, just as families have been hurt by the financial crisis and recession, so have many community-based organizations. These groups face the daunting task of finding new sources of capital and investment in a constrained financial environment. Some organizations have begun to retool their operations and develop new markets, products, and strategies to better serve the financial needs of consumers and communities. Among other goals, they are developing strategies to foster responsible homeownership, which they see as an important building block for stronger communities. To return to where I began, after a long and difficult period, we are seeing welcome signs of improvement in the housing market. An improving housing market will in turn aid the economic recovery while strengthening neighborhoods and increasing the financial well-being of families. Our recovery must be broadly felt to be complete, and families and communities that were already struggling before the crisis must be included in that recovery. As Dr. King is widely quoted to have said, "We may have all come on different ships, but we're in the same boat now." The Federal Reserve will continue to do what we can to support the housing recovery, both through our monetary policy and our regulatory and supervisory actions. But, as I have discussed, not all of the responsibility lies with the government; households, the financial services industry, and those in the nonprofit sector must play their part as well. In that spirit, I would like to close by expressing my appreciation and admiration for the work that so many of you are doing to restore our neighborhoods and to help individuals and families regain a solid financial footing. Thank you. 1.House prices are a staff calculation based on seasonally adjusted data from CoreLogic. Residential investment includes construction of single-family and multifamily houses as well as improvements to existing structures and brokers' commissions. The staff calculation of residential investment is based on data from the national income and product accounts. Home sales data are from the Census Bureau and the National Association of Realtors.Return to text 2.This is a staff calculation for 2012:Q2 based on data from the Mortgage Bankers Association's National Delinquency Survey.Return to text 3.See U.S. Census Bureau (2012), "Housing Vacancies and Homeownership," webpage, third quarter, historical tables, table 16.Return to text 4.Derived from the Board's Survey of Consumer Finances. See Jesse Bricker, Arthur B. Kennickell, Kevin B. Moore, and John Sabelhaus (2012), "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2007 to 2010: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 98 (February), pp. 1-80.Return to text 5.The homeownership rate for each year is calculated as the average of the quarters displayed in table 16 of "Housing Vacancies and Homeownership." See U.S. Census Bureau, "Housing Vacancies," table 16, in note 3.Return to text 6.Data on home-purchase lending are from annual filings pursuant to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. Data are available at Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, "Home Mortgage Disclosure Act," webpage.Return to text 7.The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices is available on theBoard's website.Return to text 8.A conforming mortgage is one that is eligible for purchase or credit guarantee by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac.Return to text 9.These data are staff calculations based on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer Credit Panel. The 10th percentile of credit scores on mortgage originations rose from 585 in 2006 to 635 at the end of 2011.Return to text 10.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2012), "Policy Statement on Rental of Residential Other Real Estate Owned (OREO) Properties," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 12-5 (April 5).Return to text 11.See U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2012),Pre-Purchase Counseling Outcome Study: Research Brief Housing Counseling Outcome Evaluation(Washington: HUD).Return to text 12.See J. Michael Collins and Maximilian D. Schmeiser (forthcoming), "The Effects of Foreclosure Counseling for Distressed Homeowners,"Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Community Bankers Symposium, Chicago, Illinois It is a real pleasure for me to have the opportunity to speak to community bankers at this annual Community Bankers Symposium sponsored jointly by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). I know that many of you are concerned about the banking agencies' recent proposals to revise the capital rules, the so-called Basel III proposals.1So I will start my remarks with an update on those proposals. Then I will move to a more detailed discussion of some data that I have found interesting as I have been thinking about the effect of regulations as they relate to residential mortgage lending. Before I begin, I want to assure you that all of my colleagues on the Board of Governors, including the Chairman, are concerned about the effect of regulation on community bank lending. In fact, we have established a subcommittee of the Board, which I chair, to focus on the supervision and regulation of community and small regional banks. In addition, we have established a Community Depository Institution Advisory Council (CDIAC) made up of community banks, thrifts, and credit unions to advise the Board about issues facing smaller institutions.2But I want to also be clear that any opinions I express today are my own and may not reflect those of other members of the Board. Regulatory Capital ProposalsLet me turn now to the capital proposals. As we enter the final deliberative phase of this rulemaking, I want to emphasize that the feedback we have received during the comment period has been extremely valuable and that we will work very hard to address your concerns in the final rules. Also, I would like to address the specific concern expressed by some bankers that these rules will be effective January 1, 2013, forcing them to potentially make changes with little preparation. We have received a large number of comments and want to closely consider each issue. Therefore, the agencies this morning announced that we do not expect that any of the proposed rules would become effective on January 1, 2013.3Further, the agencies offered the assurance that institutions will have time for transition once the rules are effective. Before the proposals were issued, our staff of economists and analysts conducted research to estimate the potential impact of the proposed rules. Their analysis indicated that the vast majority of community banks would already meet the new standards. Nevertheless, it was critically important to hear directly from community banks to better understand how individual institutions and their business plans might be affected by the proposals. Admittedly, the capital proposals were quite lengthy and in many cases applied only to the largest banking organizations. So, for the first time in a regulatory proposal that I'm aware of, short summaries were added to the capital proposals to explain more clearly which aspects were likely to affect community banks. The objective was to spare community bankers from having to wade through the many elements of the proposals that would apply almost exclusively to the largest institutions, and to encourage them to comment on those elements of the proposals most likely to affect their institutions. Judging from the number of comments we received from community banks, I would conclude that the summaries were at least somewhat helpful, and I hope that this innovation will become a standard part of large regulatory proposals in the future. We expected the summaries to make a difference in the volume and detail of the responses we received, but still we weren't content to just issue the proposals and wait for comments. So the Federal Reserve planned a systematic effort to solicit and understand the views of community banks, one that has been more comprehensive than any I have seen in my time at the Board. We launched these efforts at the Board's public meeting on June 7 of this year, when the capital proposals were approved and we began accepting comments. At that meeting, I reiterated my support for strong levels of high-quality capital in banks of all sizes, including community banks.4The large number of community banks that failed over the past several years as a result of problems in their real estate loan portfolios has highlighted the importance of having a strong cushion of loss-absorbing capital. However, I also emphasized the importance of getting the details of the proposals right. I encouraged community banks, therefore, to submit comments on the proposals to help us understand the costs that revisions to the capital framework could add for smaller banks and the changes to their businesses that might result. This summer we held a series of "Ask the Fed" sessions aimed primarily at banking organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve to provide an overview of the proposals, answer questions, and receive feedback. More than 3,000 bankers participated in these sessions, via teleconference or in person. We later summarized some of the most common questions that our staff received in an article in the first issue ofCommunity Banking Connections, a new Federal Reserve publication specifically for community bankers.5Board members and staff have also been meeting directly with various industry groups, including state bankers' associations, to hear their views on the proposals. After the proposals had been out for a couple of months, a number of parties, including many community bankers, requested more time to analyze the proposals prior to submitting comment letters. As a result, the agencies decided to extend the original 90-day comment period by an additional 45 days.6Also in response to requests, in September, the agencies made available a tool to help community banking organizations and others estimate the potential impact of the capital proposals on their regulatory capital ratios.7 We received more than 2,000 comment letters during the consultative period, which we are in the process of posting to the Board's public website. Our staff is currently reviewing each and every one of those letters. We take these comments very seriously, and we will be working with our colleagues at the OCC and FDIC to understand and analyze the many issues that have been raised. We heard many different concerns during our outreach efforts, but there were some recurring themes, including: the complexity of the proposed changes, the operational costs that would be incurred to track data that are not currently needed to calculate capital ratios, the potential impact on mortgage lending of the proposed mortgage risk weights, the accelerated phase-out of trust preferred securities from tier 1 capital, and the potential volatility in regulatory capital arising from the inclusion of unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities. It's still far too early in the process to know where we and the other agencies are going to come out on these and other issues, or when final rules may be released. But what I can promise you is that before we issue final capital rules, we will do everything possible to address the concerns that have been expressed by community banks and still achieve the goal of having strong levels of high-quality capital--built up over a reasonable and realistic transitional period--in banks of all sizes, including community banks. As we met with bankers and listened to them describe the threat to their role in residential mortgage lending posed by the proposed mortgage risk weightings, I realized that we had very little data about mortgages on the books of community banks. Much of our research has focused on securitized loans. So I set out to learn more about residential lending in smaller institutions, and as I did, it became clear to me that there are regulatory issues that go far beyond those raised in the capital proposals. I am now concerned that, even if the specific issues in the capital proposals can be addressed, the totality of new mortgage lending regulations might still seriously impair the ability of community banks to continue to offer their traditional mortgage products. In fact, in our discussions with community bankers, more of them report that they are reducing or eliminating their mortgage lending due to regulatory burden than report that they are entering or expanding their mortgage business in response to the business potential of low mortgage rates. I think this represents a real concern, both for mortgage availability and for the viability of community banking. Community Banks and Mortgage LendingWhen I think about community banks, I usually envision a bank, thrift, or credit union that serves customers in one or more well-defined local markets and that is engaged in a traditional community banking model--making a variety of loans and funding itself primarily with local core deposits. At the Federal Reserve, we generally define our community bank portfolio as those institutions with $10 billion or less in total assets, which is the definition I will use in this discussion. In evaluating the effect of regulation on community banks, I divide the potential burden into three categories: (1) additional operational costs associated with compliance; (2)restrictions on fees, interest rates, or other forms of revenue; and (3) unintentional barriers to offering a service that are a result of regulatory complexity. Each of these effects is of some concern, but to me the most disturbing is the third category. If the effect of a regulation is to make a traditional banking service so complicated or expensive that significant numbers of community banks believe they can no longer offer that service, it should raise red flags and spur policymakers to reassess whether the potential benefits of the regulation outweigh the potential loss of community banks' participation in that part of the market. Unfortunately, my discussions with community bankers lead me to believe that we might be approaching that point with residential mortgage lending regulation. I have thought a lot about how we have come to this point. I think it is because both the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) and its implementing regulations attempt to avoid a repeat of the lending abuses that were identified in the crisis by using characteristics that were common in subprime lending as proxies for identification of problematic loans. While this is an understandable approach given the abuses in subprime lending, it fails to recognize that many of these same characteristics, such as higher interest rates or balloon payments, also are key aspects of traditional community bank portfolio lending. But, as I will discuss later, these features in community bank lending do not appear to have resulted in nearly the level of borrower stress that was prevalent in subprime loans. Community banks have long been a source of loans that, for a variety of reasons, do not fit the parameters of conforming government-sponsored enterprise loans or eligibility for government-guaranteed programs. Community banks typically hold these loans on their own balance sheets. They use higher interest rates to compensate for the lack of liquidity in these loans or to cover higher processing costs because community banks lack economies of scale, and they use balloon payments as a simple way to limit their interest-rate risk. To the extent that regulations require additional operational procedures for such loans that are prohibitively expensive, raise the liability associated with making them, or create capital requirements that are out of proportion to the riskiness of the loans, community banks could be closed out of these products altogether. How concerned should we be if community banks start pulling out of mortgage lending? To answer this, I think it is important to answer three more fundamental questions. First, how important is community bank lending to the overall mortgage market? Second, how important is mortgage lending to the community banking model? And third, are there any indications that community bank lending poses the same risks as the subprime lending that shared many of the same characteristics? How important is community bank lending to the overall mortgage market?One of the advantages of working at the Federal Reserve is having access to what I believe is one of the finest research staffs anywhere. Because of the Federal Reserve's role in the economy and financial stability, we have teams of top-notch economists and financial analysts to help policymakers reach the best possible understanding of economic and financial trends. But they are equally valuable in assessing the effects of regulatory policy. So I asked Federal Reserve staff to examine available data to try to come up with answers to my questions about mortgage lending and community banks. I would like to share with you the answers they uncovered. Analysis of annual data on home lending reported pursuant to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) provides insight into the role of community banks in the mortgage market.8As you may know, HMDA requires banking institutions, credit unions, and mortgage companies with offices in metropolitan areas to report details about the applications they receive and the loans they extend each year.9 To investigate the role of community banks in the home lending market and to foster a more detailed understanding of mortgage lending within the broad group of community banks, our staff sorted lending institutions in HMDA into three asset size categories: smaller community banks with assets under $500 million, larger community banks with assets between $500 million and $10 billion, and large banks with assets of more than $10 billion. For the analysis, all affiliated entities were combined and treated as a single organization. The HMDA data indicate that community banks account for a significant fraction of total home loan originations each year. Smaller community banks account for about 5 percent of the originations annually and larger community banks an additional 13 percent.10Credit unions, which are nearly all small, now account for an additional 7percent of home loan originations. Thus, taken together, community banks and credit unions accounted for one-quarter of the new origination market in 2011. This is up from a combined market share of nearly 16 percent in 2004. Over the same time period, the share of loans originated by non-banks dropped from nearly one-third of all originations in 2004 to slightly more than one-quarter in 2011. The HMDA data further indicate that large banks accounted for about one-half of all originations in 2004 and about the same share in 2011.11 Therefore, as overall originations have declined, originations by small banks have not fallen as much as those of large banks or non-banks. And, as a reminder, these data do not include loan originations by institutions that operate exclusively in rural areas that, if included, would presumably increase the share originated by community institutions. Furthermore, these smaller institutions have been able to hold their own in the marketplace even as their numbers were diminished over the past few years by a number of bank closures and acquisitions by larger banking organizations.12 Looking more closely at the HMDA data provides considerably more information about the nature of home lending undertaken by institutions and the extent to which loans are held in portfolio or sold. Compared to larger banks, community banks The HMDA data also indicate that a larger share of the conventional loans extended by smaller lenders carry higher prices.14The data do not provide much insight into why the pricing patterns differ across lender size groups, but it may be that the types of loans originated by smaller lenders tend to be nonconforming or out of the ordinary in other ways and consequently carry higher prices to compensate for the lower liquidity or somewhat higher credit and interest-rate risk. Although the HMDA data provide us with an opportunity to learn quite a bit about the home lending activities of community banks and other lending institutions, the data have some important limitations, particularly since they only cover urban institutions and are available only through 2011. Other sources of data we can use to monitor the home lending activities of banking institutions are the Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, or Call Reports, filed quarterly by all banking institutions, and the FR Y-9C reports filed by bank holding companies (BHCs).15 Data from Call Reports and FR Y-9C filings show a pattern in originations for sale that is similar to the shares of overall originations revealed by the HMDA data. In the first quarter of 2007, small BHCs accounted for less than 10 percent of mortgage loan sales by bank holding companies. However, by the second quarter of 2012, these institutions had almost doubled their share, accounting for nearly 20 percent of sales. And, indeed, the net income from selling mortgage loans is attracting some new entrants. The number of banks reporting any income from sales, securitization, or servicing of mortgage loans has shown a substantial increase since 2007, with much of the entry occurring as the recession ended in the first half of 2009. Recent quarters have seen the entry of about 30 additional banks. But since the new entrants are all small, it will take a lot of them to make up for any pullback from the larger banking organizations. Taken together, these data demonstrate that while the community bank share of the mortgage market is not large, it is significant. Thus, I would conclude from this evidence that the additional capacity provided by smaller lenders is important, especially at the margin, and could contribute to lowering mortgage rates and loosening lending standards. How important is mortgage lending to the community banking model?The same data that were used to examine the role of community banks in the mortgage market can also be used to analyze the importance of mortgage products to community banks. Overall, community banks accounted for approximately one-fifth of closed-end, first-lien mortgages retained in portfolio by all banks as of June 2012. Mortgage lending appears to be just as important to community banks as it is to larger banks, as both tend to devote about one-quarter of their on-balance-sheet loan portfolios to home loans. Moreover, the share of first-lien mortgages as a percent of loans held in portfolio has increased substantially since 2008 at institutions with less than $10 billion in assets. Call Report data suggest that only a small fraction of community banks engage in the origination of mortgages for sale, securitization, or mortgage servicing. Since the financial crisis, however, measures of profitability at banks with such activities have significantly exceeded those at community banks not engaged in these business lines. Comparing community banks that reported any income from sales, securitization, and servicing of mortgages in the second quarter of 2012 to those without such income reveals that those with such income had a 34 basis point advantage in terms of return on assets, that is, 1.26 percent compared to 0.92 percent. The differences in return on equity were similarly significant -- 11.14 percent compared to 8.61 percent. With net interest margins compressing and regulatory costs increasing, many community banks are struggling right now to generate income. As I said earlier, the addition of mortgage origination capacity and competition would seem likely to reduce rates and ease conditions for borrowers. And the recent entry of new banks into the market indicates that barriers to entry are not prohibitive. So it seems to me that appropriate policy should encourage community banks to expand their mortgage lending rather than discourage them from doing so. Are there any indications that community bank lending poses the same risks as subprime lending that shared many of the same characteristics?I think I have made a reasonable case that community banks are important to the mortgage market and that mortgage lending can be, in turn, an important source of profits for community banks. None of this matters, however, if this lending poses a risk to the health of the institutions or to the consumers who are their customers. Community bankers argue that they never engaged in the sort of lending practices that led to the financial crisis. And I think that in most cases, the evidence supports their claims. However, as I mentioned earlier, data from the HMDA and Call Reports indicate that community bank lending does share some characteristics with subprime lending. For example, community banks appear to charge higher rates on their mortgage loans. And the maturity data in the Call Reports are consistent with variable-rate lending or balloon maturities on community banks' mortgage loans. But looking for signs of stress in the performance of the loans reveals a stark difference between mortgage loans held by community banks and subprime loans. Over the last several years as mortgage delinquencies reached record levels, the serious delinquency rate of mortgages held by community banks did not go much over 4 percent, far lower than the serious delinquency rates that climbed to almost 22 percent for subprime, fixed-rate loans and more than 46 percent for subprime, variable-rate loans. In fact, over the last several years, on average, mortgages held by community banks outperformed even fixed-rate, prime loans, the best performing mortgage category. I think this statistic by itself is a strong testament to the responsible lending practices of community banks. Balancing Regulatory Costs and BenefitsCommunity bankers tell us repeatedly that they didn't engage in the problem lending that led to the recent crisis and shouldn't be punished with expensive regulation. I think the data I have presented here support the first claim that their lending didn't cause the problem. But crafting regulations to address the real problems that occurred in subprime lending without creating punitive burdens on community banks may prove to be quite difficult. In addition to the capital proposals that I discussed earlier, community banks will be affected by a number of provisions in the Dodd-Frank Act, such as those covering escrow accounts for higher-priced mortgages,16loan officer compensation, and appraisal requirements. Within the escrow requirements, the Dodd-Frank Act did provide for an exemption for banks in rural or underserved areas, but I think broader exemptions for community banks should be considered. The definitions of qualified mortgages (QMs) and qualified residential mortgages (QRMs) could have a profound effect on the mortgage terms offered and the underwriting conditions for all banks. To the extent that these definitions constrain community bankers from using their experience with the cash flows from a small business customer or their knowledge of local real estate markets to customize a loan for an "irregular" situation, such loans may not be made. I do not mean to suggest that community banks are the only ones making good loans or that there weren't any problems in small banks. But I do believe that the contribution of community banks to mortgage lending abuses was proportionately small and that problematic practices in smaller banks can be addressed through on-site supervision. And I also believe that many community banks simply do not have the resources to appropriately comply with all of the pending regulatory changes pertaining to mortgage lending. Thus, the cost of solving the problem falls disproportionately on them. Conclusion: A Separate Set of Rules for Mortgage Loans Held by Community BanksIn mortgage lending, crafting a regulatory approach that is effective in preventing abuse but that leaves room for traditional community bank lending is challenging. And designing appropriate exemptions is no easier. I have presented evidence today indicating that community banks are important to the mortgage market, that they are able to relieve some capacity constraints at the margin, that mortgage lending is important to their balance sheets and their profitability in the aggregate, and that they are a source of responsible lending. Their lending is likely most important in the market for non-standard properties or borrowers. Having confirmed these conditions, I am convinced that the best course for policymakers would be to abandon efforts for a one-size-fits-all approach to mortgage lending. Balancing the cost of regulation that is prescriptive with respect to underwriting, loan structure, and operating procedures against the lack of evidence that balance sheet lending by community banks created significant problems, I think an argument can be made that it is appropriate to establish a separate, simpler regulatory structure to cover such lending. Such a regime should still establish appropriate safeguards to protect consumers, but it should do so in a way that recognizes the characteristics of community bank lending, perhaps by focusing on appropriate disclosures and relying on regular on-site supervision to test for appropriate underwriting and loan structuring. I originally requested this information to help me understand the implications of mortgage risk weightings in the capital proposal. But as I investigated the data, I realized that the regulatory burden surrounding mortgages extends beyond the capital rules and that addressing the problem will take more than a tweak here or an exemption there. I think it will require a different approach. The regulators cannot, on their own, craft a new approach to regulating mortgage lending by community banks. However, I hope that this data will be useful to bankers and policymakers as they discuss more broadly the establishment of a regulatory regime that preserves the important role of community banks in mortgage lending. 1.See 77 FR 52791, 77 FR 52888, and 77 FR 52978. See also Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2012). "Federal Reserve Board invites comment on three proposed rules intended to help ensure banks maintain strong capital positions," press release, June 7.Return to text 2.For more information, see the Board's publicwebsite.Return to text 3.See Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2012). "Agencies Provide Guidance on Regulatory Capital Rukemakings," press release, November 9.Return to text 4.See "Statement by Governor Elizabeth A. Duke," attachment to Federal Reserve press release (June 7, 2012).Return to text 5.See The Federal Reserve System (2012), "The Regulatory Capital Proposals: Frequently Asked Questions,"Community Banking Connections(Third Quarter).Return to text 6.See Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2012), "Federal Reserve Board extends comment period on three proposed capital rules rulemakings until October 22, 2012," press release, August 8.Return to text 7.See Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2012), "Agencies release a regulatory capital estimation tool to assist in assessing the potential effects of recently proposed regulatory capital rules," press release, September 24.Return to text 8.For more information refer to Robert B. Avery, Kenneth P. Brevoort, Neil Bhutta, and Glenn B. Canner (2012), "The Mortgage Market in 2011: Highlights from the Data Reported under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 98 (September 18).Return to text 9.The data include information about the types and purposes of the loans; the disposition of applications; information about the borrowers, such as their incomes; and information about the location of the properties securing loans. Although HMDA's coverage does not extend to lending institutions with offices exclusively in rural areas, its coverage of the home lending market is considerable, including more than 7,600 institutions and nearly 12 million applications in 2011.Return to text 10.Estimates are based on the number of first-lien mortgage originations related to one- to four-family dwellings as reported under HMDA.Return to text 11.Some industry sources suggest that the mortgage market is getting more concentrated at the top. The share of mortgage-related activity of large banks is greater if market share estimates are based on both the number of loan originations and loan purchases.Return to text 12.From year-end 2007 to June 2012, the number of banks with assets under $10 billion declined 15 percent from 7,188 to 6,110.Return to text 13.In 2011, 56 percent of the conventional home-purchase loans by small community banks and about 40 percent of those originated by larger community banks were held in portfolio as compared to 30 percent for the largest banks. For this analysis only, loans originated in the first three quarters of 2011 were considered because of the delay between origination and loan sale. The analysis assumes loans sold to affiliates are held in portfolio.Return to text 14.Under HMDA, lenders report the spread between the "average prime offer rate" (APOR) and the annual percentage rate (APR) on a loan if the difference (or "spread") exceeds 1.5 percentage points for first-lien loans or 3.5 percentage points for junior lien loans of a similar type (for example, a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage). The APOR, which is published weekly by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), is an estimate of the APR on loans being offered to high-quality prime borrowers based on the contract interest rates and discount points reported by Freddie Mac in its Primary Mortgage Market Survey.Return to text 15.For Call Report data, refer towww2.fdic.gov/Call_TFR_Rpts. For FR Y-9C data, refer towww.ffiec.gov/nicpubweb/nicweb/nichome.aspx.Return to text 16.An escrow account generally is any account that a servicer establishes or controls on behalf of a borrower to collect and pay taxes, insurance premiums, or other charges with respect to a mortgage loan.Return to text
Northwestern University won the ninth annual national finals of the College Fed Challenge on Tuesday, a competition that encourages students to learn about the U.S. economy, monetary policymaking, and the role of the Federal Reserve System. The team, from Evanston, Ill., represented the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and included Geoffrey Bery, Nikhil Byanna, David Chen, Jonathan Cohen, Eric Zhang, and faculty adviser Mark Witte. The finals were held in the Board Room at the Board of Governors as the capstone to five district competitions held around the country. The other national finalists were second place Bentley University, Waltham, Mass., with honorable mentions for American University, Washington, D.C.; Lafayette College, Easton, Pa.; and Pace University, New York, N.Y. College Fed Challenge is a team competition for undergraduate students. Teams analyze economic and financial conditions and formulate a monetary policy recommendation, modeling the Federal Open Market Committee. "Fed Challenge offers students an exceptional opportunity to learn about the economy and monetary policy. I hope the experience heightened their interest in continuing to study economics. I congratulate all of the participants for producing presentations that demonstrated a comprehensive understanding of global economic events," said Federal Reserve Board Member Elizabeth A. Duke, one of the judges for this year's competition. Teams competing in the finals gave 15-minute presentations and answered questions for a panel of judges. Teams were judged on economic analysis, responses to judges' questions, teamwork, and presentation. In addition to Governor Duke, judges for the finals this year were Krishna Guha, executive vice president of communications, Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Robert Barsky, senior economist and research adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Teams competed in their local Reserve Bank Districts, and top teams moved on to the finals in Washington, D.C.
On November 5, 2012, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $3 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were pro-rated at 63.54 percent. Resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 except that all awards below $10,000 were rounded up to $10,000. The awarded deposits will settle on November 8, 2012, and will mature on December 6, 2012. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded deposits.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application by Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, Inc., The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd., both of Tokyo, Japan, and UnionBanCal Corporation (UnionBanCal), San Francisco, California, to (1) acquire Pacific Capital Bancorp (PCB) and its subsidiary bank, Santa Barbara Bank Trust, N.A., both of Santa Barbara, California, and (2) merge PCB with UnionBanCal. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Boscobel Bancorp, Inc. and Community First Bank, both of Boscobel, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated December 23, 2010Terminated November 2, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Johnson Financial Group, Inc. and Johnson Bank, both of Racine, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated May 10, 2011Terminated November 26, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Bankers' Bank of the West Bancorp and Bankers' Bank of the West, both of Denver, ColoradoWritten Agreement dated February 19, 2010Terminated November 8, 2012 Butte State Company and Butte State Bank, both of Butte, NebraskaWritten Agreement dated September 7, 2010Terminated November 9, 2012 National Bancorp, Inc., Schaumburg, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated February 17, 2011Terminated November 9, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Foster Bankshares, Inc. (PDF), Rolling Meadows, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated November 5, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Liberty Bancorp of Georgia, Inc. (PDF), Clayton, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated October 30, 2012 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Macatawa Bank Corporation, Holland, MichiganWritten Agreement dated July 23, 2010Terminated October 26, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday launched the 2013 capital planning and stress testing program, issuing instructions to firms with timelines for submissions and general guidelines. The program includes the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) of 19 firms as well as the Capital Plan Review (CapPR) of an additional 11 bank holding companies with $50 billion or more of total consolidated assets.1 The aim of the annual reviews is to ensure that large, complex banking institutions have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks, and to help ensure that institutions have sufficient capital to continue operations throughout times of economic and financial stress. Capital is important to banking organizations, the financial system, and the broad economy because it acts as a cushion to absorb losses and helps to ensure that any such losses are borne by shareholders, not taxpayers. Institutions in the CCAR and CapPR programs will be expected to have credible plans that show they have sufficient capital to continue to lend to households and businesses even under severely adverse conditions, and are well prepared to meet Basel III regulatory capital standards as they are implemented in the United States. Firms' capital adequacy will be assessed against a number of quantitative and qualitative criteria, including projected performance under the stress scenarios provided by the Federal Reserve and the institutions' internal scenarios. Boards of directors of the institutions are required to review and approve capital plans before submitting them to the Federal Reserve. "The Federal Reserve has been focused--and will remain focused--on ensuring the nation's largest financial institutions have enough capital to weather severe, unexpected conditions and still continue lending to households and businesses," Gov. Daniel K. Tarullo said. The 19 bank holding companies in the CCAR have increased their aggregate tier 1 common capital to $803 billion in the second quarter of 2012 from $420 billion in the first quarter of 2009. The tier 1 common ratio for these firms, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, has more than doubled to a weighted average of 10.9 percent from 5.4 percent. One part of the CCAR and CapPR reviews is an evaluation by the Federal Reserve of institutions' plans to make capital distributions, such as dividend payments or stock repurchases. The Federal Reserve will approve dividend increases or other capital distributions only for companies whose capital plans are approved by supervisors and who are able to demonstrate sufficient financial strength to continue to operate as financial intermediaries under stressed macroeconomic and financial market scenarios, even after making the planned capital distributions. In a change from prior years, following the Federal Reserve's assessment of the initial capital plans, CCAR firms will have one opportunity to make a downward adjustment to their planned capital distributions from their initial submissions before a final Federal Reserve decision is made. As in 2012, the Federal Reserve will release summary results for the 19 CCAR firms including its projections of capital ratios, losses, and revenues under the Federal Reserve's severely adverse scenario. In 2013, the Federal Reserve will release two sets of post-stress data for each firm. One set will reflect the capital distribution assumptions prescribed in the stress testing rule mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act to enhance comparability of results. The other will include ratios based on each firm's own planned capital actions as proposed in their initial CCAR capital plan submissions, as well as ratios based on any adjustments made to planned capital distributions. While the aims of CapPR are the same as CCAR, there are a number of important distinctions. For example, the Federal Reserve's assessment of capital plans under CapPR will not be based on supervisory estimates derived from independent supervisory models, but instead solely on an assessment of the firms' own capital plans and internal capital planning and stress testing practices that support them. Further, the Federal Reserve will not publish a summary of bank-specific results for CapPR in 2013. The Federal Reserve wanted to give firms as much time as possible to prepare their submissions and therefore is issuing the instructions ahead of the release of the macroeconomic and financial market scenarios. The Federal Reserve will require institutions to use the scenarios in both the stress tests conducted as part of their capital plans and in the stress tests that are part of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The Federal Reserve expects to release the scenarios at 4 p.m. EST on Thursday, November 15. Institutions will be required to submit their capital plans no later than January 7, 2013. Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2013 Summary Instructions and Guidance (PDF) Capital Plan Review 2013 Summary Instructions and Guidance (PDF) 1. The 19 bank holding companies participating in the 2013 CCAR are Ally Financial Inc.; American Express Company; Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; BB&T Corporation; Capital One Financial Corporation; Citigroup Inc.; Fifth Third Bancorp; The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; Keycorp; MetLife, Inc.; Morgan Stanley; The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.; Regions Financial Corporation; State Street Corporation; SunTrust Banks, Inc.; U.S. Bancorp; and Wells Fargo & Company. These 19 firms also participated in the 2012 and 2011 CCARs and the 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program. The 11 holding companies participating in the CapPR, are BBVA USA Bancshares Inc.; BMO Financial Corp.; Citizens Financial Group Inc.; Comerica Inc.; Discover Financial Services; HSBC North America Holdings Inc.; Huntington Bancshares Inc.; M&T Bank Corporation; Northern Trust Corporation; UnionBanCal Corporation; and Zions Bancorporation. These 11 firms also participated in the CapPR 2012.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released the economic and financial market scenarios that will be used in the next round of stress tests for large financial institutions. The scenarios include baseline, adverse, and severely adverse scenarios, as described in the Federal Reserve's final rules that implement stress test requirements of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Each scenario includes 26 variables, including economic activity, unemployment, exchange rates, prices, incomes, and interest rates. The adverse and severely adverse scenarios are not forecasts, but rather hypothetical scenarios designed to assess the strength and resilience of financial institutions and their ability to continue to meet the credit needs of households and businesses in stressful economic and financial environments. The baseline scenario represents expectations of private sector forecasters. For the 19 firms that are part of the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), the three scenarios will be used in stress tests conducted under the Dodd-Frank Act stress test rules and for the CCAR, including company-run stress tests and supervisory stress tests conducted by the Federal Reserve. Large state member banks that are subsidiaries of the CCAR firms will also use all three scenarios to conduct their own stress tests to meet applicable stress testing requirements. The 11 firms that are part of the Capital Plan Review (CapPR) and their state member bank subsidiaries are not required to conduct the Dodd-Frank Act stress tests this year. However, CapPR firms will use the baseline and the severely adverse scenarios to conduct stress tests to meet requirements in the CapPR, and are not required to use the adverse scenario.1 The Federal Reserve developed the scenarios in consultation with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The FDIC and OCC will be using the same scenarios as the Federal Reserve during the upcoming stress testing cycle for their supervised institutions. Also Thursday, the Federal Reserve released a proposed policy statement describing the processes it would use to develop its stress test scenarios in future years. Comments on the policy statement are welcome by February 15, 2013. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachments:2013 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF)2013 Supervisory Scenarios (Excel)Historical Data: 1976 through Third Quarter 2012 (Excel)Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Comments:View Board Votes 1. The 19 bank holding companies participating in the 2013 CCAR are Ally Financial Inc.; American Express Company; Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; BB&T Corporation; Capital One Financial Corporation; Citigroup Inc.; Fifth Third Bancorp; The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; Keycorp; MetLife, Inc.; Morgan Stanley; The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.; Regions Financial Corporation; State Street Corporation; SunTrust Banks, Inc.; U.S. Bancorp; and Wells Fargo & Company. These 19 firms also participated in the 2012 and 2011 CCARs and the 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program. The 11 holding companies participating in the CapPR, are BBVA USA Bancshares Inc.; BMO Financial Corp.; Citizens Financial Group Inc.; Comerica Inc.; Discover Financial Services; HSBC North America Holdings Inc.; Huntington Bancshares Inc.; M&T Bank Corporation; Northern Trust Corporation; UnionBanCal Corporation; and Zions Bancorporation. These 11 firms also participated in the CapPR 2012.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFinancial Crimes Enforcement Network The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), a bureau of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, and the Federal Reserve Board are seeking comments on a proposal to amend the definitions of "funds transfer" and "transmittal of funds" under the regulations implementing the Bank Secrecy Act. The proposed amendments are necessary to maintain the current scope of funds transfers and transmittals subject to the Bank Secrecy Act in light of amendments to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act made by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Comments on the proposed rule are due January 25, 2013. Federal RegisterNotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States Senate, Washington, D.C. Michael S. Gibson presented identical remarks before the the Subcommittees on Insurance, Housing and Community Opportunity and Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives on November 29, 2012. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the proposed interagency changes to the regulatory capital framework for U.S. banking organizations. In today's testimony, I will provide an overview of the proposed changes and the main themes arising from the public comment process, especially as they relate to community banking organizations and depository institution holding companies with insurance activities. Overview of Proposed ChangesThe recent financial crisis revealed that the amount of high-quality capital held by banking organizations in the United States was insufficient to absorb losses during periods of severe stress. The effects of having insufficient levels of capital were further magnified by the fact that some capital instruments did not absorb losses to the extent previously expected. While robust bank capital requirements alone cannot ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system, we believe they play a key role in protecting the banking system and financial stability more broadly. As demonstrated during the recent financial crisis, banking organizations with strong capital positions are better equipped to absorb losses from unexpected sources. Furthermore, strong capital positions help to ensure that bank losses are borne by shareholders, rather than taxpayers. The June 2012 interagency proposal to amend the bank regulatory capital framework applies the lessons of the crisis, in part, by increasing the quantity and quality of capital held by banks.1For all banking organizations, the proposal would introduce a new common equity tier 1 capital requirement, raise existing minimum tier 1 capital requirements, and implement a capital conservation buffer to increase bank resiliency during times of stress. The proposal also updates and harmonizes the existing capital rules with a standardized approach for the calculation of risk-weighted assets, incorporating a more risk-sensitive treatment for certain asset classes to address weaknesses identified in the capital framework in recent years. For large, internationally active organizations, the proposal would introduce a supplementary leverage ratio, a countercyclical capital buffer, and would effectively raise the capital requirement by updating aspects of the advanced approaches risk-based capital rule. These amendments, along with other recent regulatory capital enhancements, will require the large, systemically important banking organizations to hold significantly higher levels of capital relative to other institutions. Under the proposal, savings and loan holding companies would, for the first time, be subject to consolidated capital requirements, as required by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). With this proposal, U.S. bank capital requirements would reflect international Basel III agreements reached by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision as well as relevant domestic legislative provisions, including sections 171 and 939A of the Dodd-Frank Act. In developing this proposal, the Federal Reserve sought to strike the right balance between safety and soundness concerns and the regulatory burden associated with implementation, including the impact on community banking. It is important to note that numerous items in this proposal, and in other recent regulatory reforms, are focused on larger institutions and would not be applicable to community banking organizations. These items include the countercyclical capital buffer, the supplementary leverage ratio, enhanced disclosure requirements, the advanced approaches risk-based capital framework, stress testing requirements, the systemically important financial institution capital surcharge, and market risk capital reforms. ImpactThe Federal Reserve has assessed the impact of the changes proposed by this rulemaking on banking organizations and the broader financial system through domestic analyses and through its participation in cost-benefit analyses performed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The Macroeconomic Assessment Group, a working group of the Basel Committee, found that among internationally active banks, the stronger capital standards proposed under Basel III would significantly lower the probability of banking crises and their associated economic losses, while having only a modest negative effect on gross domestic product and the cost of credit.2Furthermore, these modest negative effects can be mitigated by the phase in of the standards over time, which is why we have included extensive transition periods for several aspects of the proposal. The Federal Reserve believes that the benefits of the proposed changes, in terms of the reduction of risk to the U.S. financial system and to the broader economy, outweigh the compliance costs to the financial industry and any costs to the macroeconomy. In developing the proposal, each of the federal banking agencies prepared an impact analysis of the proposed requirements on banking organizations that currently meet the minimum regulatory capital requirements, based on each agency's own key assumptions using regulatory reporting data. The Federal Reserve's analysis and assumptions are included as an attachment to today's testimony.3The overall conclusion of these analyses was that the vast majority of banking organizations would not be required to raise additional capital because they already meet, on a fully phased-in basis, the proposed higher minimum requirements. In addition, approximately 90 percent of community banking organizations already have sufficient capital to meet or exceed the proposed buffer, thus avoiding restrictions on capital distributions and certain executive bonus payments. While many of the largest banking organizations do not already meet the proposed new minimums and the buffer on a fully phased-in basis, they are generally making steady progress toward meeting these standards before they are phased in. However, the Federal Reserve is mindful that other burdens exist for banks, such as systems changes and other compliance costs, which were outside the scope of our analysis. Public Comments on the Proposed ChangesThe federal banking agencies released the proposed rulemaking in early June with an extended comment period ending on October 22, giving interested parties more than four months to comment on the proposal rather than the typical two- or three-month comment period. The agencies have received thousands of comment letters from the public, including banking organizations of all sizes, trade groups, academics, public interest advocates, and private individuals.4Agency staffs are reviewing these letters carefully and will continue to do so in the coming weeks. Comments include general views on the proposal, including concerns regarding overall complexity and burden, as well as suggestions for specific policy changes and technical modifications aimed at better conforming the proposal to market practices. The most common specific areas of concern noted by the financial industry, regardless of institution size, relate to the proposed treatments of accumulated other comprehensive income, otherwise known as AOCI, and residential mortgage exposures. The proposed treatment of AOCI would require unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities to flow through to regulatory capital as opposed to the current treatment, which neutralizes such effects. Commenters have expressed concern that this treatment would introduce capital volatility, due not only to credit risk but also to interest rate risk, and affect the composition of firms' securities holdings. The proposed treatment of AOCI is part of the Basel III Accord and is meant to better reflect an institution's actual loss-absorption capacity; however, we are analyzing commenters' concerns and will be assessing potential ways forward in this area as we finalize the rule. In light of observed high loss rates for residential mortgages during the crisis, the agencies proposed a modified treatment aimed at better differentiating the risks of these exposures, which are generally assigned preferential risk weights under our current approach. Commenters have expressed concern that the operational burden and compliance costs of the proposed methodology for risk weighting residential mortgage exposures and the higher risk weights for certain types of mortgage products will increase costs to consumers and reduce their access to mortgage credit. The Federal Reserve, along with the other federal banking agencies, will take these and all comments received into consideration as we finalize the rule. Community BanksThe Federal Reserve believes capital requirements that improve the quantity and quality of regulatory capital would benefit the resiliency of all banking organizations regardless of size. However, as we consider comments from industry participants and other interested parties regarding the proposed regulatory capital requirements, the Federal Reserve, along with the other federal banking agencies, will remain sensitive to concerns expressed by community banking organizations. The Board recognizes the vital role that community banking organizations play in the U.S. financial system. Community bankers typically have deep roots in their communities, allowing them to gain insights on their local economies and to forge strong relationships with customers. As a result, they can provide relationship-based lending to small businesses, families, and others in their local communities in a manner that larger institutions would find difficult to duplicate. When the agencies were developing these proposals, we recognized the need to carefully assess their impact on community banking organizations. While we conducted internal analysis to estimate the impact of the proposal (as discussed earlier), the Federal Reserve also recognized the importance of soliciting feedback directly from community banking organizations to understand more specifically the potential effects on their business activities. To facilitate review of the proposal, the agencies provided summaries of the requirements that were most relevant for community banking organizations, provided a tool to help smaller organizations estimate their capital levels under the proposal, and extended the comment period so that interested parties would have more time to assess the proposals and submit their comments. The Federal Reserve also engaged in substantial industry outreach to hear the views of community bankers and encourage submission of comments. For example, we held a series of "Ask the Fed" sessions aimed primarily at banking organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve that provided an overview of the proposals and gave bankers an opportunity to ask us questions. Following these sessions, which were attended by more than 3,000 bankers, we published a summary of answers to frequently asked questions in a new Federal Reserve publication for community bankers.5Throughout the comment process, Board members and staff also met with various industry associations to clarify and discuss aspects of the proposal. Through outreach efforts and as part of the comment process, community banking organizations have expressed concerns about particular elements of the proposed requirements, indicating that they do not adequately take into account the community banking business model and that some aspects would have potential disproportionate effects on their organizations. In particular, they have asserted that the proposed treatment of AOCI would have more of an impact on community banks because they have fewer available strategies to address the resultant capital volatility relative to larger institutions. In addition, they have expressed concern that the relatively higher risk weights assigned to certain mortgage products would penalize loan products that community banking organizations typically provide their customers. We will be mindful of these comments when considering potential refinements to the proposal and will work to appropriately balance the benefits of a revised capital framework against its costs. As we work toward finalizing the rule, we will seek to further tailor the requirements as appropriate for community banking organizations. Insurance Holding CompaniesThe proposal would apply consolidated risk-based capital requirements that measure the credit and market risk of all assets owned by a depository institution holding company and its subsidiaries, including assets held by insurance companies. In addition, the proposal would capture the risk of insurance underwriting activities included in the consolidated holding company capital requirements by requiring deduction of the minimum regulatory capital requirement of the relevant state regulator for insurance companies in the consolidated group. Currently, capital requirements for insurance companies are imposed by state insurance laws on a legal entity basis and there are no state-based, consolidated capital requirements that cover the subsidiaries and non-insurance affiliates of insurance companies. The proposed capital requirements have been criticized by savings and loan holding companies that are not currently subject to consolidated capital requirements and that have significant insurance activities. Before mentioning some of the concerns raised by the industry, I would like to provide some background regarding the policy rationale for this proposal. The proposed application of consolidated capital requirements to savings and loan holding companies is consistent with the Board's long-standing practice of applying consolidated minimum capital requirements to bank holding companies, including those that control functionally regulated subsidiary insurance companies. Importantly, such an approach eliminates incentives to engage in capital arbitrage by booking individual exposures in the legal entity in which they receive the most favorable capital requirement. The proposed requirements are also consistent with the Collins Amendment in section 171 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which requires that the agencies establish consolidated minimum risk-based and leverage requirements for depository institution holding companies (bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies) that are no less than the generally applicable risk-based capital and leverage requirements that apply to insured depository institutions under the prompt corrective action framework. At the same time, the proposal included provisions assigning specific risk weights to assets typically held by insurance companies but not depository institutions, namely policy loans and non-guaranteed separate accounts. These provisions were designed to appropriately risk weight assets particular to the insurance industry while at the same time ensuring that the proposals complied with section 171 of the Dodd-Frank Act and fulfilled the policy goals for consistent consolidated capital requirements previously described. Through the comment process, depository institution holding companies with insurance activities raised overarching concerns that the proposed regulatory capital requirements, which have primarily been developed for banking organizations, are not suitable for the insurance business model. In particular, they assert that the proposal does not appropriately recognize the longer-term nature of their liabilities and their practice of matching asset and liability maturities. They also assert that the proposal would disproportionately affect longer term assets held by many insurance companies, thus causing them to fundamentally alter their business strategy. These holding companies also have requested a longer transition period to implement consolidated capital requirements for the first time. Currently, those savings and loan holding companies that are also insurance companies report financial statements to state insurance regulators according to Statutory Accounting Principles and would have to begin reporting under the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles to comply with consolidated regulatory capital requirements, a change they assert would be unreasonably costly. The Federal Reserve takes these comments seriously and will consider them carefully in determining how to appropriately apply regulatory capital requirements to depository institution holding companies with significant insurance activities. TimelineGiven the breadth of the proposed changes, many industry participants have expressed general concern that they may be subject to a final regulatory capital rule on January 1, 2013, as contemplated in the proposals, and that this would not provide sufficient time to understand the rule or to make the necessary systems changes. Therefore, the agencies clarified on Friday that they do not expect to finalize the proposal by January 2013.6We are working as quickly as possible to evaluate comments and issue a final rule that would provide the industry with appropriate transition periods to come into compliance. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 1.Seepress release and proposal.Return to text 2.See"Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the transition to stronger capital and liquidity requirements (PDF)" (August 2010); and "An assessment of the long-term economic impact of stronger capital and liquidity requirements (PDF)" (August 2010).Return to text 3.SeeAttachment A - FRB Impact, Methodology, and Assumptions (PDF)(Accessible version of Attachment A tables).Return to text 4.Seecomment letters.Return to text 5.See"Community Banking Connections: A Supervision and Regulation Publication (PDF)" (Third Quarter, 2012).Return to text 6.See"Agencies Provide Guidance on Regulatory Capital Rulemakings."Return to text
Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the Third Boston University/Boston Fed Conference on Macro-Finance Linkages, Boston, Massachusetts Given that the conference theme is macro-finance linkages, I thought I would try to lay out a corporate finance perspective on large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs). I have found this perspective helpful in thinking both about the general efficacy of LSAPs going forward, and about the differential effects of buying Treasury securities as opposed to mortgage-backed securities (MBS). But before I get started, please note the usual disclaimer: The thoughts that follow are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). I should also mention that these comments echo some that I made in a speech at Brookings last month.1As I noted in that speech, I support the Committee's decision to purchase mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at a rate of $40 billion per month, in tandem with the ongoing maturity extension program in Treasury securities, and its plan to continue with asset purchases if the Committee does not observe a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. I will start with the case of Treasury LSAPs, and then go on to discuss the differences that arise when the Fed purchases MBS instead. One thing that seems clear in the data is that if you buy a lot of long-term Treasury securities, this exerts significant downward pressure on their yields and term premiums. Indeed, the Fed's past actions are likely one important reason why Treasury term premiums are now near historic lows, on the order of minus 80 basis points, according to a model used by the Board staff.2Moreover, while this is not entirely uncontroversial, my own reading of the evidence is that there has also been substantial pass-through to corporate bond rates. Based on this evidence, a reasonable estimate is that, if the Fed were to undertake an additional $500 billion Treasury LSAP, both long-term Treasury and corporate bond rates might be expected to decline by something on the order of 15 to 20 basis points. This observation leads to an important conceptual question: How should one expect a firm to respond when its long-term borrowing costs fall not because of a change in the expected future path of short-term rates--as would be the case with a conventional monetary easing--but rather because of a change in the term premium? By way of a benchmark, it should be emphasized that many macro models--including the Fed staff's FRB/US model--implicitly treat the two sorts of shocks as having similar effects on corporate investment. But is there any reason to believe that, in reality, the response to the two might differ? A basic corporate finance analysis suggests the answer may be yes--and, in particular, that a shock to the term premium is more likely to elicit a financing response on the part of firms, as opposed to a change in their capital spending plans. To see why, consider the following example. A firm faces a rate on its 10-year bonds of 2 percent. At the same time, it expects that the sequence of rolled-over short-term rates over the next 10 years will average 3 percent. Hence, there is a term premium of minus 1 percent. What should the firm do? Clearly, it should take advantage of the cheap long-term debt by issuing bonds. But if the firm is not facing a binding financing constraint, it is less obvious that the bargain 2 percent rate on these bonds should exert any influence on its capital spending plans. After all, it can use the proceeds of the bond issue to pay down short-term debt, repurchase stock, or buy short-term securities. These capital-structure adjustments all yield an effective return of 3 percent. As a result, the hurdle rate for new investment should remain pinned at 3 percent. In other words, the negative term premium matters a lot for financing behavior, but in this stylized world, investment spending is decoupled from the term premium and is determined instead by the expected future path of short rates. This reasoning suggests why one might expect future rounds of Treasury-based LSAPs to have diminishing returns, at least for corporate investment. As noted earlier, the data make clear that past rounds of LSAPs have pushed down interest rates and term premiums. But the further the term premium is driven into negative territory, and the more financing constraints are thereby relaxed, the more the previous logic comes into play, and hence the weaker is likely to be the response of aggregate spending to further downward pressure on long-term rates. The corporate finance example is also consistent with what we have observed in markets in recent months. Issuance of both investment-grade and high-yield bonds has been robust. Indeed, domestic nonfinancial corporate bond issuance is on pace to set a record in 2012, and the speculative-grade segment appears on track to register a new high for the year. At the same time, a large fraction of issuance has been devoted to refinancing--either to retiring existing debt or to payouts to equity holders via dividends and share buybacks. These uses of proceeds have accounted for about two-thirds of all issuance by speculative-grade firms so far this year. Such patterns are what one would expect based on the logic I have just discussed. Another way to make a similar point is to note that as borrowing costs have fallen, Federal Reserve staff estimates of the expected return on the stock market (using a model based on analysts' earnings expectations) remain high by historic standards. This unusually large divergence in the costs of debt and equity--due in part to the cumulative effects of our LSAP policies--is likely to be one factor that makes debt-financed repurchases of equity attractive. Let me turn now from Treasury-based LSAPs to those involving MBS. If there is to be any difference between the two, one necessary condition is that there is some form of market segmentation, so that buying MBS has a different effect on the constellation of credit-market rates than buying Treasury securities--in other words, it's not all about just removing a certain amount of undifferentiated duration from the market. Judging by what happened in the wake of the Committee's policy announcement on September 13, this segmentation condition seems to be clearly satisfied--indeed, I would say surprisingly so.3In particular, while nominal long-term Treasury yields were roughly unchanged on the day of the announcement, yields on MBS fell dramatically. Moreover, although the pass-through to primary mortgage rates has been more gradual, it too has been significant to date. According to Freddie Mac's primary mortgage market survey, the rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages has come down by more than 20 basis points since the September announcement, and is now near historic lows. One way to say it is that, given the nature of market segmentation, MBS purchases appear to trade off of some amount of breadth of effect across markets for a more pronounced effect in a single market--namely, the mortgage market. What, then, are the implications for the transmission mechanism? Clearly, it depends on the sensitivity of different forms of spending to changes in rates. If, per my previous example, corporate investment reacts only weakly to further changes in term premiums, there may be more "kick" to be had by focusing efforts on a sector that is more responsive. Moreover, it seems plausible that households' spending behavior will in fact be more strongly affected by changes in the mortgage rate. As compared with many of the large firms that are active in the corporate bond market, one might expect a greater proportion of households to behave as if they are financially constrained. Hence, a reduction in the cost of mortgage borrowing might be expected to allow households to spend more, either on a new home or by using the proceeds from a mortgage refinancing for non-housing consumption. The bottom line is that I suspect that mortgage purchases may confer more macroeconomic stimulus dollar-for-dollar than Treasury purchases. This is of course, not to say that Treasury purchases have no effect on the real economy; research has found that in addition to moving bond prices, they are associated with increases in stock prices, which in turn can have wealth effects on consumption and investment. Interestingly, however, to the extent that Treasury purchases trigger a financing response on the part of firms, as opposed to an investment response, they may have something of an unintended benefit for financial stability. A major source of problems during the recent crisis was the excessive maturity transformation undertaken by financial firms. Put simply, these firms were relying too much on short-term debt. One of the thrusts of regulatory reform has been to attack this problem--for example, via the constructs of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio and the Net Stable Funding Ratio that are a part of Basel III. However, a complementary way to deal with the problem is to influence the underlying incentives for short-term debt issuance. And these incentives are in turn shaped by the structure of rates and term premiums in the market. As I noted earlier, a natural response for any firm facing an unusually low term premium is to adjust its capital structure by issuing cheap long-term debt to replace its shorter-term debt. It is therefore not surprising that the average debt maturity of large nonfinancial firms has increased notably over the past few years. Moreover, the same pattern shows up among large financial firms--they too have been significantly lengthening their average debt maturity. The current cheapness of long-term debt contrasts with the pre-crisis configuration, where frequently a pronounced premium favored issuers not at the long end of the yield curve, but at the very short end. In other words, the fact that the yield curve often tended to be steeply upward sloping at the front end gave financial firms a strong incentive to issue overnight paper. Thus I suspect that LSAPs have, by changing the structure of term premiums in the market, helped encourage an extension of debt maturity by both financial and nonfinancial firms. All else being equal, this development is a good thing from a financial stability perspective. To conclude: A corporate finance perspective on LSAPs suggests that when monetary policy works by moving term premiums, as opposed to moving expectations about the future path of short rates, the transmission to the real economy may be altered in important ways. These differences can have implications for how we think about the benefits of a policy action, its costs, and even its consequences for financial stability. Thanks very much, and I look forward to your questions. 1.See Jeremy C. Stein (2012), "Evaluating Large-Scale Asset Purchases," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, October 11.Return to text 2.See Don H. Kim and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), "An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-33 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 13.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for September 24 and October 22, 2012. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on October 23-24, 2012. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes of the meeting scheduled December 11-12, 2012 will be released on Thursday January 3, 2013, one day later than usual, because of the proximity of the ordinary release date to the New Year's holiday. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 23-24, 2012:HTML|PDF
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Yale School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, Connecticut In the aftermath of the financial crisis, regulators around the world continue to implement reforms designed to limit the incidence and severity of future crises. My subject today pertains to an area in which reforms have yet to be made--the regulation of the U.S. operations of large foreign banks.1Applicable regulation has changed relatively little in the last decade, despite a significant and rapid transformation of those operations, as foreign banks moved beyond their traditional lending activities to engage in substantial, and often complex, capital market activities. The crisis revealed the resulting risks to U.S. financial stability. In taking a fresh look at regulation of foreign banks in the United States, I by no means want to imply that the United States should revoke its welcome to foreign banks. On the contrary, this reconsideration reflects the important role foreign banks have played. The presence of foreign banks can bring particular competitive and countercyclical benefits because foreign banks often expand lending in the United States when U.S. banking firms labor under common domestic strains. But just as we are adapting our regulatory approach to U.S. banks, so we need to incorporate important lessons learned from the crisis into our oversight program for foreign banks. The question of how best to regulate foreign banks is hardly a new one, either here or in other countries. Debates over the relative merits of territorial versus global or mutual recognition approaches, the difficulties in achieving strictly equal terms of competition between banks with different home regulatory systems, and the degree to which harmonization of international standards and supervisory consultations can mitigate the resulting inconsistencies and frictions are all familiar topics to academics, banking lawyers, and supervisory authorities. While I do not aim to resolve this afternoon the complicated interaction among these perspectives and considerations, I will try to outline a practical and reasonable way forward. To be effective, a new approach must address the vulnerabilities that have been created by the shift in foreign bank activities, in keeping with sound prudential policy and congressional mandates in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. At the same time, a modified regulatory system should maintain the principle of national treatment and allow foreign banks to continue to operate here on an equal competitive footing, to the benefit of the U.S. banking system and the U.S. economy generally.2 Foreign Bank Regulation in the United StatesRegulating the U.S. operations of foreign banks presents unique challenges. Although U.S. supervisors have full authority over the local operations of foreign banks, we see only a portion of a foreign bank's worldwide activities, and regular access to information on its global activities can be limited. Foreign banks operate under a wide variety of business models and structures that reflect the legal, regulatory, and business climates in the home and host jurisdictions in which they operate. Despite these difficulties, the United States has traditionally accorded foreign banks the same national treatment as domestic banks, and U.S. regulators generally have allowed foreign banks to choose among structures that they believe promote maximum efficiency at the consolidated level. Under the statutory scheme established by Congress, permissible U.S. structures include cross-border branching and direct and indirect subsidiaries, provided that they operate in a safe and sound manner.3U.S. law also allows well-managed and well-capitalized foreign banks to conduct a wide range of bank and nonbank activities in the United States under conditions comparable to those applied to U.S. banking organizations. Still, it is worth noting that even as there has been continuity in this basic policy, U.S. regulation of foreign banks has evolved over the years in response to changes in the extent and nature of foreign bank activities. Let me mention two examples. Before 1978, foreign bank branches in the United States were licensed and regulated by individual states, with little in the way of federal regulation or restrictions. They were not subject to the full panoply of limitations on interstate banking, equity investments, or affiliations with securities firms that were applicable to domestic banks. The rapid growth of foreign banking in the 1970s, particularly branching, prompted an end to this lighter regulatory regime.4The International Banking Act of 1978 gave the Federal Reserve Board regulatory authority over the domestic operations of foreign banks and significantly equalized regulatory treatment of foreign and domestic firms.5Congress maintained this approach of basic competitive equality in the 1999 Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.6That law substantially removed restrictions on affiliations between commercial banks and other kinds of financial firms for both domestic and foreign institutions operating in the United States. Moreover, in light of provisions in Gramm-Leach-Bliley that permitted a foreign bank to be a financial holding company (FHC), the Federal Reserve announced in 2001 that a bank holding company (BHC) in the United States that was owned and controlled by a well-capitalized and well-managed foreign bank generally would not be required to meet the Board's capital requirements normally applicable to BHCs.7 My second example relates to the massive fraud uncovered at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) and its subsequent collapse in 1991, which highlighted the need for more effective supervision of banks operating in multiple countries. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 (FBSEA) required foreign banks to receive approval from the Board before establishing a branch or agency in the United States.8The law required the Federal Reserve, in turn, to determine that the foreign bank is subject to "comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis" in its home country before approving an application either to open a branch or to acquire a U.S. subsidiary bank. It is further worth noting that changes in U.S. law and regulatory practice affecting foreign banking organizations have often corresponded to changes in international regulatory agreements. For example, FBSEA was enacted at the same time as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision was working to address the problems revealed by BCCI--an effort that bore fruit the next year in changes to the so-called Basel Concordat, which established minimum standards for the supervision of international banking groups.9Another instance was the substantial reduction or removal of remaining asset-pledge and asset-maintenance requirements for most U.S. branches of foreign banks, prompted in part by implementation of the new international capital standards included in the 1988 Basel Accord. The Shift in Foreign Bank ActivitiesAlthough foreign banks expanded steadily in the United States during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, their activities here posed limited risks to overall U.S. financial stability. Throughout this period, the U.S. operations of foreign banks were largely net recipients of funding from their parents and generally engaged in traditional lending to home-country and U.S. clients.10U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks held large amounts of cash during the 1980s and '90s, in part to meet asset-maintenance and asset-pledge requirements put in place by regulators. Their cash-to-third-party liability ratio from the mid-1980s through the late 1990s generally ranged between 25 percent and 30 percent. The U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks that borrowed from their parents and lent those funds in the United States ("lending branches") held roughly 60 percent of all foreign bank branch and agency assets in the United States during the 1980s and '90s. Commercial and industrial lending continued to account for a large part of foreign bank branch and agency balance sheets through the 1990s.11 This profile of foreign bank operations in the United States changed in the run-up to the financial crisis. Reliance on less stable, short-term wholesale funding increased significantly. Many foreign banks shifted from the "lending branch" model to a "funding branch" model, in which U.S. branches of foreign banks were borrowing large amounts of U.S. dollars to upstream to their parents. These "funding branches" went from holding 40 percent of foreign bank branch assets in the mid-1990s to holding 75 percent of foreign bank branch assets by 2009. Foreign banks as a group moved from a position of receiving funding from their parents on a net basis in 1999 to providing significant funding to non-U.S. affiliates by the mid-2000s--more than $700 billion on a net basis by 2008.12 A good bit of this short-term funding was used to finance long-term, U.S. dollar-denominated project and trade finance around the world. There is also evidence that a significant portion of the dollars raised by European banks in the pre-crisis period ultimately returned to the United States in the form of investments in U.S. securities. Indeed, the amount of U.S. dollar-denominated asset-backed securities and other securities held by Europeans increased significantly between 2003 and 2007, much of it financed by the short-term, dollar-denominated liabilities of European banks.13Meanwhile, commercial and industrial lending originated by U.S. branches and agencies as a share of their third-party liabilities fell significantly after 2003.14In contrast, U.S. broker-dealer assets of the top-10 foreign banks increased rapidly during the past 15 years, rising from 13 percent of all foreign bank third-party assets in 1995 to 50 percent in 2011.15 Lessons from the Recent Financial CrisisThe 2007–2008 financial crisis and the continuing financial stress in Europe have revealed financial stability risks associated with the foreign banking model as it has evolved in the United States. To some extent the concerns associated with foreign banking operations track the more general shortcomings of pre-crisis financial regulation. Internationally agreed minimum capital levels were too low, the quality standards for required capital were too weak, the risk weights assigned to certain asset classes did not reflect their actual risk, and the potential for liquidity strains was seriously underappreciated. But some risks are more closely tied to the specifically international character of certain global banks, both here and in some other parts of the world. The location of capital and liquidity proved critical in the resolution of some firms that failed during the financial crisis. Capital and liquidity were in some cases trapped at the home entity, as in the case of the Icelandic banks and, in our own country, Lehman Brothers. Actions by home-country authorities during this period showed that while a foreign bank regulatory regime designed to accommodate centralized management of capital and liquidity can promote efficiency during good times, it also increases the chances of ring-fencing by home and host jurisdictions at the moment of a crisis, as local operations come under severe strain and repayment of local creditors is called into question. Resolution regimes and powers remain nationally based, complicating the resolution of firms with large cross-border operations. The large intra-firm, cross-border flows that grew rapidly in the years leading up to the crisis also created vulnerabilities. To be fair, the ability to move liquidity freely throughout a banking group may have provided some financial stability benefits during the crisis by enabling banks to respond to localized balance-sheet shocks and dysfunctional markets in some areas (such as the interbank and foreign exchange swap markets) and by transferring resources from healthier parts of the group. Nevertheless, this model also created a degree of cross-currency funding risk and heavy reliance on swap markets that proved destabilizing.16Moreover, foreign banks that relied heavily on short-term, U.S. dollar liabilities were forced to sell U.S. dollar assets and reduce lending rapidly when that funding source evaporated, thereby compounding risks to U.S. financial stability. Although the United States did not suffer a destabilizing failure of foreign banks, many rode out the crisis only with the help of extraordinary support from home- and host-country regulators. Following national treatment practice, the Federal Reserve itself provided substantial discount window access to U.S. branches and the opportunity to participate in the Primary Dealer Credit Facility to U.S. primary-dealer subsidiaries of foreign banks. Moreover, the potential for funding disruptions did not disappear with the waning of the global financial crisis. In 2011, for example, as concerns about the euro zone rose, U.S. money market funds suddenly pulled back their lending to large euro area banks, reducing lending to these firms by roughly $200 billion over just four months.17 While there has been some reduction in operations and some change in funding patterns by foreign banking organizations in the United States since the crisis, particularly by European firms reacting to euro zone financial stress, the basic circumstances have not changed.18The proportion of foreign banking assets to total U.S. banking assets has remained at about one-fifth since the end of the 1990s. But the concentration and complexity of those assets have changed noticeably from earlier decades, and have not reversed in recent years despite the global financial crisis and subsequent events. Ten foreign banks now account for more than two-thirds of foreign bank third-party assets held in the United States, up from 40 percent in 1995.19And while the largest U.S. operations of foreign banks do not approach the size of our largest domestic financial institutions, it is striking that there are 23 foreign banks with at least $50 billion in assets in the United States--the threshold established by the Dodd-Frank Act for special prudential measures for domestic firms--compared with 25U.S. firms.20 Most notably, perhaps, five of the top-10 U.S. broker-dealers are owned by foreign banks. Like their U.S.-owned counterparts, large foreign-owned U.S. broker-dealers were highly leveraged in the years leading up to the crisis. Their reliance on short-term funding also increased, with much of the expansion of both U.S.-owned and foreign-owned U.S. broker-dealer activities attributable to the growth in secured funding markets during the past 15 years.21 Finally, we should note that one of the fundamental elements of the current approach--our ability, as host supervisors, to rely on the foreign bank to act as a source of strength to its U.S. operations--has come into question in the wake of the crisis. The likelihood that some home-country governments of significant international firms will backstop their banks' foreign operations in a crisis appears to have diminished. It also appears that constraints have been placed on the ability of the home offices of some large international banks to provide support to their foreign operations. The motivations behind these actions are not hard to understand and appreciate, but they do affect the supervisory terrain for host countries such as the United States. International and Domestic Regulatory ResponseSince the crisis, important changes have been made to strengthen international regulatory standards. The Basel III capital and liquidity frameworks are big improvements, and the proposed capital surcharges for systemically important firms will be another important step forward. But these reforms are primarily directed at the consolidated level, with little attention to vulnerabilities posed by internationally active banks in host markets. The risks associated with large intra-group funding flows have remained largely unaddressed. Managing international regulatory initiatives also has become more difficult, as the number of complex items on the agenda has increased. And despite continued work by the Financial Stability Board, challenges to cross-border resolution are likely to remain significant. For the foreseeable future, then, our regulatory system must recognize that while internationally active banks live globally, they may well die locally. Quite apart from the need to act pragmatically under the circumstances, it is not clear that we should aim toward extensive harmonization of national regulatory practices related to foreign banking organizations. The nature and extent of foreign banking activities vary substantially across national markets, suggesting that regulatory responses might best vary as well. For instance, the importance of the U.S. dollar in many international transactions can motivate foreign banks to use their U.S. operations to raise dollar funding for their international operations, potentially creating vulnerabilities. Such a model is unlikely to prevail in most other host financial markets around the world. Indeed, in response to financial stability risks highlighted during the crisis, ongoing challenges associated with the resolution of large cross-border firms, and the limitations of the international reform agenda, several national authorities have already introduced their own policies to fortify the resources of internationally active banks within their geographic boundaries. Regulators in the United Kingdom, for example, have recently increased requirements for liquidity to cover local operations of domestic and foreign banks, set stricter rules around intra-group exposures of U.K. banks to foreign subsidiaries, and moved to ring-fence home-country retail operations.22Meanwhile, Swiss authorities have explicitly prioritized the domestic systemically important operations of their large, internationally active firms in resolution.23 Here in the United States, Congress included in the Dodd-Frank Act a number of changes directed at the financial stability risk posed by foreign banks. Sections 165 and 166 instruct the Federal Reserve to implement enhanced prudential standards for large foreign banks as well as for large domestic BHCs and nonbank systemically important financial institutions. Dodd-Frank also bolstered capital requirements for FHCs, including foreign FHCs, by extending the well-capitalized and well-managed requirements beyond U.S. bank subsidiaries to the top-tier holding company. In addition, the so-called Collins Amendment in Dodd-Frank removed the exemption from BHC capital requirements granted by the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation Letter 01-01.24The required phase-out of SR 01-01 was clearly intended to strengthen the capital regime applied to the U.S. operations of foreign banks; however, the organizational flexibility that the amendment gave to foreign banks in the United States has allowed some large foreign banks to restructure their U.S. operations to minimize the impact of this regulatory change. As a result, in the absence of additional structural requirements for foreign banks in the United States, the effectiveness of our capital regime for large foreign banks with both bank and nonbank operations in the United States depends on the foreign bank's own organizational choices. A Rebalanced Approach to Foreign Bank RegulationAs has been the case in the past, we need to adjust the regulatory requirements for foreign banks in response to changes in the nature of their activities in the United States, the risks attendant to those changes, and instructions from Congress in new statutory provisions. The modified regime should counteract the risks posed to U.S. financial stability by the activities of foreign banking organizations, as manifested in the years leading up to, and through, the financial crisis. Special attention must be paid to the risk of runs associated with significant reliance on short-term funding. In addition, the regime should reduce the difficulties in resolution of cross-border firms. Finally, it should take steps to diminish the potential need for ex-post ring-fencing when losses mount or runs develop during a crisis, since such actions may well be unhelpfully procyclical. At the same time, in modifying our regulatory regime for foreign banking organizations, we must remain mindful of the benefits that foreign banks can bring to our economy and of the important policies of national treatment and comparable competitive opportunity. Thus, we should chart a middle course, not moving to a fully territorial model of foreign bank regulation, but instead making targeted adjustments to address the risks I have identified. In basic terms, three such adjustments are desirable. First, a more uniform structure should be required for the largest U.S. operations of foreign banks--specifically, that these firms establish a top-tier U.S. intermediate holding company (IHC) over all U.S. bank and nonbank subsidiaries. An IHC would make application of enhanced prudential supervision more consistent across foreign banks and reduce the ability of foreign banks to avoid U.S. consolidated-capital regulations. Because U.S. branches and agencies are part of the foreign parent bank, they would not be included in the IHC. However, they would be subject to the activity restrictions applicable to branches and agencies today as well as to certain additional measures discussed below. Second, the same capital rules applicable to U.S. BHCs should also apply to U.S. IHCs. These rules have been reshaped to counteract the risks to the U.S. financial system revealed by the crisis and should be implemented consistently across all firms that engage in similar activities. Similarly, other enhanced prudential standards required by the Dodd-Frank Act--including stress testing requirements, risk management requirements, single counterparty credit limits, and early remediation requirements--should be applied to the U.S. operations of large foreign banks in a manner consistent with the Board's domestic proposal.25 Third, there should be liquidity standards for large U.S. operations of foreign banks. Standards are needed to increase the liquidity resiliency of these operations during times of stress and to reduce the threat of destabilizing runs as dollar funding channels dry up and short-term debt cannot be rolled over. For IHCs, the standards should be broadly consistent with the standards the Federal Reserve has proposed for large domestic BHCs, pending final adoption and phase-in of quantitative liquidity requirements by the Basel Committee.26That is, they should be designed to ensure that, in stressed circumstances, the U.S. operations have enough high-quality liquid assets to meet expected net outflows in the short term. There should also be liquidity standards for foreign bank branch and agency networks in the United States, although they may be less stringent, in recognition of the integration of branches and agencies into the global bank as a whole. By imposing a more standardized regulatory structure on the U.S. operations of foreign banks, we can ensure that enhanced prudential standards are applied consistently across foreign banks and in comparable ways between U.S. banking organizations and foreign banking organizations. As with domestic firms subject to enhanced prudential standards, the Federal Reserve would work to ensure that the new regime is minimally disruptive, through transition periods and other means. An IHC structure would also provide the Federal Reserve, as umbrella supervisor of the U.S. operations of foreign banks, with a uniform platform to implement a consistent supervisory program across large foreign banks. In the case of foreign banks with the largest U.S. operations, the IHC would also help mitigate resolution difficulties by providing U.S. regulators with one consolidated U.S. legal entity to place into receivership under title II of the Dodd-Frank Act if the failure of the foreign bank would threaten U.S. financial stability. Branches and agencies would remain separate, but all other entities would be included. Further, an IHC structure would facilitate a consistent U.S. capital regime for bank and nonbank activities of foreign banks under the IHC, similar to the approach taken in other jurisdictions, such as the United Kingdom and some continental European countries. Some observers will, I am sure, ask if it is necessary to depart from the prevailing firm-by-firm approach to foreign banking regulation and to adopt generally applicable requirements in implementing the Dodd-Frank enhanced prudential standards for foreign banks. It is difficult to see how reliance on this approach can be effective in addressing risks to U.S. financial stability, at least in the absence of extraterritorial application of our own standards and supervision, and perhaps not even then. We would, at a minimum, need to make regular and detailed assessments of each firm's home-country regulatory and resolution regimes, the financial stability risk posed by each firm in the United States, and the financial condition of the consolidated banking organization. In fact, such an approach might result in the worst of both worlds--an ongoing intrusiveness into the consolidated supervision of foreign banks by their home-country regulators without the ultimate ability to evaluate those banks comprehensively or to direct changes in a parent bank's practices necessary to mitigate risks in the United States. Although the Federal Reserve will continue to cooperate with its foreign counterparts in overseeing large, multinational banking operations, that supervisory tool cannot provide complete protection against risks engendered by U.S operations as extensive as those of many large U.S. institutions. It is also important to note that while the reforms I have described today contain some elements that are more territorial than our current approach, including requiring some additional capital and liquidity buffers to be held in the United States, they do not represent a complete departure from prior practice. This enhanced approach would allow foreign banks to continue to operate branches in the United States and would generally allow branches to meet comparable capital requirements at the consolidated level. Similarly, this approach would not impose a cap on intra-group flows, thereby allowing foreign banks in sound financial condition to continue to obtain U.S. dollar funding for their global operations through their U.S. entities. It would instead provide an incentive to term out at least some of this funding in a way that reduces the risk of runs. Requiring additional local capital and liquidity buffers, like any prudential regulation, may incrementally increase cost and reduce flexibility of internationally active banks that manage their capital and liquidity on a centralized basis. However, managing liquidity and capital on a local basis can have benefits not just for financial stability generally, but also for firms themselves. During the crisis, the more decentralized global banks relied somewhat less on cross-currency funding and were less exposed to disruptions in international wholesale funding and foreign exchange swap markets than the more centralized banks.27Indeed, as noted earlier, in the wake of the crisis and of subsequent stresses, many foreign banks have modified their funding practices and business models. In revamping our approach, we will both be guarding against a return to pre-crisis practices and, more generally, ensuring that foreign banking operations in the United States that pose potential risks to U.S. financial stability are regulated similarly to domestic banking operations posing similar risks. ConclusionThe imperative for change in our foreign bank regulation is clear and, indeed, mandated by Dodd-Frank. Of course, I have provided only an outline of the three key measures that will best navigate the middle course I have suggested. The all-important details are under discussion at the Board. I anticipate that in the coming weeks we will complete our work and issue a notice of proposed rulemaking that will elaborate the basic approach I have foreshadowed. I look forward to hearing your general reactions today and more specific feedback after the Board has adopted a proposed rule. 1.Molly Mahar of the Board's staff contributed substantially to these remarks.Return to text 2.The principle of "national treatment" in the context of financial and other services is that a host country should treat a foreign-owned service provider no less favorably than like domestic service providers. Of course, differences in business organization, domestic regulatory systems, and other factors mean that there must sometimes be determinations whether foreign and domestic firms are "like" one another in relevant respects.Return to text 3.Cross-border branches of foreign banks operate in the United States as a direct branch of the foreign parent and are not separately capitalized entities. Federal foreign branches and agencies are authorized by 12 U.S.C. §3102, which recognizes that states may also authorize branches of foreign banks to operate within their territory. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System must approve all foreign branches and agencies, whether state or federal (see 12 U.S.C.§3105(d)). A good survey of the considerations for both firms and policymakers in the choice between subsidiaries and branches for foreign banks is provided in Jonathan Fiechter, Inci Otker-Robe, Anna Ilyina, Michael Hsu, Andre Santos, and Jay Surti (2011), "Subsidiaries or Branches: Does One Size Fit All? (PDF)" Staff Discussion Note 11/04 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, March 7).Return to text 4.Between 1972 and 1977, the number of foreign banking institutions in the United States roughly doubled, while the total assets of those institutions roughly tripled in absolute terms and doubled as a proportion of all banking assets in the United States, reaching nearly 13 percent. Henry Terrell and Sydney Key (1977), "The Growth of Foreign Banking in the United States: An Analytical Survey," inKey Issues in International Banking, Conference Series No. 18 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October).Return to text 5.Pub. L. No. 95-369, 92 Stat. 607, codified at 12 U.S.C. 3101–3111.Return to text 6.Pub. L. No. 106-102, 113 Stat. 1338.Return to text 7.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2001), "Application of the Board's Capital Adequacy Guidelines to Bank Holding Companies Owned by Foreign Banking Organizations," Supervision and Regulation Letter 01-01 (January 5).Return to text 8.Pub. L. No. 102-242, 105 Stat. 2286, amending the International Banking Act of 1978, codified at 12 U.S.C. 3101–3111.Return to text 9.Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1992), "Minimum Standards for the Supervision of International Banking Groups and Their Cross-Border Establishments," (Basel: BIS, July). The original Basel Concordat, concluded in 1975, was the first significant accomplishment of the Basel Committee.Return to text 10.FFIEC 002, various years.Return to text 11.FFIEC 002, various years.Return to text 12.FFIEC 002, various years.Return to text 13.Ben S. Bernanke, Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin (2011), "International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003–2007," International Finance Discussion Papers Number 1014 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).Return to text 14.FFIEC 002, various years.Return to text 15.FR Y-9C, FFIEC 002, FR Y-7, FR 2886b, FFIEC 031/041, FR Y-7N/S, X-17A-5 Part II (SEC Form 1695), and X-17A-5 Part IIA (SEC Form 1696).Return to text 16.Bank for International Settlements (2010), "Funding Patterns and Liquidity Management of Internationally Active Banks" (Basel: BIS, May).Return to text 17.SEC N-MFP Form.Return to text 18.The significant funding pressures experienced by a number of European firms in 2011, highlighted by a quiet run by money market funds and other short-term funders, were mitigated by the liquidity-support measures undertaken by the European Central Bank. As a result, many of the U.S. operations of these firms are currently receiving net funding from their parents. A parallel development has been a shift in lending activity from a number of European firms to non-European firms, even as the total proportion of U.S. lending accounted for by foreign banks has remained roughly constant in the last few years.Return to text 19.FR Y-9C, FFIEC 002, FR 2886b, FFIEC 031/041, FR Y-7N/S, X-17A-5 Part II (SEC Form 1695), and X-17A-5 Part IIA (SEC Form 1696).Return to text 20.Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2011). Sections 165 and 166 apply to all foreign banks with $50 billion or more in global consolidated assets and a U.S. banking presence of any size. More than 100 foreign banks operating in the United States would meet this threshold today (source: FR Y-7Q). Whether such a bank with relatively small U.S. operations should be subject to the same prudential requirements as those with U.S. operations in excess of $50 billion is an open question.Return to text 21.SEC FOCUS reports.Return to text 22.See, for example,www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/policy/ps09_16.pdf,www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/other/turner_review.pdf,www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/discussion/dp09_02.pdf, andhttp://bankingcommission.s3.amazonaws.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/07/ICB-Final-Report.pdf.Return to text 23.Seewww.sif.admin.ch/dokumentation/00514/00519/00592/index.html?lang=en.Return to text 24.Seewww.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/srletters/2001/sr0101.htm.Return to text 25.Seewww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20111220a.htm.Return to text 26.Seewww.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2012-01-05/pdf/2011-33364.pdf.Return to text 27.Committee on the Global Financial System (2010), "Funding Patterns and Liquidity Management of Internationally Active Banks (PDF)," CGFS Papers No 39 (Basel: BIS, May).Return to text
Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California Thank you. I'm delighted to be back at Haas, which I've been proud to call home for much of my career. I'd like to thank Dean Lyons for inviting me to speak to you this afternoon.1 My subject is the recent revolution and continuing evolution in communication by central banks. All of us, of course, live in an era of revolutionary advances in communication: If I succeed in saying anything interesting this afternoon, those words may be posted, tweeted, and blogged about even before I've left this podium. So, it might seem unsurprising that the Federal Reserve, too, is bolstering its efforts at communication. But the revolution in central bank communication is not driven by technological advances. Rather, it is the product of advances in our understanding of how to make monetary policy most effective. A growing body of research and experience demonstrates that clear communication is itself a vital tool for increasing the efficacy and reliability of monetary policy. In fact, the challenges facing our economy in the wake of the financial crisis have made clear communication more important than ever before. Today I'll discuss the revolution in thinking about central bank transparency and how, pushed by the unique situation precipitated by the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has responded with fundamental advances in communication. Indeed, I hope that one of the legacies of this difficult period is a permanent and substantial advance in Federal Reserve transparency, building on the policies I'll talk about shortly. As you all know, the Federal Reserve is actively promoting a faster recovery. Our efforts are hampered by the fact that our standard policy tool, the federal funds rate, is near zero and cannot be reduced much further. In this extraordinary environment, the Federal Reserve is employing two unconventional policy tools to spur job creation and growth: large-scale asset purchases, which some people call quantitative easing, and communications about the future course of monetary policy, also known as forward guidance. At the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) meeting in September, the FOMC--the Federal Reserve's principal monetary policymaking body--employed both of these unconventional tools. The Committee initiated a new large-scale asset purchase program to buy mortgage-backed securities (MBS). In addition, with regard to forward guidance, the Committee said that, first, it intends to continue buying MBS and other assets until it sees a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.2Second, the Committee stated that it expects a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy to remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens. And third, the Committee noted that it currently expects to hold the federal funds rate at exceptionally low levels at least through mid-2015, about a half-year longer than previously announced. The three elements of forward guidance that were adopted by the FOMC in September 2012 would have been unthinkable in 1992 and greatly surprising in 2002, but they have, in my view, become a centerpiece of appropriate monetary policy. To better explain my views regarding the FOMC's forward guidance, I will first discuss how it fits into the Committee's broader thinking and communication about monetary policy. The FOMC took a major step to explain this thinking last January when it issued for the first time a "Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy."3This statement provides a concise description of the FOMC's objectives in conducting monetary policy and the approach the Committee considers appropriate to achieve them. I will present my views on the implications of this statement for monetary policy in current circumstances. I will then discuss several approaches the FOMC has recently considered to enhance its communications to make its policy more effective in this challenging situation. Let me emphasize that the views I express here are my own and do not necessarily represent those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. The Case for Central Bank TransparencyTo fully appreciate the recent revolution in central bank communication and its implications for current policy, it is useful to recall that for decades, the conventional wisdom was that secrecy about the central bank's goals and actions actually makes monetary policy more effective. In 1977, when I started my first job at the Federal Reserve Board as a staff economist in the Division of International Finance, it was an article of faith in central banking that secrecy about monetary policy decisions was the best policy: Central banks, as a rule, did not discuss these decisions, let alone their future policy intentions. While the Federal Reserve is required by the Congress to promote stable prices and maximum employment, Federal Reserve officials at that time avoided discussing how policy would be used to pursue both sides of this mandate. Indeed, mere mention of the employment side of the mandate, even by the mid-1990s, was described in aNew York Timesarticle as the equivalent of "sticking needles in the eyes of central bankers."4 This secretiveness regarding monetary policy decisions clashed with the openness regarding government decisions expected in a democracy, especially since Federal Reserve decisions influence the lives of every American. And there were critics within the economics profession. James Tobin and Milton Friedman, both Nobel laureates, disagreed on almost every aspect of monetary policy, but they were united in arguing that transparency regarding central bank decisions is vital in a democracy to lend legitimacy to policy decisions.5Surely only some important societal interest requiring opacity could justify the traditional practice. Indeed, in 1975 a citizen demanding greater openness sued the FOMC to obtain immediate release of the policy directive upon its adoption, and in 1981 the case was resolved in favor of deferred disclosure.6 Ironically, while this transparency lawsuit was wending its way through the courts, Robert Lucas and others were publishing research that would garner several Nobel prizes and ultimately overturn the traditional wisdom that secrecy regarding policy actions was the best policy.7A key insight of these scholars was that monetary policy affects employment, incomes, and inflation to a large extent through its effects on the public's expectations about future policy. Many spending decisions, such as financing the purchase of a home or businesses' capital expenditures, depend on longer-term interest rates that are connected to monetary policy through expectations of short-term interest rates over the lifetime of a mortgage or an investment project. In other words, the effect of monetary policy on the economy today depends not only, or even primarily, on the FOMC's current target for the federal funds rate or the quantity of assets on its balance sheet, but rather on how the public expects the Federal Reserve to set the paths of these variables in the future. These expectations influence longer-term interest rates and asset prices as well as the public's views concerning the likely future paths of income and inflation. The history of oil price shocks is a good example to illustrate this point. In the 1970s, two large oil price shocks led to sharp increases in general inflation that were not met with prompt inflation-fighting actions by the Federal Reserve. This delay left the public unsure whether the Federal Reserve would act to reverse the increase in inflation, and expectations of longer-term inflation ratcheted up. When the Federal Reserve eventually did act to bring inflation down from double-digit levels, the consequence was the painful recession of 1981 and 1982. The effects of that policy shift were severe, but the decision helped change expectations of the Federal Reserve's commitment to price stability, and thereby ultimately led to longer-run inflation expectations becoming anchored at their current low levels. As a result, a series of large increases in oil prices starting in 2005 did not unleash a general rise in inflation or longer-term inflation expectations. The public seemed to correctly perceive that the Federal Reserve would not allow an oil price shock to precipitate a general rise in inflation. Longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored, and hence no aggressive and recessionary disinflation action by the Federal Reserve was required. Thus, over the quarter century up to the mid-2000s, the Federal Reserve established a record of policymaking that allowed the public to predict monetary policy responses to unforeseen events such as an oil price shock with reasonable accuracy. Unfortunately, recent events have made it harder for the public to predict the future course of monetary policy. Economic weakness since the financial crisis and the Great Recession has confounded hopes for a speedy recovery and has required unprecedented monetary policy actions. Shortly after the financial crisis erupted, the Federal Reserve reduced the federal funds rate to almost zero and launched a number of temporary liquidity and credit programs to keep the financial system operating. Even these aggressive policy responses, however, were not enough to halt the contraction, and further action was needed to stop the economy from falling into a second Great Depression. To this end, the Federal Reserve started to expand its balance sheet through purchases of longer-term Treasury securities and agency debt and MBS in an effort to put further downward pressure on long-term interest rates and so stimulate the economy. With the federal funds rate near zero, and the Federal Reserve deploying the new tool of large-scale asset purchases, it became much more difficult for the public to anticipate how the FOMC would likely conduct policy over time, and how the overall stance of monetary policy would both affect and respond to economic conditions. In this situation, the FOMC began to rely heavily on forward guidance about both the likely future path of the federal funds rate and the Committee's intentions concerning asset purchases and sales.8But, for this guidance to have its maximum effect, it must be understood and believed by the public, and therefore provide the public with a solid basis for forming their borrowing and spending decisions today.9In my view, such credibility can be achieved only if the public understands the FOMC's objectives and intentions. Communications after the Financial CrisisChairman Bernanke asked me to take up these challenges in 2010 as chair of a new FOMC communications subcommittee.10Central bank transparency had long been an issue of great interest to both of us, and the Chairman had been an exceptionally strong voice for central bank transparency in his academic work and in his earlier service on the Board of Governors. Throughout the Chairman's term, the FOMC has made important strides in transparency through actions such as introducing the Committee's quarterly Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which provides information about participants' forecasts for the economy under their individual views concerning appropriate policy and their longer-run assessments of potential output growth, the "normal" unemployment rate, and the most appropriate inflation rate. A high priority for the Chairman was to further clarify the FOMC's interpretation of the long-term objectives implied by its dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices. While we had made progress, as I just noted, during the years preceding the crisis, the FOMC as a body had never provided an explicit description of its policy goals beyond quoting its mandate. We saw further clarification of these objectives as important for the sake of transparency and accountability. But beyond that, an explicit statement of goals had become essential for the Committee to achieve its monetary policy objectives in the aftermath of the crisis, including allowing heavier reliance than in the past on forward guidance on the future path of policy. A particular concern, given that the crisis had ushered in a prolonged period of elevated unemployment, was that the weakness in the economy might push inflation well below 2 percent, a level that many took to be an implicit target of the FOMC. There was even an ongoing risk that low inflation might turn to deflation and further hamper growth. These challenges led to legitimate questions among forecasters and the public about just what the FOMC meant by "maximum employment" and "stable prices." The FOMC could have chosen to adopt an "inflation-targeting framework," in which it would have specified an objective solely for inflation, without any explicit reference to employment. Such an approach has been adopted by a large number of central banks since the 1990s. While the FOMC had debated adopting an inflation target on a number of occasions since the mid-1990s, some Committee members believed that stating an explicit target for inflation alone would undermine the maximum-employment side of the dual mandate. In fact, some central banks that have been assigned a single mandate of inflation stabilization have struggled to explain how the goals of growth and financial stability figure into their inflation-targeting framework.11 A Consensus on Monetary Policy GoalsLast January, the FOMC took a major step to clarify its interpretation of its dual mandate, issuing the "Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy" that I mentioned earlier. Unlike the regular postmeeting statements, which are intended to remain current only until the next FOMC meeting, this statement is meant to be a more enduring expression of the FOMC's policy objectives and how it plans to pursue them. The intention is that the public can count on the principles expressed in the statement to remain unchanged for some time to come, even as the economic outlook changes. For that reason, the Committee sought the endorsement of all its participants--the Board members and all 12 Reserve Bank presidents--not only the voting members. My expectation is that this "consensus statement" will be reaffirmed each January, perhaps with minor modifications but with the core principles intact. Importantly, the consensus statement provides a numerical value--2 percent--for the Committee's longer-run inflation goal. But importantly, it pairs that inflation goal with a specific goal for maximum employment. In particular, the statement cites a range summarizing FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. Finally, the statement says that the Committee will follow a "balanced approach" as it "seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee's assessments of its maximum level."12 The specification of 2 percent as the Committee's longer-run inflation goal, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), reflected careful deliberation. The Committee judged that the PCE price index is the most reliable measure of prices that are relevant for households and, in choosing the 2 percent goal, balanced two main considerations. First, any rate of price inflation, whether positive or negative, imposes some costs on society, making planning more difficult and creating distortions in the economy. Second, were the FOMC to aim for zero inflation to eliminate these costs, it would face greater difficulty in providing sufficient monetary accommodation in response to large negative shocks. With inflation at zero, the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates implies that real short-term interest rates cannot be reduced below zero. In contrast, with low but positive inflation, they can be.13History has shown that sustained periods of even mild deflation can impose immense costs in terms of slow growth and high unemployment.14Thus, balancing the goal of maximum employment against the costs of modest inflation, the Committee chose 2 percent measured inflation as the value it judged likely to provide an adequate buffer against costly deflations while keeping the costs of inflation quite small. Given that the rate of inflation over the longer run is determined solely by monetary policy, central banks can, and indeed must, determine the long-run level of inflation. In contrast, they cannot do much to affect the maximum sustainable level of employment. That level is determined by factors affecting the structure and dynamics of the labor market that are almost completely outside the control of the central bank. Nonetheless, the Committee felt strongly that it should provide some quantitative interpretation of economic conditions consistent with the maximum employment portion of the Fed's mandate. Failure to do so might be seen as elevating the inflation side of the dual mandate above the employment side. The Committee chose to couch the longer-run employment objective in terms of the rate of unemployment while indicating that other indicators may also be relevant in assessing the maximum level of employment. Unfortunately, there is a considerable range of disagreement in the economics profession and on the FOMC itself about what this longer-run normal rate of unemployment is. Moreover, there is widespread recognition that whatever the normal rate might be today, it can change over time. So the consensus statement notes that, as of January 2012, FOMC participants' estimates of this rate had a central tendency of 5.2 percent to 6.0 percent. I expect the FOMC to review its estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment in its annual reaffirmation of the consensus statement on goals and strategy. Setting Longer-Run Objectives and Minimizing Shorter-Run FluctuationsAs I mentioned before, stating longer-run goals is only one part of clarifying the dual mandate. The other part involves explaining how the FOMC will conduct policy to attain its longer-run objectives over time. Because shocks to the economy regularly push inflation and unemployment away from the Committee's objectives, the FOMC must adjust policy to mitigate such deviations from its goals. We can therefore think of two tasks for monetary policymakers: first, setting policy to pursue the longer-run objectives; and second, adjusting policy in response to shocks to minimize shorter-run fluctuations around those objectives. Clarity on longer-run goals, due to the important role of expectations, can itself help reduce short-run fluctuations. In the words of the January consensus statement, "communicating this inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee's ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances."15 Put differently, the purpose of providing greater clarity about the FOMC's longer-run inflation goal is to anchor inflation expectations more firmly. These more firmly anchored expectations in turn free the Committee's hand to more actively and effectively stabilize short-run fluctuations in economic activity. The Committee can act in this way because the FOMC can tolerate transitory deviations of inflation from its objective in order to more forcefully stabilize employment without needing to worry that the public will mistake these actions as the pursuit of a higher or lower long-run inflation objective. The instability of inflation, inflation expectations, and employment in response to the oil price increases of the 1970s vividly illustrates the threat posed by price shocks when longer-term inflation expectations arenotwell anchored. To minimize short-run fluctuations, the FOMC also needs to decide how to respond to shocks that push the economy away from price stability and maximum employment. The goals of stable prices and maximum employment are often complementary: Policymakers need not sacrifice performance on one goal to pursue the other. However, the pursuit of the two sides of the dual mandate can temporarily conflict. For example, returning inflation to its longer-run goal might require, say, a tighter stance of monetary policy, whereas returning the economy to maximum employment might require just the opposite. The consensus statement explains that in such circumstances the FOMC will pursue a balanced approach, taking into account the magnitude of the deviation of each variable from its objective and allowing for the possibility that the deviations may not be eliminated over the same time horizon. The balanced-approach strategy endorsed by the FOMC is consistent with the view that maximum employment and price stability stand on an equal footing as objectives of monetary policy. As I see it, such a balanced approach has two important implications that deserve emphasis. The first is that, if the FOMC is doing its best to minimize deviations from its objectives, then, over long periods, both unemployment and inflation will be about equally likely to fall on either side of those objectives. To put it simply, if 2 percent inflation is the Committee's goal, 2 percent cannot be viewed as a ceiling for inflation because that would result in deviations that are more frequently below 2 percent than above and thus not properly balanced with the goal of maximum employment. Instead, to balance the chances that inflation will sometimes deviate a bit above and a bit below the goal, 2 percent must be treated as a central tendency around which inflation fluctuates. The same holds true for fluctuations of unemployment around its longer-run normal rate. The second property, which to me is the essence of the balanced approach, is that reducing the deviation of one variable from its objective must at times involve allowing the other variable to move away from its objective. In particular, reducing inflation may sometimes require a monetary tightening that will lead to a temporary rise in unemployment. And a policy that reduces unemployment may, at times, result in inflation that could temporarily rise above its target. Communicating the Economic Outlook and Its Policy ImplicationsHow can we translate the principles embodied in the Committee's consensus statement of longer-run goals and strategy into a concrete plan of action for the current situation? And, having done so, how can we make such a plan understandable to the public? I'll next illustrate a method I use to help me judge the best plan of action at a particular time. I will then describe the communications tools the Committee is now using to explain its strategy and discuss others it is considering to better explain its policy decisions to the public. In addition to clearly specified goals, concrete recommendations about appropriate monetary policy require the specification of a baseline outlook for the economy and also a realistic, quantitative model of the economy to assess how monetary policy choices affect the likely paths of the FOMC's goal variables--namely, inflation and the unemployment rate.Figure 1presents such an outlook, one based on a survey of the Federal Reserve's primary dealers conducted during the week prior to the September FOMC meeting. The baseline paths through 2015 of the unemployment rate and inflation shown by the solid black lines in the upper two panels track the median of the dealers' forecasts of these variables. Beyond 2015, the path assumes that the unemployment rate converges over time to 6 percent--the median forecast of the long-run unemployment rate, which is the upper end of the range of estimates of the longer-run normal unemployment rate cited in the FOMC consensus statement--while the inflation rate settles down at 2 percent, the FOMC's inflation objective and the median long-run forecast in the dealer survey. The solid black line in the bottom panel of the figure shows the median of dealers' expectations for the path of the federal funds rate through the end of 2015. The dealers assumed it would remain near zero through the first half of 2015, consistent with the guidance the Committee subsequently provided. Beyond 2015, the federal funds rate is assumed to gradually rise to 4 percent, the long-run value expected by most dealers as well as most FOMC participants. I have assumed in the baseline that this process is largely completed within four years.16 The question I now want to address is whether this illustrative baseline path for the federal funds rate is one that reflects a balanced approach to attaining our longer-run objectives, consistent with our consensus statement. As I noted, this balanced approach means inflation and unemployment will sometimes temporarily deviate from longer-run objectives, but that these deviations would be minimized. To answer this question I need to rely, as I noted, on a specific macroeconomic model, and, for this purpose, I will employ the FRB/US model, one of the economic models commonly used at the Board. The model lets us analyze every possible policy path to see which one yields the best feasible outcome for the paths of unemployment and inflation. Although the exact numerical results of the exercises I am about to report depend on the specific model, the qualitative points that I'll highlight are fairly general. To derive a path for the federal funds rate consistent with the Committee's enunciated longer-run goals and balanced approach, I assume that monetary policy aims to minimize the deviations of inflation from 2 percent and the deviations of the unemployment rate from 6 percent, with equal weight on both objectives.17In computing the best, or "optimal policy," path for the federal funds rate to achieve these objectives, I will assume that the public fully anticipates that the FOMC will follow this optimal plan and is able to assess its effect on the economy.18 The blue lines with triangles labeled "Optimal policy" show the resulting paths. The optimal policy to implement this "balanced approach" to minimizing deviations from the inflation and unemployment goals involves keeping the federal funds rate close to zero until early 2016, about two quarters longer than in the illustrative baseline, and keeping the federal funds rate below the baseline path through 2018. This highly accommodative policy path generates a faster reduction in unemployment than in the baseline, while inflation slightly overshoots the Committee's 2 percent objective for several years. This path illustrates one of the key features of optimal policy under a balanced approach to the dual mandate. Provided that long-term inflation expectations are firmly anchored, the federal funds rate is set to balance the benefits from a faster reduction of the unemployment rate against the losses from a temporary and modest increase of inflation above 2 percent. The more rapid reduction in unemployment along the optimal control path than in the baseline reflects the stimulus to demand provided by lower nominal and real interest rates, higher asset prices, and the expectation of more rapid growth in employment and income.19 The computation of an optimal path for monetary policy is obviously complicated, and, as I'll discuss, it's challenging to communicate. It rests on many assumptions about the outlook for the economy and its structure. An alternative and much simpler approach would entail setting the federal funds rate according to the prescriptions of a policy rule, such as the well-known Taylor rule or a variant. Many studies have shown that, in normal times, when the economy is buffeted by typical shocks--not the extraordinary shock resulting from the financial crisis--simple rules can come pretty close to approximating optimal policies. In fact, empirical research suggests that a modified version of the original Taylor rule fits the behavior of the Fed reasonably well from the late 1980s until the financial crisis. Given that participants in financial markets are familiar with both the FOMC's historical behavior and simple rules, the communications challenges might arguably be less severe if the FOMC followed such a strategy.20To be sure, I would never advocate turning over monetary policy to a computer, but why shouldn't the FOMC adopt such a rule as a guidepost to policy? The answer is that times are by no means normal now, and the simple rules that perform well under ordinary circumstances just won't perform well with persistently strong headwinds restraining recovery and with the federal funds rate constrained by the zero bound. A further simulation serves to illustrate that such rules would perform relatively poorly at the current time. The red lines with squares labeled "Modified Taylor rule" show the economic outcomes that would be expected if the federal funds rate were set according to the prescriptions of a rule that is similar to the original Taylor rule, with the only difference being that it responds equally to deviations of unemployment and inflation from their respective longer-run values. The figure shows that this rule would raise the federal funds rate substantially earlier than the optimal path and thereby leads to more protracted deviations of the unemployment rate above its longer-run normal level without any measurable gains in keeping inflation closer to the 2 percent target. In contrast, the optimal policy results in better economic outcomes. In effect, it compensates for the period of economic weakness induced by both the zero lower bound and the unusual persistence and severity of the headwinds now buffeting the economy by holding the federal funds rate lower for longer than the modified Taylor rule, thereby maintaining greater accommodation as the economic recovery takes hold.21 The Future of FOMC CommunicationsThe fact that simple rules aren't as useful in current circumstances as they would be for the FOMC at other times poses a significant challenge for FOMC communications, especially since private-sector Fed watchers have frequently relied on such rules to understand and predict the Committee's decisions on the federal funds rate.22In particular, private-sector forecasters commonly use such rules to revise their expectations concerning the path of the federal funds rate in response to news that alters their views concerning the outlook for the economy. Now, however, the federal funds rate may well diverge for a number of years from the prescriptions of simple rules. Moreover, the FOMC announced an open-ended asset purchase program in September, and there is no historical record for the public to use in forming expectations on how the FOMC is likely to use this tool. Thus, the current situation makes it very important that the FOMC provide private-sector forecasters with the information they need to predict how the likely path of policy will change in response to changes in the outlook. While a clear statement of the Committee's goals and the strategy it will use to achieve them was an important and necessary step in this regard, the exercise we've just undertaken illustrates that a host of additional assumptions and information is needed to derive the concrete implications of the consensus statement for the FOMC's policy decisions. The challenge facing the FOMC now is to devise ways to communicate its policy intentions during a period in which policy will most likely be constrained by the zero bound on short-term rates and asset purchases will be actively used to foster faster growth. I think the existing FOMC postmeeting statement already goes some way in this direction. With respect to the path of the federal funds rate, it offers a date--mid-2015--as the earliest time at which the Committee currently anticipates that liftoff might be warranted. As the simulations illustrate, this date is later than the modified Taylor rule would predict and closer to the predictions of the optimal policy simulation. This later liftoff date is consistent with the Committee's statement that "a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens."23Moreover, the simulations also suggest that, once liftoff from the zero lower bound occurs, it would be optimal for the federal funds rate to remain for some time below the prescriptions from a rule, such as the modified Taylor rule, that might in the past have provided a good guide to the Committee's action. Finally, with respect to asset purchases, the guidance indicates that, subject to ongoing evaluations of their efficacy and costs, purchases will continue until there is a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market in a context of price stability. Importantly, this open-ended plan reflects a goal-oriented approach in which the ultimate quantity of asset purchases will be geared to the attainment of sufficient progress toward the Committee's employment goal. Could the FOMC go further in enhancing its communications? One logical possibility would be for the Committee to publish forecasts akin to those I've presented in figure 1. That is, the Committee could provide the public with its projections for inflation and the unemployment rate together with what it views as appropriate paths both for the federal funds rate and its asset holdings, conditional on its current outlook for the economy. Over time, these projections would be revised in response to incoming data that alters the Committee's economic outlook or, instead, because the Committee decides to alter its policy stance. Several inflation-targeting central banks, such as those in Sweden and Norway, publish forecasts of this type. Such a forecast could be highly informative, and, in recent months, the FOMC has explored whether it might be achievable. Not surprisingly perhaps, in a Committee of 19 participants with diverse views on the structure of the economy and appropriate policy, a detailed consensus forecast is exceptionally difficult to develop. As an alternative, the FOMC could try to build on the individual projections of macroeconomic variables and policy already included in its quarterly SEP to provide at least some further information about how these individual projections inform the Committee's collective policy judgment. Improvements along these lines are currently under active consideration.24 Another alternative that deserves serious consideration would be for the Committee to provide an explanation of how the calendar date guidance included in the statement--currently mid-2015--relates to the outlook for the economy, which can and surely will change over time. Going further, the Committee might eliminate the calendar date entirely and replace it with guidance on the economic conditions that would need to prevail before liftoff of the federal funds rate might be judged appropriate. Several of my FOMC colleagues have advocated such an approach, and I am also strongly supportive. The idea is to define a zone of combinations of the unemployment rate and inflation within which the FOMC would continue to hold the federal funds rate in its current, near-zero range. For example, Charles Evans, president of the Chicago Fed, suggests that the FOMC should commit to hold the federal funds rate in its current low range at least until unemployment has declined below 7 percent, provided that inflation over the medium term remains below 3 percent. Narayana Kocherlakota, president of the Minneapolis Fed, suggests thresholds of 5.5 percent for unemployment and 2.25 percent for the medium-term inflation outlook. Under such an approach, liftoff would not be automatic once a threshold is reached; that decision would require further Committee deliberation and judgment. I support this approach because it would enable the public to immediately adjust its expectations concerning the timing of liftoff in response to new information affecting the economic outlook. This market response would serve as a kind of automatic stabilizer for the economy: Information suggesting a weaker outlook would automatically induce market participants to push out the anticipated date of tightening and vice versa. Perhaps more importantly, the use of inflation and unemployment thresholds would help the public understand whether a shift in the calendar date, assuming that one is still included in the statement, reflects a change in the Committee's economic outlook or, alternatively, a change in its view concerning the appropriate degree of accommodation. Since monetary policy works in large part through the public's perceptions of the FOMC's systematic behavior, this distinction is critical.25 ConclusionThe past few years have seen important changes in the FOMC's communications‑‑innovations that promote the Federal Reserve's accountability to the public. Beyond that, I believe better communication serves to improve the efficacy of monetary policy at a time when the FOMC faces constraints on its ability to provide appropriate support to the economic recovery through the federal funds rate, its traditional policy tool. In my view, we've made progress, but much work remains to be done. 1.I am indebted to members of the Board staff--Jon Faust,Thomas Laubach, and John Maggs--who contributed to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text 2.The September FOMC meeting statement further indicates that the Committee will take account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases in determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 13.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy," press release, January 25. I should note that this statement grew out of discussions within the FOMC that date back to the early 1990s. For a proposal from 2003 by the then Governor Bernanke, see Ben S. Bernanke (2003), "Panel Discussion," speech delivered at the 28th Annual Policy Conference: Inflation Targeting Prospects and Problems, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, October 17. My own thinking on the issue has evolved over the years; for a snapshot of its state in early 2006, see Janet L. Yellen (2006), "Enhancing Fed Credibility," speech delivered at the Annual Washington Policy Conference Sponsored by the National Association for Business Economics, Washington, March 13.Return to text 4.See Keith Bradsher (1994), "Tough-Decision Time for the Federal Reserve; New Vice Chairman Stirs the Board's Pot,"New York Times, September 26, www.nytimes.com/1994/09/26/business/tough-decision-time-for-federal-reserve-new-vice-chairman-stirs-board-s-pot.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm.Return to text 5.See Milton Friedman (1962), "Should There Be an Independent Monetary Authority?" in Leland B. Yeager, ed.,In Search of a Monetary Constitution(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press), pp.219-43; and James Tobin (1992), "Prepared Statement," inThe Monetary Policy Reform Act of 1991,hearing before the Subcommittee on International Finance and Monetary Policy of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, November 13, 1991, S.1611, 102 Cong. (Washington: Government Printing Office), pp. 25-33.Return to text 6.See David R. Merrill and others v. Federal Open Market Committee of the Federal Reserve System, U.S. District Court of the District of Columbia, 443 U.S. 340 (1979). Disclosure of the directive adopted at a given FOMC meeting was deferred until after the following meeting, at which time the released directive would be superseded by a new directive.Return to text 7.While Robert Lucas mainly analyzed models in which only monetary surprises have any effect on real activity, his important insight in the present context was that the perceived monetary policyruleis critical in determining the effects of monetary policy actions, both anticipated and unanticipated.Return to text 8.The FOMC also provided information concerning its "exit strategy" in the minutes of its June 2011 meeting (see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011),Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 21-22). The Committee indicated that it intends to normalize the size and composition of its balance sheet by selling off agency securities at a gradual pace after it begins the process of raising the federal funds rate.Return to text 9.Economic theory suggests that the public's expectations concerning the time path of the Federal Reserve's asset holdings--which includes both the ultimate size of those holdings and the length of time that these assets will be retained on the Fed's balance sheet--influence longer-term yields and the term premiums embedded in those yields today. For empirical estimates of these effects see, for example, Canlin Li and Min Wei (2012), "Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large Scale Asset Purchase Programs," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-37 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May).Return to text 10.Similar subcommittees acting in the early 1990s dealt with FOMC policies concerning the disclosure of the minutes and transcripts of FOMC meetings. An FOMC subcommittee in 1999 laid the groundwork for the current FOMC postmeeting statements. And a subcommittee appointed in 2006, led by the then Vice Chairman Kohn, considered the adoption of a numerical inflation objective and recommended enhancements that were incorporated in the Summary of Economic Projections.Return to text 11.See, for example, the discussions in Lars E.O. Svensson (1999), "Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 43 (June), pp. 607-54; and in Jon Faust and Dale W. Henderson (2004), "Is Inflation Targeting Best-Practice Monetary Policy?"Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, vol. 86 (July/August), pp 117-44.Return to text 12.See Board of Governors, "FOMC Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy," in note 3.Return to text 13.Due to well-known upward biases in the PCE and other indexes of consumer prices as measures of the cost of living, zero inflation, properly measured, corresponds to a positive measured level of PCE inflation, most likely on the order of 1/2 percent.Return to text 14.The detrimental effects of unanticipated deflation are discussed in remarks by the then Governor Bernanke. See Ben S. Bernanke (2002), "Deflation: Making Sure ‘It' Doesn't Happen Here," speech delivered at the National Economists Club, Washington, November 21.Return to text 15.See Board of Governors, "FOMC Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy," in note 3.Return to text 16.It is worth noting that the dealer forecasts probably incorporate some effect from asset purchases that were only later announced by the FOMC. At the time of this survey, the median probability that the primary dealers assigned to the FOMC announcing a new program of asset purchases in September was 55% and the median probability assigned to further asset purchases within one year was 70%. The median value of asset purchases anticipated by the dealers under such a program was about $500 billion. In the simulations that follow, I treat the balance sheet as unchanged relative to its baseline path, and focus on the federal funds rate as the tool for conducting monetary policy even though the Committee is currently using both forward guidance concerning the funds rate path and the balance sheet to provide monetary accommodation. (The text of this footnote has been revised since its original release.)Return to text 17.More precisely, the loss function that the central bank is assumed to minimize is the discounted sum of current and future squared deviations of inflation from 2 percent, current and future squared deviations of the unemployment rate from 6 percent, and current and future quarterly changes in the federal funds rate. The last term is included to avoid unrealistically large quarterly movements in the "optimal" federal funds rate path.Return to text 18.This illustration takes the anticipated scale of asset purchases as fixed. The effect of these purchases, given that the modal expectation in the primary dealer survey was for $500 billion of purchases, is implicitly already incorporated into the baseline forecast. In principle, we could use the FRB/US model to perform a joint optimization exercise in which the optimal paths of asset purchases and the federal funds rate are simultaneously determined, but the results from such an exercise would be highly sensitive to assumptions about possible costs of asset purchases that are not well defined, such as the potential for market disruption.Return to text 19.It is also worth noting that the "Exit Strategy Principles" adopted by the FOMC in June 2011 indicate that the Committee intends to gradually sell off agency securities to normalize the size and composition of its portfolio after liftoff of the federal funds rate. This assumption pertaining to asset sales is incorporated into the FRB/US simulations, and provides a further reason why, along the optimal control path, the federal funds rate stays low for so long, rising only gradually after liftoff.Return to text 20.The rule is defined asRt= 2 +πt+ 0.5(πt- 2) + 1.0Yt. In this expression,Ris the federal funds rate,πis the percent change in the headline PCE price index from four quarters earlier, andYis the output gap. The output gap is approximated using Okun's law; specifically,Yt= 2.0(6‑Ut), where 2.0 is the estimated value of the Okun's law coefficient and 6 is the assumed value of the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, or NAIRU. In a recent speech (see Janet L. Yellen (2012), "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, April 11), I dubbed this rule "Taylor (1999)," as John Taylor described the rule in a paper published that year. See John B. Taylor (1999), "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 319-41. As Taylor’s own strong preference is for his original rule--Taylor (1993)--I now refer to the later rule as the "modified Taylor rule." (The text of this footnote has been revised since its original release.)Return to text 21.I would note that the original Taylor rule, which places only one-half as much weight as the modified rule on unemployment deviations, would already have raised the federal funds rate above the zero bound, producing far worse outcomes than any illustrated in figure 1.Return to text 22.The baseline path, based through the end of 2015 on the primary dealer survey, assumes greater accommodation than would be consistent with the modified Taylor rule, suggesting that FOMC communications have had some success in conveying the desirability of such an approach.Return to text 23.See Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," September 13, note 2.Return to text 24.In the SEP, participants provide paths for the unemployment rate, real GDP growth, and inflation that each expects under his or her own view of the policy that is most appropriate to achieve the Committee's dual mandate. But as is apparent in the SEP, participants have a great diversity of views on matters such as the expected timing and subsequent pace of federal funds rate increases. The SEP currently provides information about the separate distributions of the projections for inflation, real activity, and the federal funds rate over the next few years, but it does not provide the joint paths--that is, multivariate projections. The public cannot, for example, infer whether a projection for higher inflation in 2015 was made by a participant who expects real activity to be weak due to a more pessimistic view about the productive capacity of the economy, or by a participant who expects higher inflation in the context of a stronger recovery, perhaps judging, in the spirit of the optimal policy simulations, that somewhat higher inflation is warranted for some time to achieve faster progress in reducing unemployment.Return to text 25.The FOMC could also, potentially, provide additional information pertaining to the economic conditions it would expect to justify a decision to stop, or scale back, its asset purchases. However, this decision also depends on the Committee's assessment of efficacy and costs--matters on which the Committee is still gaining experience.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York Good afternoon. I am pleased to join the New York Economic Club for lunch today. I know that many of you and your friends and neighbors are still recovering from the effects of Hurricane Sandy, and I want to let you know that our thoughts are with everyone who has suffered during the storm and its aftermath. My remarks today will focus on the reasons for the disappointingly slow pace of economic recovery in the United States and the policy actions that have been taken by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to support the economy. In addition, I will discuss some important economic challenges our country faces as we close out 2012 and move into 2013--in particular, the challenge of putting federal government finances on a sustainable path in the longer run while avoiding actions that would endanger the economic recovery in the near term. The Recovery from the Financial Crisis and RecessionThe economy has continued to recover from the financial crisis and recession, but the pace of recovery has been slower than FOMC participants and many others had hoped or anticipated when I spoke here about three years ago. Indeed, since the recession trough in mid-2009, growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) has averaged only a little more than 2 percent per year. Similarly, the job market has improved over the past three years, but at a slow pace. The unemployment rate, which peaked at 10 percent in the fall of 2009, has since come down 2 percentage points to just below 8 percent. This decline is obviously welcome, but it has taken a long time to achieve that progress, and the unemployment rate is still well above both its level prior to the onset of the recession and the level that my colleagues and I think can be sustained once a full recovery has been achieved. Moreover, many other features of the jobs market, including the historically high level of long-term unemployment, the large number of people working part time because they have not been able to find full-time jobs, and the decline in labor force participation, reinforce the conclusion that we have some way to go before the labor market can be deemed healthy again. Meanwhile, inflation has generally remained subdued. As is often the case, inflation has been pushed up and down in recent years by fluctuations in the price of crude oil and other globally traded commodities, including the increase in farm prices brought on by this summer's drought. But with longer-term inflation expectations remaining stable, the ebbs and flows in commodity prices have had only transitory effects on inflation. Indeed, since the recovery began about three years ago, consumer price inflation, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, has averaged almost exactly 2 percent, which is the FOMC's longer-run objective for inflation.1Because ongoing slack in labor and product markets should continue to restrain wage and price increases, and with the public's inflation expectations continuing to be well anchored, inflation over the next few years is likely to remain close to or a little below the Committee's objective. As background for our monetary policy decisionmaking, we at the Federal Reserve have spent a good deal of effort attempting to understand the reasons why the economic recovery has not been stronger. Studies of previous financial crises provide one helpful place to start.2This literature has found that severe financial crises--particularly those associated with housing booms and busts--have often been associated with many years of subsequent weak performance. While this result allows for many interpretations, one possibility is that financial crises, or the deep recessions that typically accompany them, may reduce an economy's potential growth rate, at least for a time. The accumulating evidence does appear consistent with the financial crisis and the associated recession having reduced the potential growth rate of our economy somewhat during the past few years. In particular, slower growth of potential output would help explain why the unemployment rate has declined in the face of the relatively modest output gains we have seen during the recovery. Output normally has to increase at about its longer-term trend just to create enough jobs to absorb new entrants to the labor market, and faster-than-trend growth is usually needed to reduce unemployment. So the fact that unemployment has declined in recent years despite economic growth at about 2 percent suggests that the growth rate of potential output must have recently been lower than the roughly 2-1/2 percent rate that appeared to be in place before the crisis.3 There are a number of ways in which the financial crisis could have slowed the rate of growth of the economy's potential. For example, the extraordinarily severe job losses that followed the crisis, especially in housing-related industries, may have exacerbated for a time the extent of mismatch between the jobs available and the skills and locations of the unemployed. Meanwhile, the very high level of long-term unemployment has probably led to some loss of skills and labor force attachment among those workers. These factors may have pushed up to some degree the so-called natural rate of unemployment--the rate of unemployment that can be sustained under normal conditions‑‑and reduced labor force participation as well. The pace of productivity gains‑‑another key determinant of growth in potential output--may also have been restrained by the crisis, as business investment declined sharply during the recession; and increases in risk aversion and uncertainty, together with tight credit conditions, may have impeded the commercial application of new technologies and slowed the pace of business formation. Importantly, however, although the nation's potential output may have grown more slowly than expected in recent years, this slowing seems at best a partial explanation of the disappointing pace of the economic recovery. In particular, even though the natural rate of unemployment may have increased somewhat, a variety of evidence suggests that any such increase has been modest, and that substantial slack remains in the labor market. For example, the slow pace of employment growth has been widespread across industries and regions of the country. That pattern suggests a broad-based shortfall in demand rather than a substantial increase in mismatch between available jobs and workers, because greater mismatch would imply that the demand for workers would be strong in some regions and industries, not weak almost across the board. Likewise, if a mismatch of jobs and workers is the predominant problem, we would expect to see wage pressures developing in those regions and industries where labor demand is strong; in fact, wage gains have been quite subdued in most industries and parts of the country.4Indeed, as I indicated earlier, the consensus among my colleagues on the FOMC is that the unemployment rate is still well above its longer-run sustainable level, perhaps by 2 to 2-1/2 percentage points or so.5 A critical question, then, is why significant slack in the job market remains three years after the recovery began. A likely explanation, which I will discuss further, is that the economy has been faced with a variety of headwinds that have hindered what otherwise might have been a stronger cyclical rebound. If so, we may take some encouragement from the likelihood that there are potentially two sources of faster GDP growth in the future. First, the effects of the crisis on potential output should fade as the economy continues to heal.6And second, if the headwinds begin to dissipate, as I expect, growth should pick up further as many who are currently unemployed or out of the labor force find work. Headwinds Affecting the RecoveryWhat are the headwinds that have slowed the return of our economy to full employment? Some have come from the housing sector. Previous recoveries have often been associated with a vigorous rebound in housing, as rising incomes and confidence and, often, a decline in mortgage interest rates led to sharp increases in the demand for homes.7But the housing bubble and its aftermath have made this episode quite different. In the first half of the past decade, both housing prices and construction rose to what proved to be unsustainable levels, leading to a subsequent collapse: House prices declined almost one-third nationally from 2006 until early this year, construction of single-family homes fell two-thirds, and the number of construction jobs decreased by nearly one-third. And, of course, the associated surge in delinquencies on mortgages helped trigger the broader financial crisis. Recently, the housing market has shown some clear signs of improvement, as home sales, prices, and construction have all moved up since early this year. These developments are encouraging, and it seems likely that, on net, residential investment will be a source of economic growth and new jobs over the next couple of years. However, while historically low mortgage interest rates and the drop in home prices have made housing exceptionally affordable, a number of factors continue to prevent the sort of powerful housing recovery that has typically occurred in the past. Notably, lenders have maintained tight terms and conditions on mortgage loans, even for potential borrowers with relatively good credit.8Lenders cite a number of factors affecting their decisions to extend credit, including ongoing uncertainties about the course of the economy, the housing market, and the regulatory environment. Unfortunately, while some tightening of the terms of mortgage credit was certainly an appropriate response to the earlier excesses, the pendulum appears to have swung too far, restraining the pace of recovery in the housing sector. Other factors slowing the recovery in housing include the fact that many people remain unable to buy homes despite low mortgage rates; for example, about 20 percent of existing mortgage borrowers owe more on their mortgages than their houses are worth, making it more difficult for them to refinance or sell their homes. Also, a substantial overhang of vacant homes, either for sale or in the foreclosure pipeline, continues to hold down house prices and reduce the need for new construction. While these headwinds on both the supply and demand sides of the housing market have clearly started to abate, the recovery in the housing sector is likely to remain moderate by historical standards. A second set of headwinds stems from the financial conditions facing potential borrowers in credit and capital markets. After the financial system seized up in late 2008 and early 2009, global economic activity contracted sharply, and credit and capital markets suffered significant damage. Although dramatic actions by governments and central banks around the world helped these markets to stabilize and begin recovering, tight credit and a high degree of risk aversion have restrained economic growth in the United States and in other countries as well. Measures of the condition of U.S. financial markets and institutions suggest gradual but significant progress has been achieved since the crisis. For example, credit spreads on corporate bonds and syndicated loans have narrowed considerably, and equity prices have recovered most of their losses. In addition, indicators of market stress and illiquidity--such as spreads in short-term funding markets--have generally returned to levels near those seen before the crisis. One gauge of the overall improvement in financial markets is the National Financial Conditions Index maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The index shows that financial conditions, viewed as a whole, are now about as accommodative as they were in the spring of 2007. In spite of this broad improvement, the harm inflicted by the financial crisis has yet to be fully repaired in important segments of the financial sector. One example is the continued weakness in some categories of bank lending. Banks' capital positions and overall asset quality have improved substantially over the past several years, and, over time, these balance sheet improvements will position banks to extend considerably more credit to bank-dependent borrowers. Indeed, some types of bank credit, such as commercial and industrial loans, have expanded notably in recent quarters. Nonetheless, banks have been conservative in extending loans to many consumers and some businesses, likely even beyond the restrictions on the supply of mortgage lending that I noted earlier. This caution in lending by banks reflects, among other factors, their continued desire to guard against the risks of further economic weakness. A prominent risk at present--and a major source of financial headwinds over the past couple of years--is the fiscal and financial situation in Europe. This situation, of course, was not anticipated when the U.S. recovery began in 2009. The elevated levels of stress in European economies and uncertainty about how the problems there will be resolved are adding to the risks that U.S. financial institutions, businesses, and households must consider when making lending and investment decisions. Negative sentiment regarding Europe appears to have weighed on U.S. equity prices and prevented U.S. credit spreads from narrowing even further. Weaker economic conditions in Europe and other parts of the world have also weighed on U.S. exports and corporate earnings. Policymakers in Europe have taken some important steps recently, and in doing so have contributed to some welcome easing of financial conditions. In particular, the European Central Bank's new Outright Monetary Transactions program, under which it could purchase the sovereign debt of vulnerable euro-area countries who agree to meet prescribed conditions, has helped ease market concerns about those countries. European governments have also taken steps to strengthen their financial firewalls and to move toward greater fiscal and banking union. Further improvement in global financial conditions will depend in part on the extent to which European policymakers follow through on these initiatives. A third headwind to the recovery--and one that may intensify in force in coming quarters--is U.S. fiscal policy. Although fiscal policy at the federal level was quite expansionary during the recession and early in the recovery, as the recovery proceeded, the support provided for the economy by federal fiscal actions was increasingly offset by the adverse effects of tight budget conditions for state and local governments. In response to a large and sustained decline in their tax revenues, state and local governments have cut about 600,000 jobs on net since the third quarter of 2008 while reducing real expenditures for infrastructure projects by 20 percent. More recently, the situation has to some extent reversed: The drag on economic growth from state and local fiscal policy has diminished as revenues have improved, easing the pressures for further spending cuts or tax increases. In contrast, the phasing-out of earlier stimulus programs and policy actions to reduce the federal budget deficit have led federal fiscal policy to begin restraining GDP growth. Indeed, under almost any plausible scenario, next year the drag from federal fiscal policy on GDP growth will outweigh the positive effects on growth from fiscal expansion at the state and local level. However, the overall effect of federal fiscal policy on the economy, both in the near term and in the longer run, remains quite uncertain and depends on how policymakers meet two daunting fiscal challenges--one by the start of the new year and the other no later than the spring. Upcoming Fiscal ChallengesWhat are these looming challenges? First, the Congress and the Administration will need to protect the economy from the full brunt of the severe fiscal tightening at the beginning of next year that is built into current law--the so-called fiscal cliff. The realization of all of the automatic tax increases and spending cuts that make up the fiscal cliff, absent offsetting changes, would pose a substantial threat to the recovery--indeed, by the reckoning of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and that of many outside observers, a fiscal shock of that size would send the economy toppling back into recession. Second, early in the new year it will be necessary to approve an increase in the federal debt limit to avoid any possibility of a catastrophic default on the nation's Treasury securities and other obligations. As you will recall, the threat of default in the summer of 2011 fueled economic uncertainty and badly damaged confidence, even though an agreement ultimately was reached. A failure to reach a timely agreement this time around could impose even heavier economic and financial costs. As fiscal policymakers face these critical decisions, they should keep two objectives in mind. First, as I think is widely appreciated by now, the federal budget is on an unsustainable path. The budget deficit, which peaked at about 10 percent of GDP in 2009 and now stands at about 7 percent of GDP, is expected to narrow further in the coming years as the economy continues to recover. However, the CBO projects that, under a plausible set of policy assumptions, the budget deficit would still be greater than 4 percent of GDP in 2018, assuming the economy has returned to its potential by then. Moreover, under the CBO projection, the deficit and the ratio of federal debt to GDP would subsequently return to an upward trend.9Of course, we should all understand that long-term projections of ever-increasing deficits will never actually come to pass, because the willingness of lenders to continue to fund the government can only be sustained by responsible fiscal plans and actions. A credible framework to set federal fiscal policy on a stable path--for example, one on which the ratio of federal debt to GDP eventually stabilizes or declines--is thus urgently needed to ensure longer-term economic growth and stability. Even as fiscal policymakers address the urgent issue of longer-run fiscal sustainability, they should not ignore a second key objective: to avoid unnecessarily adding to the headwinds that are already holding back the economic recovery. Fortunately, the two objectives are fully compatible and mutually reinforcing. Preventing a sudden and severe contraction in fiscal policy early next year will support the transition of the economy back to full employment; a stronger economy will in turn reduce the deficit and contribute to achieving long-term fiscal sustainability. At the same time, a credible plan to put the federal budget on a path that will be sustainable in the long run could help keep longer-term interest rates low and boost household and business confidence, thereby supporting economic growth today. Coming together to find fiscal solutions will not be easy, but the stakes are high. Uncertainty about how the fiscal cliff, the raising of the debt limit, and the longer-term budget situation will be addressed appears already to be affecting private spending and investment decisions and may be contributing to an increased sense of caution in financial markets, with adverse effects on the economy. Continuing to push off difficult policy choices will only prolong and intensify these uncertainties. Moreover, while the details of whatever agreement is reached to resolve the fiscal cliff are important, the economic confidence of both market participants and the general public likely will also be influenced by the extent to which our political system proves able to deliver a reasonable solution with a minimum of uncertainty and delay. Finding long-term solutions that can win sufficient political support to be enacted may take some time, but meaningful progress toward this end can be achieved now if policymakers are willing to think creatively and work together constructively. Monetary PolicyLet me now turn briefly to monetary policy. Monetary policy can do little to reverse the effects that the financial crisis may have had on the economy's productive potential. However, it has been able to provide an important offset to the headwinds that have slowed the cyclical recovery. As you know, the Federal Reserve took strong easing measures during the financial crisis and recession, cutting its target for the federal funds rate--the traditional tool of monetary policy--to nearly zero by the end of 2008. Since that time, we have provided additional accommodation through two nontraditional policy tools aimed at putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates: asset purchases that reduce the supply of longer-term securities outstanding in the market, and communication about the future path of monetary policy. Most recently, after the September FOMC meeting, we announced that the Federal Reserve would purchase additional agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and continue with the program to extend the maturity of our Treasury holdings.10These additional asset purchases should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and make broader financial conditions more accommodative.11Moreover, our purchases of MBS, by bringing down mortgage rates, provide support directly to housing and thereby help mitigate some of the headwinds facing that sector. In announcing this decision, we also indicated that we would continue purchasing MBS, undertake additional purchases of longer-term securities, and employ our other policy tools until we judge that the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. Although it is still too early to assess the full effects of our most recent policy actions, yields on corporate bonds and agency MBS have fallen significantly, on balance, since the FOMC's announcement. More generally, research suggests that our previous asset purchases have eased overall financial conditions and provided meaningful support to the economic recovery in recent years.12 In addition to announcing new purchases of MBS, at our September meeting we extended our guidance for how long we expect that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate will likely be warranted at least through the middle of 2015. By pushing the expected period of low rates further into the future, we are not saying that we expect the economy to remain weak until mid-2015; rather, we expect--as we indicated in our September statement--that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens.13In other words, we will want to be sure that the recovery is established before we begin to normalize policy. We hope that such assurances will reduce uncertainty and increase confidence among households and businesses, thereby providing additional support for economic growth and job creation. ConclusionIn sum, the U.S. economy continues to be hampered by the lingering effects of the financial crisis on its productive potential and by a number of headwinds that have hindered the normal cyclical adjustment of the economy. The Federal Reserve is doing its part by providing accommodative monetary policy to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. As I have said before, however, while monetary policy can help support the economic recovery, it is by no means a panacea for our economic ills. Currently, uncertainties about the situation in Europe and especially about the prospects for federal fiscal policy seem to be weighing on the spending decisions of households and businesses as well as on financial conditions. Such uncertainties will only be increased by discord and delay. In contrast, cooperation and creativity to deliver fiscal clarity--in particular, a plan for resolving the nation's longer-term budgetary issues without harming the recovery--could help make the new year a very good one for the American economy. 1. Inflation excluding food and energy has averaged a little less, about 1-1/2 percent, over this period.Return to text 2. See Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009),This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly(Princeton: Princeton University Press); Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor (2012), "Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008,"American Economic Review, vol. 102 (April), pp. 1029-61; Valerie Cerra and Sweta Chaman Saxena (2008), "Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery,"American Economic Review, vol. 98 (March), pp. 439-57; Greg Howard, Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2011), "Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different?" International Finance Discussion Papers 1037 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November); and Michael D. Bordo and Joseph G. Haubrich (2012), "Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries, and Financial Crises: Evidence from the American Record," Working Paper 12-14 (Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, June).Return to text 3. That said, GDP growth in excess of potential is probably not the whole explanation for the decline in unemployment. Some of the decline in unemployment during the recovery could also reflect a reversal of the especially large increases that occurred during the deepest part of the recession, when firms appeared to cut their workforces by greater numbers than would normally be associated with the decline in GDP. (For a discussion, see Ben S. Bernanke (2012), "Recent Developments in the Labor Market," speech delivered at the National Association for Business Economics 28th Annual Economic Policy Conference, Arlington, Va., March 26.) A reduction in the number of people receiving extended or emergency unemployment insurance benefits may have contributed to the decline in unemployment as well.Return to text 4. In addition, while the changing relationship between job vacancies and unemployment--the shift in the Beveridge curve--probably does point to some greater difficulty matching jobs with workers, factors other than mismatch likely explain some of that shift. For example, evidence suggests that firms tend to become more selective in hiring when their hiring needs are not urgent. For further discussion of these labor market issues, see Bernanke, "Recent Developments," in note 3 and the references cited therein. See also Edward P. Lazear and James R. Spletzer (2012), "The United States Labor Market: Status Quo or a New Normal? (PDF)" paper delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1.Return to text 5. In the September 2012 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the central tendency of FOMC participants' estimates of the long-run normal rate of unemployment ranged from 5.2 to 6 percent. The SEP is an addendum to the FOMC minutes and is available at Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 12-13, 2012," press release, October 4.Return to text 6. For example, mismatch problems in the labor market should fade as the economy strengthens, a further rise in business investment would contribute to faster growth in the capital stock, and an improving economy should cause investors to become less risk averse.Return to text 7. In the recoveries following the 1975 and 1982 recessions, for example, residential construction directly contributed about 1 percentage point to GDP growth during the two years following the recession trough; indirect effects--through the effect of home prices on consumer spending or through multiplier effects--no doubt added to the contribution.Return to text 8. For example, according to the April 2012 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending, about one-half of lenders reported that they were "somewhat less likely" or "much less likely" than in 2006 to originate a mortgage to a borrower with a FICO score of 680 and a 10 percent down payment. The complete survey is available on the Board'swebsite.Return to text 9. This projection is the alternative fiscal scenario in a CBO report from August of this year. See Congressional Budget Office (2012),An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2012 to 2022(Washington: CBO, August).Return to text 10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 13.Return to text 11. One way in which our asset purchases affect the economy is through the so-called portfolio balance channel. Because different classes of financial assets are not perfect substitutes in investors' portfolios, changes in the supplies of various assets available to private investors may affect the prices and yields of those assets. Thus, the Federal Reserve's purchases of Treasury securities, for example, should raise the prices and lower the yields of those securities; moreover, as investors rebalance their portfolios by replacing the Treasury securities sold to the Federal Reserve with other assets, the prices of those other assets should rise and their yields decline as well. An increase in our asset purchases may also act as a signal that we intend to pursue a persistently more accommodative policy stance than previously thought, thereby lowering investors' expectations for the future path of the federal funds rate and putting additional downward pressure on longer-term interest rates.Return to text 12. See Ben S. Bernanke (2012), "Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. For simulation results showing the effects of the FOMC's asset purchases, see Hess Chung, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams (2012), "Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44 (February supplement), pp. 47-82. For a study focusing only on the second large-scale asset purchase program that finds comparable effects, attributing to that program a bit less than a 1 percent increase in output and 700,000 new jobs, see Jeffrey C. Fuhrer and Giovanni P. Olivei (2011), "The Estimated Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Treasury Purchase Program," Public Policy Briefs 11-02 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, April). For a study using different methodologies that finds significantly smaller effects, see Michael T. Kiley (2012), "The Aggregate Demand Effects of Short- and Long-Term Interest Rates," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-54 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August); and for one that finds larger effects, see Christiane Baumeister and Luca Benati (2010), "Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the Impact of a Compression in the Yield Spread at the Zero Lower Bound, (PDF)" European Central Bank Working Paper Series 1258 (Frankfurt: European Central Bank, October).Return to text 13. See Board of Governors, "FOMC Statement," in note 10.Return to text