Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York Good afternoon. I want to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Rockefeller Institute for inviting me to participate in this important discussion of distressed residential real estate. The boom and bust in housing that is a hallmark of the recent economic cycle has resulted in an unprecedented volume of foreclosures that has, in turn, left us with an extraordinary level of vacant and distressed properties. Even after the official end of the recession, home sales and house prices continued to decline for several years, and residential investment languished.1All of this has resulted in a slow recovery in housing, which is one of the primary reasons why our overall economic recovery has been so sluggish. In order to see the robust economic recovery we all want, we need to deal effectively with the large volume of vacant and distressed properties throughout the country. Our housing crisis has many dimensions and will require a full spectrum of policy actions to restore health to the housing market, our economy, and most importantly, to neighborhoods and communities across the country. The Federal Reserve System has been active in studying various aspects of the crisis, bringing together community leaders and market participants to share experiences in forums such as this, and using data to identify areas of particular need. I have spoken in the past about credit availability, preventing foreclosures, converting foreclosed properties to rental properties, and strategies for neighborhood stabilization. Today, I would like to focus on the problems posed by an elevated level of vacant properties. I plan to draw on research conducted by Federal Reserve Board staff and would especially like to thank Raven Molloy, an economist in our macroeconomic analysis group, for her work in this area. As I will discuss later in my remarks, the effective use of data is a common theme among success stories in neighborhood stabilization. In the hope that the census tract data referenced in this speech might be helpful to others working to address vacancy problems, I plan to post our data on the Federal Reserve website along with this speech.2 Level and Distribution of Vacant HousingSince the beginning of this year, there have been signs of improvement in aggregate housing market conditions nationally. Sales of new and existing homes have risen and home prices have turned upward. So far this year, house prices have risen sufficiently to move a noticeable number of underwater households--that is, those who owe more on their mortgages than the market value of their homes--from negative equity to positive equity. However, housing markets differ greatly both across regions and within metropolitan areas, and the positive signs in the aggregate data do not apply to all neighborhoods equally. For example, even within those metropolitan areas that have experienced rising average prices over the past year, one-fourth of ZIP codes saw a decrease in prices over the same period.3Moreover, those ZIP codes with falling prices have also experienced rising vacancy rates more often than in other ZIP codes.4These struggling high-vacancy areas provide evidence of the hard work that remains even as housing markets show signs of improvement. Although many of these areas share a high level of vacancy, they differ significantly in other characteristics: the concentration of vacancies, age of the housing stock, cause of the problem, and even the demographics of the residents. By looking more closely at the differences, we will gain a better understanding of these markets and of the policies or program solutions that will address their vacancy issues most effectively. One measure that is frequently cited when describing recent improvements in the national housing market is the inventory of vacant homes for sale. This measure had fallen to 1.6 million units in the second quarter of 2012, substantially below its peak of about 2 million units in 2010 and the first half of 2011.5However, many vacant homes are not on the market at all. These vacant units include properties that are in the foreclosure process, bank-owned properties that are not yet for sale, as well as properties for which the cause of vacancy has no connection to the foreclosure process. Indeed, the stock of non-seasonal homes held off market is nearly two and a half times as large as the for-sale vacant stock.6But unlike the inventory of vacant homes for sale, this stock remains stubbornly elevated relative to pre-crisis numbers, and has not gone down at all over the past year. Moreover, vacant units are not evenly distributed throughout the United States. Some neighborhoods suffer disproportionate numbers of them. Specifically, one-tenth of all census tracts account for nearly 40 percent of the entire vacant housing stock. By comparison, the overall housing market is only half as concentrated with only 20 percent of the aggregate housing stock found in the 10 percent of census tracts with the largest total number of housing units.7 Problems Posed by Vacant PropertiesWhy focus on vacant homes? Vacant homes can be more than just an eye sore; they can have substantial negative impacts on the surrounding community, impacts that are felt most acutely by the neighbors and communities that must cope with the dangers and costs of vacant buildings. Since vacant properties tend to be concentrated in a relatively few number of neighborhoods, some communities are adversely affected much more than others. Homes that have been vacant for a long time tend to fall into severe disrepair. Such physical blight can invite more property crime, as vacant houses are an appealing hide-out and target for criminals, and the absence of residents can mean fewer eyes in the neighborhood to look out for suspicious activity. In fact, counties that experience a large increase in the number of long-term vacant homes tend to see an increase in burglary in the following year. This correlation holds even after controlling for other county characteristics, such as changes in unemployment, changes in population, and changes in violent crime.8 In turn, blight and crime make these neighborhoods less attractive to potential buyers, renters, and businesses. Calculations by Board staff indicate that ZIP codes with a larger increase in long-term vacancy experience smaller increases--or larger decreases--in house prices in the next year.9Falling home prices can harm both neighboring homeowners as well as local municipalities that are dependent on property tax revenue. Research conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland has shown that a home that is simply foreclosed, but not vacant, lowers neighboring property values by up to 3.9 percent. However, if a home is foreclosed, tax delinquent, and vacant, it can lower neighboring property values by nearly two and a half times that amount.10Moreover, properties that have been vacant for a substantial period of time can impose even larger costs on the community, and all too often, the private market is not likely to solve the problem on its own. In such cases, government authorities and public resources may be required. Of course, not all vacant properties pose a problem for the local community, as some homes become briefly vacant during the usual process of changes in ownership. But the longer a home stands vacant, the greater likelihood that poor maintenance and the associated problems that result can become serious issues for the surrounding community. Statistics from the American Housing Survey show that properties that have been vacant for longer than two years are much more likely to have severe problems, such as cracked floors or walls, broken or boarded up windows, and a roof or foundation in disrepair, that make these properties harder to rehabilitate and less appealing to prospective buyers. Segmenting the Inventory of Long-Term VacanciesAnalysis by Federal Reserve Board staff has calculated the fraction of housing units in each census tract that has been vacant for at least two years--which I will refer to as "long-term" vacancy--and categorized tracts that appear in the top 10 percent of this distribution into three types.11 The first category of high long-term vacancy census tract is an area where a large percentage of housing units were built post-2000, and that therefore can be thought of as "housing boom" tracts. These locations also have a higher median income, higher median house value, and a larger fraction of residents with at least a college degree than other high long-term vacancy census tracts. Examples of metropolitan areas with a large number of tracts in this category are Denver, Colorado; Orlando, Florida; Las Vegas, Nevada; and Phoenix, Arizona. The second category of high long-term vacancy census tract has a large share of older housing stock built before 1960, low median income, a high poverty rate, a high unemployment rate, and a large share of residents with less than a high school degree. These tracts can be called "low demand" locations because these characteristics are frequently associated with areas suffering from persistent job loss and a decline in housing demand. Metropolitan areas with a large number of tracts in this category include Detroit, Michigan; Cleveland, Ohio; St. Louis, Missouri; and Baltimore, Maryland. The third and final category of high long-term vacancy census tract has a low density of housing units per square mile, high shares of owner-occupied and single-family housing units, and a high fraction of white non-Hispanic residents. We can think of these neighborhoods as "traditional suburban" areas. Examples of metropolitan areas with a large number of tracts in this category are Charleston, West Virginia; Des Moines, Iowa; Peoria, Illinois; and Oklahoma City, Oklahoma--locations not often mentioned in national media coverage about the housing crisis. Matching Solutions to Neighborhood CharacteristicsAs I mentioned earlier, we should endeavor to achieve full recovery in all of the many diverse housing markets around the country. The private market will likely drive recovery in many locations and, in those locations, the appropriate role of government may be to monitor local activity and ensure that the actions of the private markets improve neighborhoods and provide opportunity for all families, regardless of income, race, ethnicity, or housing tenure. However, some neighborhoods likely will not recover without the assistance of government, and in this time of scarce resources, it is critical that the public sector has the information and tools necessary to ensure that any assistance that is provided is effective and efficient. Doubtless there will be costs associated with solving these problems, but it is important to also consider the costs of doing nothing. For example, it costs local taxpayers to let vacant buildings decline, it costs money to tear them down, and it costs money to convert them to a better use. Ultimately, a policy of neglect will be just as--or even more--costly than finding and implementing constructive solutions to the vacancy issue. We must ask ourselves, can we create policies that fairly distribute those costs? What are the limitations? What innovations can create more effective, scalable solutions? With funding scarce, how can we identify solutions that will ultimately be most cost effective? To begin to answer some of these questions, I return to the typology of vacant properties introduced earlier. "Housing Boom" LocationsThe first type, "housing boom" areas, has relatively high median incomes and new housing stock. These characteristics are attractive to investors, and many investors are reportedly purchasing vacant homes and converting them to rental. Given the recent tightening of the rental market, such a strategy could be a win-win scenario for communities that need more affordable rental homes and suffer from an excess of single-family vacant units. In fact, in January, the Federal Reserve released a staff paper on housing issues12that went into some detail about the potential benefits of converting foreclosed properties to rental, and in April, the Board released a policy statement that outlines supervisory expectations for residential rental activities for certain banking organizations.13 Phoenix, Arizona, is a good example of an area with many census tracts that fit into the "housing boom" typology. Phoenix was one of the areas hit hard during the housing bust, with a peak-to-trough decline in prices of more than 50 percent.14More recently, however, prices in Phoenix have rebounded with a double-digit increase over the 12 months ending in July.15Reportedly, much of this demand is driven by investors who are converting vacant homes into rental properties. Direct statistical evidence on investor activity at the local level is not available. However, since investors tend to finance their purchases with cash or other non-mortgage financing, the level of cash purchases can provide an indicator of investor activity. In the past two years, the fraction of home purchases financed with cash in the Phoenix area was much higher than the national average.16This is an example of the private market stepping in to purchase vacant units and in turn increasing housing values. As encouraging as this trend may be, it is not a panacea. For example, it is possible that aggressive investor activity could crowd out potential homeowners, especially low- to moderate-income households. In addition, investors are not interested in all markets; therefore, there will still be some areas where private investment will not step in to curb the problems associated with vacant properties. The problem of investors crowding out local homebuyers could be addressed through "first look" programs that provide a window, usually 15 days, during which time only prospective homebuyers and nonprofits may bid on a property. In Phoenix, non-profit organizations and local government officials used Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP) funding and enlisted local real estate professionals to match vacant homes with eligible homebuyers. These are important programs. Community leaders, banks, and real estate professionals should continue to collaborate to ensure that prospective homeowners are given a fair chance to bid on available properties. However, most prospective homebuyers and local nonprofits cannot bid on a property if they cannot access mortgage credit. Results from the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey suggest that banks are less willing to provide mortgage credit now than in 2006 to borrowers with lower credit scores or smaller down payments.17We hear much the same story from community groups and housing counselors who report that low- and moderate- income and first-time homebuyers, especially, are finding it increasingly difficult to meet the requirements for a home purchase loan due to limited funds for a down payment or weaker credit scores. While prudent lending may warrant tighter underwriting standards relative to pre-crisis levels, it is also important to ensure that tight credit does not unnecessarily dampen the housing recovery and disproportionately affect creditworthy low-income and minority homebuyers. And without the participation of owner-occupants, it will be difficult for many housing markets to recover. Like Phoenix, Oakland, California is also reportedly experiencing a significant amount of investor activity that may be crowding out purchases by prospective homebuyers and nonprofits. We hear complaints that many of these investors are not based in Oakland, causing residents to express concern about external ownership of their neighborhoods and the long-term implications of absentee landlords. In an attempt to address these concerns and provide more homeownership opportunities to low- and moderate-income Oakland residents, a national nonprofit, Enterprise Community Partners, is working with a private real estate fund to direct some of the private dollars seeking investment properties in Oakland. The nonprofit partnership is using a complex data-driven platform to identify targeted low- and moderate-income neighborhoods in the city, purchasing vacant properties, rehabilitating them through a local workforce development program, and converting them to rental. The ultimate goal is to ensure that the properties remain local neighborhood assets. To achieve this, the partnership is prioritizing rentals and sales to qualified local residents or nonprofits. Such an innovative strategy seeks to complement local government and investor activity so that residents can share in the benefits of a housing recovery. "Low Demand" LocationsNot all markets are equally attractive to private investors, so some governments are developing programs to attract private capital to "low demand," high-vacancy neighborhoods. The city of Baltimore, Maryland provides a good example of such a program. Baltimore is burdened with approximately 16,000 vacant and abandoned buildings, about a quarter of which are owned by the city. Much of this vacancy has been caused by population loss and suburban flight--Baltimore City has lost nearly one-third of its population over the last 50 years.18However, not all parts of Baltimore have a significant number of vacant properties. In fact, only 5 percent of census tracts in the Baltimore metropolitan area have a long-term vacancy rate in the top decile of the national distribution.19The city of Baltimore has recognized these micro-market distinctions and initiated an innovative data-driven program to identify areas with a high concentration of vacant properties and turn these properties into valuable assets. This initiative, called "Vacants to Value," uses data and targeted housing code enforcement to foster redevelopment in areas where there is modest private investment interest. Using a variety of real-time data sources, this program has developed market typologies down to the census block-group level so that it can accurately determine the needs of specific neighborhoods and apply targeted programs to best meet those needs. For example, the city is targeting approximately 700 vacant properties in weak market areas where large-scale investment--encompassing at least a city block--is necessary to catalyze private investment. In healthier neighborhoods, the city believes that increased code enforcement and homebuyer or developer incentives should be enough to reduce vacancy and stabilize neighborhoods. Lastly, in Baltimore's hardest hit neighborhoods, the city is demolishing, holding, or maintaining properties that are unlikely to attract any private investment in the near future.20 Unfortunately, in some cases, vacant homes are beyond repair and will never be habitable again. In these instances, demolition is often the best solution, and land banks can be a good way to hold the property until it can be converted to a better use. A land bank is a governmental or nongovernmental nonprofit entity established, at least in part, to assemble, temporarily manage, and dispose of vacant land for the purpose of stabilizing neighborhoods and encouraging re-use or redevelopment of urban property. Land banks have been around since the early 1970s, but the recent foreclosure crisis has stimulated the creation of several new land banking programs, including in New York State and Kansas City, Missouri. A key characteristic of the new generation of land banks is that they often include mechanisms to self-finance over time, including the ability to recapture a portion of the property taxes for a fixed period of time after the property is put back to productive use. As encouraging as these new self-financing features are, land banks and municipalities are still struggling with the high costs of demolition. For example, in Cuyahoga County, home to Cleveland, Ohio, about 80 percent of the approximately 100 properties per month that the land bank acquires need demolition, but at $10,000 in average costs per demolition, the Cuyahoga Land Bank is struggling to find the resources to fund this activity.21The state of Ohio recently dedicated $75 million of its direct payments from the Attorneys' General (AG) National Mortgage Settlement to fund a new grant program for demolition of abandoned and vacant properties statewide.22This $75 million still will not solve all of Ohio's demolition needs, but leveraging public and private funds like the AG settlement or developing new national sources of bond financing could help address this local problem.23 "Traditional Suburban" LocationsThe last category of high-vacancy areas in the typology that I discussed earlier is "traditional suburban" neighborhoods. In contrast to the other two types of high-vacancy census tracts, these neighborhoods are more evenly spread across many metropolitan areas, illustrating that vacancy can be a problem in any community. Furthermore, ZIP codes in the "traditional suburban" tracts do not tend to have a higher share of property vacancies resulting from foreclosure than other ZIP codes, which demonstrates that some neighborhoods are struggling with long-term vacancy issues even though they did not experience large numbers of foreclosures. While the vacancies faced by these suburban areas might not have been caused by foreclosure problems, the costs to neighborhoods are every bit as real. Such areas represent additional opportunities to use the lessons of the recent crisis as local leaders strive to better understand the root cause of high vacancy levels and to target limited resources. Consider the situation faced by Oklahoma City. Oklahoma City estimates that 8,000 urban properties have been vacant for more than three years, and that the number of vacancies is increasing.24The city's historically high housing vacancies mostly stem from cultural and demographic changes that have occurred over decades, as well as inadequate building code laws and enforcement. Interestingly, the area did not experience the housing boom and bust that occurred in much of the nation. Whereas national house prices rose by 89 percent between 2000 and 2006, prices in Oklahoma City rose by only 35 percent. In addition, house prices in Oklahoma City have been flat since 2006, a sharp contrast to the large drop in national home prices. But even though the vacancy rates in Oklahoma City are not a direct result of the housing boom and bust, it may be that newer solutions developed for "housing boom" and "low demand" areas can be combined with traditional community development policy tools to help solve a problem that developed over decades. Indeed, city planners recently concluded that the city could not tackle neighborhood revitalization without addressing vacancies. Increasing costs for needed city services, reduced revenues, and barriers to growth resulting from deteriorating infrastructure all combined to lend urgency to these efforts. As has been the case in other cities, officials in Oklahoma City realized that gathering data was a necessary first step. Starting earlier this year, they embarked on an ambitious study to determine the total cost resulting from vacancies. The city will then use the findings from the study to support enactment of tougher code enforcement to recover lost revenue, including assessment of fines against owners who fail to maintain their properties. This combination of new measurements and old tools to develop solutions should serve as an example to many "traditional suburban" areas around the country that have experienced, and will continue to experience, vacancy issues. ConclusionThe potential fallout of high rates of vacancy--blight, crime, lowered home values, and decreased property tax revenue--is the same for every neighborhood and community. But there is no one-size-fits-all solution to the vacancy problem. I've used some examples of communities around the country that are facing high vacancy rates in order to illustrate their different characteristics and the different origins of their vacancy problems. Taking account of such differences will be important in crafting solutions to the problems caused by those vacancies. Hopefully, these examples and other ideas that have been shared throughout this conference will inspire new and creative solutions to the difficult issues faced by communities. Certainly, different housing markets will recover in different ways and at different paces. In some areas, the private market will lead the way, while in others, government will have to use precious resources wisely to catalyze recovery. The examples I've discussed also illustrate the value of using data to understand vacancy issues, to determine which neighborhoods are experiencing which challenges, and to design appropriate policy solutions. Solving the problems of long-term vacancies will require the best efforts of public, private, and non-profit leaders locally and across the country. I can assure you the Federal Reserve System will continue to support recovery through the use of all its policy tools and research capacity. Thank you. 1.In the two years after the end of the most recent recession (Q2:2009), existing home sales rose only 4 percent, house prices fell by 4 percent, according to the CoreLogic price index, and residential investment averaged only 2-1/2 percent of gross domestic product (GDP)--half of the average GDP between 1949 and 2006.Return to text 2.A Summary of Long-Term Vacant Typologies, Background on Analysis, and Data by Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) is available on the Federal Reserve Boardwebsite.Return to text 3.Staff calculations based on house price indexes from CoreLogic.Return to text 4.Staff calculations based on house price indexes from CoreLogic and vacancy rates from the U.S. Postal Service (USPS).Return to text 5.Data from the Census Bureau's Housing Vacancy Survey.Return to text 6.Data from the Census Bureau's Housing Vacancy Survey. This measure of vacant homes held off market excludes properties that are held for occasional use or temporarily occupied by individuals with a usual residence elsewhere.Return to text 7.Staff calculations based on USPS vacancy data.Return to text 8.Staff calculations based on crime data from the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Uniform Crime Reports.Return to text 9.Staff calculations using USPS vacancy data and house values by ZIP code from Zillow.Return to text 10.Stephen Whitaker and Thomas J. Fitzpatrick IV (2011), "The Impact of Vacant, Tax-Delinquent and Foreclosed Property on Sales Prices of Neighboring Homes, (PDF)" Working Paper 11-23 (Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, October).Return to text 11.The vacancy data are from the USPS and the tract characteristics are from the five-year sample of the 2010 American Community Survey.Return to text 12."The U.S. Housing Market: Current Conditions and Policy Considerations, (PDF)" white paper (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 2012).Return to text 13.Federal Reserve Board Policy Statement on Rental of Residential Other Real Estate Owned Properties (PDF). April 5, 2012.Return to text 14.Data from CoreLogic.Return to text 15.Data from CoreLogic.Return to text 16.The number of transactions financed with cash are calculated by subtracting the number of mortgage originations by ZIP code (based on data gathered under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act) from the number of home sales by ZIP code reported by CoreLogic.Return to text 17.Federal Reserve Board.April 2012 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (PDF). In response to a special set of questions on residential real estate lending practices, banks reported that they were less likely than in 2006, to varying degrees, to originate mortgages to any borrowers apart from those with the strongest credit profiles.Return to text 18.Ellen Janes and Sandra Davis (2011), "Vacants to Value: Baltimore's Market-Based Approach to Vacant Property Redevelopment,"Putting Data to Work: Data-Driven Approaches to Strengthening Neighborhoods(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December).Return to text 19.Staff calculations based on USPS vacancy data.Return to text 20.Ibid18.Return to text 21.Tom Fitzpatrick. (2012).Connecting Communities[Webinar].Return to text 22.Ohio Attorney General (2012). "Attorney General Launches Moving Ohio Forward Demolition Grant Program To Remove Blighted Residential Structures," press release, April 13.Return to text 23.For example, the "Restore Our Neighborhoods Act" (H.R. 4210), sponsored in 2012 by Representative Steven LaTourette (R-OH) would authorize creation of "Qualified Urban Demolition Bonds" to support demolition costs.Return to text 24.Russell Claus, Director, Planning Department, city of Oklahoma City. Interview by Paul Wenske, Senior Community Development Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. August 2012.Return to text Summary of Long-Term Vacant TypologiesBelow is a description of the three typologies of census tracts with high long-term vacancy rates that are described in Governor Elizabeth Duke's October 5 speech entitled "Addressing Long-Term Vacant Properties to Support Neighborhood Stabilization" and demonstrated by the attached data. These tracts are defined as tracts in the top 10 percent of the national distribution of long-term vacancy rates, where the long-term vacancy rate is the fraction of residential addresses that have been vacant for longer than two years. More details on the methodology can be found in the Background on Analysis section. "Housing Boom" "Low Demand" "Traditional Suburban" * Characteristics with an asterisk are only true when compared to other high long-term vacancy tracts. See Table 2 in the Background on Analysis section for details. Background on AnalysisThe analysis of long-term vacancy by neighborhood is based on data collected by the U.S. Postal Service (USPS). The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) processes the data and makes statistics by census tract available to researchers at government and non-profit institutions. Details can be found atwww.huduser.org/portal/datasets/usps.html. The first step is to identify census tracts with a large fraction of long-term vacant housing units. Because an address could appear to be vacant if it is seasonally occupied, we drop census tracts with a share of seasonal housing units greater than 10 percent (data on seasonal housing units by census tract are from the 2006-10 American Community Survey).1Then, we calculate the fraction of all residential addresses in each tract that have been vacant for two years or more; we call this the "long-term vacancy rate."2We identify tracts in the top decile of the national distribution as those with a high long-term vacancy rate. To create a typology of these high-vacancy tracts, we merge in data on tract characteristics from the 2006-10 American Community Survey and estimate a factor model. Factor analysis is designed to combine a set of variables in a way that summarizes common elements. The analysis identifies three factors that account for a meaningful fraction of the variance of the characteristics in the model.3Table 1 reports the census tract characteristics used in the model and weights that each factor places on each characteristic. Using these weights, we predict the value of each factor for each census tract. Then, we assign each tract to a category based on its largest predicted factor. Table 2 reports the average value of each characteristic for tracts that are assigned to each of the three types. Factor 1 = "Housing Boom" Factor 2 = "Low Demand" Factor 3 = "Traditional Suburb" 0.148 -0.143 0.106 0.148 0.299 -0.499 0.106 -0.457 0.734 0.019 -0.102 0.780 0.262 -0.014 0.068 0.252 -0.113 0.100 -0.101 0.164 -0.029 -0.178 0.326 -0.106 0.698 -0.377 0.438 0.838 -0.106 -0.034 -0.365 0.632 -0.424 -0.267 0.676 -0.178 -0.490 0.381 -0.212 0.783 -0.222 -0.048 -0.240 0.764 -0.221 -0.067 -0.171 -0.151 0.394 -0.050 -0.256 5.45 1.78 1.19 Note: The table shows the factor loadings from a factor analysis that includes all census tracts with a long-term vacancy rate in the top decile of the national distribution. The long-term vacancy rate is the fraction of residential addresses that have been vacant for at least two years. All characteristics except distance are from the 2006-10 American Community Survey. Distance is calculated using the Pythagorean theorem where the inputs are the latitude and longitude of the centroid of the census tract and the latitude and longitude of the centroid of the metropolitan area. Factor 1 = "Housing Boom" Factor 2 = "Low Demand" Factor 3 = "Traditional Suburb" Other Tracts (long-term vacancy rate not high) 0.32 0.21 0.28 0.28 1,782 2,421 149 2,671 0.60 0.44 0.80 0.64 0.60 0.61 0.77 0.68 0.07 0.03 0.04 0.03 0.11 0.04 0.07 0.06 0.19 0.25 0.19 0.28 0.18 0.46 0.26 0.26 $56,975 $23,741 $46,525 $56,143 $251,477 $77,711 $109,684 $245,675 14.9 39.4 13.9 14.9 7.5 21.0 7.6 8.5 0.12 0.29 0.18 0.16 0.33 0.09 0.15 0.28 0.10 0.73 0.06 0.14 0.15 0.08 0.11 0.16 0.05 0.01 0.01 0.05 565 792 1112 44318 Note: Tracts in the highest decile of long-term vacancy are assigned to the category (i.e., factor 1, factor 2, or factor 3) for which the predicted factor is highest. The long-term vacancy rate is the fraction of residential addresses that have been vacant for at least two years. All characteristics except distance are from the 2006-10 American Community Survey. Distance is calculated using the Pythagorean theorem where the inputs are the latitude and longitude of the centroid of the census tract and the latitude and longitude of the centroid of the metropolitan area. 1.We also drop all census tracts in Tennessee because the data on length of vacancy for that state are not accurate.Return to text 2.In the USPS data, residential addresses are divided into three types: occupied, vacant, and "no-stat." An address is considered vacant if the resident has not collected their mail for at least 90 days. An address is considered "no-stat" if it is a rural route address vacant for 90 days or longer, if it is under construction and not yet occupied, or if the postal carrier considers it not likely to be active for some time. Because many abandoned and uninhabitable housing units may fall in this last category, the analysis includes addresses that have been categorized as "no-stat" for at least two years in the measure of long-term vacancy. Results are similar if these addresses are excluded.Return to text 3.Specifically, each of these factors has an eigenvalue greater than one.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (the agencies) recognize the serious impact of Hurricane Sandy on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and will provide regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found atwww.fema.gov. Lending:Bankers should work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by Hurricane Sandy. The agencies realize that the effects of natural disasters on local businesses and individuals are often transitory, and prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas should not be subject to examiner criticism. In supervising institutions affected by the hurricane, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances they face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound banking practices as well as in the public interest. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, institutions should review theInteragency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment (PDF). Investments:Bankers should monitor municipal securities and loans affected by the hurricane. The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected. Appropriate monitoring and prudent efforts to stabilize such investments are encouraged. Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by Hurricane Sandy that expect to encounter difficulty submitting accurate and timely regulatory report data for the September 30, 2012, report date should contact their primary federal regulatory agency to discuss their situation. These regulatory reports include the Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income (Call Report) and holding company Y reports. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements by the specified filing deadlines because of the effects of Hurricane Sandy. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by the hurricane may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal regulatory agency. Temporary Banking Facilities:The agencies understand that many banks face power, telecommunications, staffing and other challenges in re-opening facilities after the hurricane. In cases where operational challenges persist, the appropriate primary federal regulator will expedite any request to operate temporary banking facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by the hurricane. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal regulator will suffice initially. Necessary written notification can be submitted later.
Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. It's a pleasure to be here at Brookings. And it's a special thrill and honor for me to be here alongside Don Kohn. One of my only regrets about coming to the Fed is my timing. I wish I had had the good fortune to arrive a few years earlier, so I could have had the privilege of being Don's colleague, and of learning from him. Now I can only do so indirectly. Several of the best bits of advice I've gotten since joining the Board have been preceded by words like: "Here's what Don Kohn would have done in this situation…." So Don, thank you, and I look forward to our discussion. I'd like to take this opportunity to describe the framework I have been using to think about monetary policy in the current environment, focusing primarily on the role of large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs). But before doing so, please note the usual disclaimer: The thoughts that follow are my own, and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). There is a considerable diversity of views within the FOMC, and among economists more generally, about the use of LSAPs and other nonconventional policy tools. This diversity is both inevitable and healthy given the unprecedented circumstances in which we find ourselves. To be clear on where I stand, I support the Committee's decision of last month--namely, to initiate purchases of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at a rate of $40 billion per month, in tandem with the ongoing maturity extension program (MEP) in Treasury securities, and to plan to continue with asset purchases if the Committee does not observe a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. Given where we are, and what we know, I firmly believe that this decision was the right one. In my comments today, I will only briefly review the case for taking action, as that ground has been well covered in a number of other places, most notably in Chairman Bernanke's recent Jackson Hole speech.1Instead, I will explore in more detail the factors that make decisions about LSAPs so challenging. The Chairman discussed these challenges in his recent speech, saying: "Estimates of the effects of nontraditional policies on economic activity and inflation are uncertain, and the use of nontraditional policies involves costs beyond those generally associated with more-standard policies. Consequently, the bar for the use of nontraditional policies is higher than for traditional policies."2 With this principle in mind, my aim is to lay out the thought process that I am bringing to bear in an effort to decide just how high the bar should be, and whether a proposed action clears that bar. Along the way I also hope to highlight some gaps in economists' collective understanding about LSAPs, and perhaps to provoke some further thought and research on these questions. However, let me begin by setting the context. The point of departure for any analysis of monetary policy is our dual mandate--to foster maximum employment and price stability. The first pass here is pretty clear. Unemployment remains painfully high, and in my opinion, well above the long-run structural rate of unemployment. Moreover, smoothing through the ups and downs of incoming data, it appears that the economy is growing at a pace such that, absent policy action, progress on reducing unemployment will likely be slow for some time. Meanwhile, inflation is subdued, running at or below our long-run objective of 2 percent, while inflation expectations remain well anchored. If the federal funds rate were at, say, 3 percent, we would have, in my view, an open-and-shut case for reducing it. The complication, of course, is that the federal funds rate is essentially at its lower bound, which means that we cannot do more simply by turning that dial further. Instead, we have to use unconventional tools, such as LSAPs and guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate. With respect to LSAPs, my belief--which echoes the views expressed by Chairman Bernanke at Jackson Hole--is that past rounds of LSAPs have played a significant role in supporting economic activity and in preventing a worrisome undershoot of the Committee's inflation objective. The case is especially strong with respect to the first round of LSAPs, which was a very potent policy action that helped to bring the economy back from the brink in 2009. However, we now face a harder set of questions--not about the value of past LSAPs, but about the marginal benefits and costs of further LSAPs. A number of observers have raised concerns about diminishing returns, or escalating costs. I think that, at least in the limit, these concerns must be right; we could in principle push this tool to the point that the hurdle for additional usage would become very high. As policymakers, it is our responsibility to be as clear as possible about the nature of the costs and benefits, and how they might evolve. In that spirit, I will try in what follows to outline the mechanisms that can give rise to decreasing marginal efficacy of LSAPs, or to increasing marginal costs. While much of my discussion will focus on the direct hydraulic effects of LSAPs on the economy, it should be emphasized that their overall impact may be augmented via a signaling or confidence channel. Another important tool in the Committee's arsenal these days is its use of forward guidance about the expected path of the federal funds rate. And a change in this guidance was a key part of the September FOMC statement, with the Committee stating that "a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens." I believe that the LSAP component of the statement helped bolster the credibility of the forward guidance component by pairing a declaration about future intentions with an immediate and concrete set of actions. And I suspect that this complementarity helps explain the strong positive reaction of the stock market to the release of the statement. In addition to this signaling channel, LSAPs of course also have a variety of direct effects on the economy, as I just noted. To understand these effects, it is useful to compare them with those that make monetary policy work in normal times. Away from the zero lower bound, conventional monetary policy is thought to work via an expectations channel; when the Fed cuts the federal funds rate, long-term rates also fall, primarily because expectations regarding future short-term rates shift down. By contrast, a principal motive for doing LSAPs is to influence interest rates not just through expectations, but via supply-and-demand effects in the long-term bond market. As the Fed buys more long-term bonds, their price goes up, and their yield falls, even if expectations of future short rates are unchanged. Said differently, the so-called term premium on long-term bonds declines, which means that post-LSAP, long-term bonds are expected to perform less well as an investment relative to short-term bills. There is a large body of evidence that suggests that LSAPs do in fact exert significant pressure on long-term Treasury yields.3Estimates of thecumulativeeffect of past LSAPs on 10-year yields range from 80 to 120 basis points.4And these past actions are one reason why Treasury term premiums are now near historic lows, on the order of minus 80 basis points, according to a well-known model used by the Board staff.5 A central theme of my talk today is this: When policy works by moving term premiums, as opposed to moving expectations about the path of short rates, the transmission to the real economy may be altered in subtle yet important ways that can have implications for the benefits of a policy action, its costs, and even its consequences for financial stability. Moreover, to address these issues, we need to understand not onlyby how muchan LSAP moves term premiums, but alsowhyit does so. It should be noted that many standard macro models completely set aside the distinction I am emphasizing here. For example, in the Board staff's main model, FRB/US, a fall in the long rate is assumed to have the same effect on economic activity irrespective of whether this fall comes from the term premium or from expectations of future short rates. For the sake of concreteness in what follows, let's think in terms of a hypothetical $500 billion LSAP, conducted entirely by buying longer-term Treasury securities; later I will speak to the differences that arise when the program is carried out with MBS purchases. A reasonable estimate based on the literature would be that such a program reduces the term premium, and thus the 10-year Treasury yield, by 15 to 20 basis points. In my mind, this step is the least controversial piece of the transmission mechanism.6Moreover, I have no reason to expect any diminishing efficacy on this market-impact dimension, so in this instance the past evidence seems like a good guide to future outcomes. However, the evidence on Treasury-market impact is just a starting point. To fully evaluate an LSAP, one needs to take several further steps, some of which are more open to debate. In so doing, it is helpful to clarify the specifics of the supply-demand story. One version of this story works through the market price of duration risk, which is the interest rate risk borne by an investor in long-term bonds. In this case, all bonds--including Treasury securities, corporate bonds, and MBS--can be thought of as close substitutes for one another, and an LSAP, by reducing the total quantity of duration in private hands, lowers the price of duration risk and so reduces the yields on all long-term bonds by an amount proportional to their duration. Going further, this story might also suggest that, to the extent that equities embed duration risk, the return investors require to hold them should fall commensurately, thus giving a significant boost to stock prices. In other versions of the story, markets are more segmented, and Treasury securities and other bonds are not such close substitutes, so an LSAP has differential effects on various securities. In this case, an LSAP that absorbs Treasury supply would be expected to lower the yields on Treasury securities relative to those on corporate bonds, or alternatively, to increase the corporate-Treasury spread.7And by a similar logic, an LSAP might have only a modest effect on stock prices. With this backdrop, let's start with the efficacy side of the question. Take our $500 billion LSAP and, as mentioned earlier, stipulate that it reduces the 10-year Treasury rate by 20 basis points. A simple way to proceed would be to plug this 20 basis point change into one of our econometric models and ask what the consequences are for gross domestic product growth and unemployment. As a concrete case, if you did this exercise with the Fed's workhorse FRB/US model, it would tell you that the $500 billion LSAP should bring down the unemployment rate by approximately two-tenths of a percentage point at a two-year horizon.8This effect is economically meaningful. Naturally, all models rely on a host of assumptions, so the true effect could be larger or smaller than what comes out of the FRB/US model. But I will focus on two sources of uncertainty in particular. A first uncertainty relates to a point raised earlier--that a given impact on Treasury bonds may not pass through fully to other rates that are more relevant for consumption and investment decisions, such as corporate bond rates or primary mortgage market rates. The recent academic literature seems divided on this point, as some papers argue that the pass-through is near 100 percent while others claim that it is quite low.9My own reading of the evidence is that, thus far, there has been substantial pass-through from LSAPs to corporate bonds and mortgages, and some, but considerably less, to other, more distant asset categories like equities. Leaving aside this set of complications--so that we suppose our $500 billion LSAP has an impact of 20 basis points on corporate bond rates as well as on Treasury rates--there is a second, perhaps more fundamental, issue. How should one expect a company to respond when its long-term borrowing costs fall not because of a change in the expected future path of short-term rates, but because of a change in the term premium? As noted earlier, many macro models--like the Fed's FRB/US model--treat the two sorts of shocks as having similar effects. But is there any reason to believe that, in reality, the response to the two might differ? A basic corporate-finance analysis suggests the answer may be yes. To see why, consider the following example. A risk-neutral firm faces a rate on its 10-year bonds of 2 percent. At the same time, it expects that the sequence of rolled-over short-term rates over the next 10 years will average 3 percent. Hence, there is a term premium of minus 1 percent. What should the firm do? Clearly, it should take advantage of the cheap long‑term debt by issuing bonds. But it is less obvious that the bargain 2 percent rate on these bonds should exert any influence on its capital spending plans. After all, it can take the proceeds of the bond issue and use these to pay down short-term debt, repurchase stock, or buy short-term securities. These capital-structure adjustments all yield an effective return of 3 percent. As a result, the hurdle rate for new investment should remain pinned at 3 percent. In other words, the negative term premium matters a lot for financing behavior, but in this stylized world, investment spending is decoupled from the term premium and is determined instead by the expected future path of short rates.10 This reasoning suggests why one might expect future rounds of LSAPs to have diminishing returns. As noted earlier, the data make clear that past rounds of LSAPs have pushed down interest rates and term premiums. But the further the term premium is driven into negative territory, the more the previous logic comes into play, and hence the weaker is likely to be the response of aggregate spending to further downward pressure on long-term rates.11 The corporate-finance example is also consistent with what we have observed in markets in recent months. Issuance of both investment-grade and high-yield bonds has been robust. Indeed, domestic nonfinancial corporate bond issuance is on pace to set a record in 2012, and the speculative-grade segment may also register a new high for the year. At the same time, a large fraction of issuance has been devoted to refinancing--either to retiring existing debt or to payouts to equity holders via dividends and share buybacks. These uses of proceeds have accounted for about two-thirds of all issuance by speculative-grade firms so far this year. Such patterns are what one would expect in a world of segmented markets and negative term premiums.12 This caveat about the diminishing effectiveness of LSAPs can be thought of as a specific version of Goodhart's law.13It may be that under normal circumstances, changes in 10-year rates have significant explanatory power for economic activity, perhaps because they are a proxy for the expected future path of short rates or other aspects of financial conditions. But it doesn't follow that when one sets out to influence the 10-year rate directly, via asset purchases--without changing the future path of short rates--the usual historical relationships will continue to apply. While we should acknowledge these doubts, it is important to keep them in perspective. In addition to lowering interest rates, LSAPs also boost equity prices and other asset values. Taken together, these effects of LSAPs seem likely to be meaningful, even if the benefits of an impetus to rates are less than in the baseline scenario sketched earlier. And to be sure, there is a wide confidence interval around any estimate we might make of the benefits. Moreover, it is worth repeating a point made earlier: whatever direct hydraulic effects LSAPs create by pushing down term premiums and discount rates, their overall impact may be reinforced via a signaling effect, whereby they enhance the credibility of our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate. Indeed, this signaling benefit strikes me as an important part of the argument in favor of LSAPs in the current environment. Let me turn now to the cost side of the equation. Several potential costs of LSAPs have been discussed. One is the exit problem--that a large balance sheet may make it harder for the FOMC to raise rates when the time comes. Between the ability to pay interest on reserves, as well as various reserve-draining methods that the Fed has been methodically testing, I am confident that we have the tools to raise rates. If the FOMC needs to act in the face of an emerging threat to price stability, there is little doubt in my mind that wecan. As to whether wewill, the Federal Reserve has repeatedly made clear its commitment to both sides of its mandate--to price stability as well as to maximum employment. A second set of costs has to do with the possible effects of further asset purchases on various aspects of market functioning, including bid-ask spreads and market depth. And it would indeed be a concern if large Fed ownership of some segments of the Treasury or MBS market were to cause market liquidity to deteriorate significantly. We have seen little evidence of such problems so far, and we continue to closely monitor market conditions. If problems do begin to crop up, we will know it, and we will be able to adjust. A final notion of cost relates to the currently low yields and term premiums on Treasury bonds. At an intuitive level, one might think that, for the Fed, as for any other buyer contemplating a large asset purchase, information on prices and expected returns should be a relevant factor in the decision. Said differently, the case for an LSAP might seem more appealing if the term premium on Treasury bonds were at plus 200 basis points instead of its current level of roughly minus 80 basis points. However, to make sense of this intuition, we have to return to the question ofwhyLSAPs move term premiums. One interesting possibility is that, in a world where other sovereign debt has come into question, long-term Treasury securities are uniquely able to provide a money-like safe-haven service to certain investors. By analogy, think of currency, which investors are willing to hold even at a zero yield, because of the flow of convenience services it provides. Similarly, the negative term premium on long-term Treasury securities may in part reflect the relative scarcity of this money-like asset. If so, it would be economically costly to remove Treasury securities from the system.14This logic is an application of the so-called Friedman rule.15 So a key question is to what extent removing long-term Treasury securities is like removing currency. This question is hard to answer precisely and depends on the details of how you tell the story. If you believe that only nominal Treasury securities‑-but not something similar, such as agency securities or AAA-rated corporate bonds--provide money-like services to investors, you can try to measure the value of these services by looking at the spread on Treasury securities relative to something else that is very safe but not literally a Treasury bond--for example, corporate bonds coupled with credit default swap protection to minimize the credit risk. Arvind Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen of Northwestern University take this approach and conclude that between 24 and 70 basis points of the yield premium on Treasury securities is attributable to a "money-ness" effect.16Numbers in this ballpark suggest that the costs of further LSAPs on this dimension are likely to be modest relative to even a conservative estimate of their potential benefits. However, a couple of caveats are worth noting. First, this methodology may only provide a lower bound on the welfare costs of an LSAP, as it is plausible that not just Treasury securities, but also agency securities and perhaps highly rated corporate bonds, also have some degree of money-ness to them in terms of being useful in satisfying safe-haven demands. In this case, a spread of the sort just described may underestimate the value of monetary services provided by safe and near-safe assets. This area is one where both our conceptual understanding and our measurement techniques remain underdeveloped and where more work would be of great value in informing policy. Second, things can change over time. One episode of interest is the Clinton-era debt buyback program, which was in many ways analogous to an LSAP. Between March 2000 and December 2001, the Treasury repurchased long-term bonds with a face value of $63.5 billion, about 10 percent of the value of long-term government debt then outstanding. Much as with an LSAP, this program appears to have had a powerful negative effect on the term premium, with long-term rates falling sharply relative to short-term rates.17But in contrast to what we have seen with LSAPs thus far, it was also associated with a pronounced increase in Treasury-specific scarcity. One way this scarcity manifested in the data available at the time was in a widening of the Treasury-swap spread, which rose rapidly after the announcement of the buybacks, and hovered in a range of 120 to 130 basis points in the spring and summer of 2000.18The lesson to be drawn is that we should continue to develop and monitor a variety of metrics of this scarcity phenomenon because they may provide an early warning if LSAP costs begin to rise relative to benefits. For the sake of concreteness, I have couched the discussion in terms of a hypothetical all-Treasury LSAP. In light of our recent initiation of an MBS purchase program, it is natural to ask what the salient differences are between buying Treasury securities and buying MBS. In my view there are two, both of which suggest that MBS purchases may offer a better cost-benefit profile than Treasury purchases in the current environment. First, on the cost side, I have just alluded to the idea that Treasury securities may provide money-like services to certain investors, such that removing them from the system may entail a welfare cost. Presumably, MBS are less money-like than Treasury securities, so this element of cost could be reduced when buying MBS.19Second, if the efficacy of Treasury purchases is diminished by the fact that many corporate borrowers already have plentiful access to low-cost funds, it is natural to focus on a sector that is more sensitive to financing costs. The housing market would seem to fit this bill. To the extent that markets are segmented and MBS purchases therefore have a more powerful effect on primary mortgage rates than do Treasury purchases, this possibility may be another appeal of going the MBS route. Finally, let me touch on the implications of LSAPs for financial stability. Some observers have argued that a long period of low rates can create incentives among market participants (such as banks, insurance companies, and pension funds) to reach for yield by taking on higher levels of risk with adverse consequences for stability. These concerns should be taken very seriously, and a lot of work at the Fed is devoted to monitoring such risks. A short summary would be that there is some qualitative evidence of reaching-for-yield behavior in certain segments of the market, but that we are not seeing anything quantitatively alarming at this point. Of course, the worry is that one often sees only the tip of the iceberg in these kinds of situations, so one needs to be cautious in interpreting the data. Taking as a given that reaching for yield could be a problem, what are the implications at the margin for monetary policy, and for LSAPs in particular? First, it is just a fact of life that we are likely to be in a low-rate environment for a considerable period of time, in light of the economic outlook. It is not a choice at the margin. While we are going to have to pay careful attention to the attendant financial stability issues and be prepared to intervene with supervisory and regulatory tools as needed, I would find it hard to accept the proposition that we should preemptively resolve them by, say, starting to raise the federal funds rate today. The potential damage that could be caused by choking off the recovery is too great. Second, one can argue that, by reducing term premiums, LSAPs in particular have potentially significant benefits in terms of financial stability. A major source of problems during the recent crisis was the excessive maturity transformation undertaken by financial firms. Put simply, these firms were relying too much on short-term debt. One of the thrusts of regulatory reform has been to attack this problem--for example, via the constructs of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio and the Net Stable Funding Ratio that are a part of Basel III. However, a complementary way to deal with the problem is to influence the underlying incentives for short-term debt issuance. And these incentives are in turn shaped by the structure of rates and term premiums in the market. As I noted earlier, a natural response for any firm facing an unusually low term premium is to adjust its capital structure by issuing cheap long-term debt to replace its shorter-term debt. It is therefore not surprising that the average debt maturity of large nonfinancial firms has increased notably over the past few years. Moreover, the same pattern shows up among large financial firms--they too have been significantly lengthening their average debt maturity.20 The current cheapness of long-term debt contrasts with the pre-crisis configuration, where there was frequently a pronounced premium favoring issuers not at the long end of the yield curve, but at the very short end. In other words, the fact that the yield curve often tended to be steeply upwards sloping at the front end gave financial firms a strong incentive to issue overnight paper. The bottom line is that I suspect that LSAPs have, by changing the structure of term premiums in the market, helped encourage an extension of debt maturity by both financial and nonfinancial firms. All else being equal, this development is a good thing from a financial stability perspective.21 To conclude, I believe that our recently announced policy of MBS purchases, coupled with the change in our forward guidance, are strong positive steps. I am hopeful that these actions by the Federal Reserve will help to give economic growth a much needed boost. At the same time, I am keenly aware of the many uncertainties we still have about the workings of nonconventional policies, and of LSAPs in particular. As I have tried to explain, LSAPs really are a different animal, and it is important for us to try to better understand these differences, and to do our best to take them into account when making policy judgments. In short, there is a lot left for us to learn. Thank you very much. References Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jeffrey Wurgler (2003). "When Does the Market Matter? Stock Prices and the Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms (PDF),"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118 (August), pp. 969-1005. Bernanke, Ben S. (2012). "Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams (2012). "Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44 supplement (February), pp. 47-82. Custódio, Cláudia, Miguel A. Ferreira, and Luís Laureano (forthcoming). "Why Are U.S. Firms Using More Short-Term Debt?"Journal of Financial Economics, draft availablehere (PDF). D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David López-Salido, and Edward Nelson (forthcoming). "The Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effects,"Economic Journal. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (forthcoming). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics. Friedman, Milton (1969).The Optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company. Gagnon, Joseph, Mathew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). "The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7 (March), pp. 3-43. Goodhart, C.A.E. (1975). "Problems of Monetary Management: The U.K. Experience," in Reserve Bank of Australia, ed.,Papers in Monetary Economics, vol. 1. Sydney: RBA. Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein (2010). "A Gap-Filling Theory of Corporate Debt Maturity Choice (PDF),"Journal of Finance, vol. 65 (June), pp. 993-1028. -------- (2012). "A Comparative-Advantage Approach to Government Debt Maturity (PDF)," Mimeo. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School, January. Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos (2010). "Price Pressure in the Government Bond Market,"American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, vol. 100 (May), pp.585-90. Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore (2011). "Did the Federal Reserve's MBS Purchase Program Lower Mortgage Rates?"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.58 (July), pp.498-514. Kiley, Michael (2012). "The Aggregate Demand Effects of Short- and Long-Term Interest Rates," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-54. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Kim, Don H., and Jonathan H. Wright (2005). "An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-33. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen (2011). "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 215-65. -------- (2012). "Why an MBS-Treasury Swap Is Better Policy than the Treasury Twist (PDF)," Kellogg Insight. Evanston, Ill.: Kellogg School of Management, July. Li, Canlin, and Min Wei (2012). "Term Structure Modelling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large Scale Asset Purchase Programs," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-37. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. Meaning, Jack, and Feng Zhu (2011). "The Impact of Recent Central Bank Asset Purchase Programmes (PDF),"Bank of International Settlements Quarterly Review,December, pp. 73-83. Meyer, Laurence H., and Antulio N. Bomfim (2012). "Not Your Father's Yield Curve: Modeling the Impact of QE on Treasury Yields," Macroeconomic Advisers,Monetary Policy Insights, May 7. Pandl, Zach (2012). "Talking Down the Term Premium," Goldman Sachs ECS Research,US Economics Analyst, no. 12/19. Swanson, Eric T. (2011). "Let's Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of Operation Twist and Its Implications for QE2 (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring,pp. 151-88. Woodford, Michael (2012). "Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. Wright, Jonathan H. (2011). "What Does Monetary Policy Do to Long-Term Interest Rates at the Zero Lower Bound? (PDF)" NBER Working Paper Series 17154. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. 1.See Bernanke (2012).Return to text 2.See Bernanke (2012).Return to text 3.Papers include Gagnon and others (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011), Swanson (2011), Meaning and Zhu (2011), D'Amico and King (forthcoming), D'Amico and others (forthcoming), Li and Wei (2012), and Wright (2011).Return to text 4.See Li and Wei (2012), Pandl (2012), and Meyer and Bomfim (2012).Return to text 5.The model is due to Kim and Wright (2005).Return to text 6.See Woodford (2012) for an opposing view.Return to text 7.See Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011) for an articulation of this view.Return to text 8.See Chung and others (2012).Return to text 9.Papers that examine the pass-through issue include Gagnon and others (2011), Wright (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011), Swanson (2011), and Hancock and Passmore (2011). Primary mortgage rates, of course, are distinct from secondary-market rates for assets traded in centralized markets. A variety of factors affect the wedge between the secondary MBS rate and the primary mortgage rate, and these factors, and hence the degree of pass-through, may vary over time.Return to text 10.See Kiley (2012) for a recent model that predicts a differential reaction of spending to changes in term premiums versus changes in the future path of short rates. A similar set of issues arises in thinking about how firms should respond to "nonfundamental" movements in their stock prices--movements that are not driven by changes in expected future cash flows. See, for example, Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003).Return to text 11.If the term premium starts out significantly positive, so that long-term rates are well above expected future short rates, an initial reduction may indeed spur further investment among financially constrained firms who need to issue long-term bonds to fund new investment. However, once the term premium becomes negative, we hit a corner where the financial constraint no longer binds and the relevant opportunity cost becomes the option to invest in short-term securities or repurchase shares. Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003) model an analogous diminishing-returns effect for stock prices and corporate investment.Return to text 12.As borrowing costs have fallen, Federal Reserve staff estimates of the expected return on the stock market (using a model based on analysts' earnings expectations) remain near historic highs. It is this divergence in the costs of debt and equity that is likely to make debt-financed repurchases of equity attractive.Return to text 13.Goodhart's original formulation is that "Any observed statistical regularity will tend to collapse once pressure is placed on it for control purposes." See Goodhart (1975).Return to text 14.To be clear, this argument relies on there being multiple distinct monetary assets. That is, the case needs to be that, for some investors, long-term Treasury securities provide a type of service that is not provided as effectively by short-term bills or reserves. If all safe assets provide the same kind of monetary services, then an LSAP that swaps reserves for long-term bonds has no effect on the net supply of monetary assets. See also Woodford (2012) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012).Return to text 15.Friedman (1969) famously argued that a socially efficient outcome involves setting the opportunity cost to investors of holding money equal to the marginal cost to the government of creating additional money.Return to text 16.Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen's (2012) analysis is based on market quotes from July 20, 2012. One obtains similar estimates if their methodology is updated to the present. However, it is important to emphasize that spreads of the sort they study can be subject to a variety of other idiosyncratic influences, so care must be taken not to over-interpret any one of them.Return to text 17.See Greenwood and Vayanos (2010) for an analysis of the Clinton buyback program and its effect on the Treasury yield curve.Return to text 18.One important distinction is that in the case of the Clinton-era buybacks, bond prices were likely influenced not simply by the bond purchases themselves, but by the prospect of future surpluses over a longer horizon.Return to text 19.This argument is made by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012). One natural reason why MBS may be less money-like than Treasury securities is their exposure to prepayment risk.Return to text 20.These statements are based on an analysis of Compustat data, updating the results of Custódio, Ferreira, and Laureano (forthcoming). Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2010) show that the following is a general tendency in historical U.S. data: When government debt maturity is low, expected returns (that is, term premiums) on long-term bonds are low as well, and private firms fill in the gaps by lengthening their own debt maturity.Return to text 21.Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2012) make a similar argument in the context of Treasury debt maturity, and its potential effect on financial stability goals.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the annual indexing of the reserve requirement exemption amount and of the low reserve tranche for 2013. These amounts are used in the calculation of reserve requirements of depository institutions. The Board also announced the annual indexing of the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit that will be used to determine deposit reporting panels effective 2013. All depository institutions must hold a percentage of certain types of deposits as reserves in the form of vault cash, as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or as a deposit in a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). Depository institutions must also regularly submit reports of their deposits and other reservable liabilities. For net transaction accounts in 2013, the first $12.4 million, up from $11.5 million in 2012, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $12.4 million up to and including $79.5 million, up from $71.0 million in 2012. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts in excess of $79.5 million. These annual adjustments, known as the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment, are based on growth in net transaction accounts and total reservable liabilities, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 2011 and June 30, 2012. For depository institutions that report weekly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment will apply to the 14-day reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, November 27, 2012, and the corresponding 14-day reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, December 27, 2012. For depository institutions that report quarterly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment will apply to the seven-day reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, December 18, 2012, and the corresponding seven-day reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, January 17, 2013. The Board also announced changes in two other amounts, the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit, that are used to determine the frequency with which depository institutions must submit deposit reports. The attached Federal Register notice contains a description of the new boundaries for deposit reporting that will be effective in 2013. The Board's notice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the proposal by River Valley Bancorp, Madison, to acquire Dupont State Bank, Dupont, both of Indiana, and to become a bank holding company. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) and the president and vice president of the council for 2013. CDIAC advises the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues. Members are selected from representatives of commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils serves on CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. Charles H. Majors, executive chairman of American National Bank and Trust Company, Danville, Va., will serve as president in 2013. Drake Mills, president and chief executive officer of Community Trust Bank, Ruston, La., will serve as vice president. The other members of CDIAC in 2013 are: Glenn D. BarksPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFirst Community Credit UnionChesterfield, Mo. Michael J. CastellanaPresident and Chief Executive OfficerSEFCUAlbany, N.Y. Dennis D. CirucciPresident and Chief Executive OfficerAlliance BankBroomall, Pa. John B. DicusChairman, President, and Chief Executive OfficerCapitol Federal Savings BankTopeka, Kan. John V. Evans, Jr.Chief Executive OfficerD.L. Evans BankBurley, Idaho Chandler J. HowardPresident and Chief Executive OfficerLiberty BankMiddletown, Conn. Terry LobdellPresidentCommunity First Bank of GlendiveGlendive, Mont. Timothy G. MarshallPresident and Chief Executive OfficerBank of Ann ArborAnn Arbor, Mich. Eddie SteinerPresident and Chief Executive OfficerThe Commercial and Savings Bank of Millersburg, OhioMillersburg, Ohio Claire W. TuckerPresident and Chief Executive OfficerCapStar BankNashville, Tenn. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced a five-month delay in the implementation of the second phase of its program to simplify the administration of reserve requirements. The delay will allow for further development and testing of automated systems to ensure a smooth transition for affected institutions. The Board issued a final rule on April 4, 2012, amending its Regulation D to simplify the reserve administration program in two phases. The first phase, which took effect on July 12, 2012, discontinued as-of adjustments related to deposit report revisions and eliminated clearing balance requirements. The second phase of the amendments will introduce a common two-week maintenance period and a penalty-free band around reserve balance requirements to eliminate carryover and routine penalty waivers. The second phase of amendments was originally scheduled to take effect on January 24, 2013. The new effective date is June 27, 2013. The purpose of the simplification is to reduce administrative and operational costs for depository institutions, the Federal Reserve Board, and Federal Reserve Banks. The project does not affect the stance of monetary policy. The Board's notice is attached and will be published shortly in the Federal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Sunrise Bank, Cocoa Beach, FloridaPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated August 26, 2010Terminated October 9, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Northeast Securities Corporation, Minneapolis, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated May 24, 2010Terminated October 1, 2012 TCSB Bancorp, Inc., Traverse City, MichiganWritten Agreement dated December 6, 2010Terminated September 27, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application by Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group, Inc. and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation, both of Tokyo, Japan, foreign banking organizations that are bank holding companies under the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended ("BHC Act"), to acquire up to 9.9 percent of the voting shares of The Bank of East Asia, Limited, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China, a foreign banking organization that is a bank holding company under the BHC Act by virtue of its ownership of The Bank of East Asia (U.S.A.) National Association, New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the approval of fee schedules, effective January 2, 2013, for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to depository institutions (priced services). The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 102.7 percent of their priced services costs in 2013. The Reserve Banks expect to recover all of their actual and imputed expenses, and earn a profit that is above their targeted return. Overall, the price level for Reserve Bank priced services will increase less than 1 percent in 2013 from 2012. The effective average fee paid to collect checks using the Reserve Banks' Check 21 services is expected to decline 4 percent, while the effective average fee to return a check electronically will decline 3 percent. In addition, the effective fees for the Reserve Banks' FedACH®service will decline marginally. The effective fees will increase about 7 percent for Fedwire®Funds and National Settlement Services and about 9 percent for Fedwire®Securities Service. The Board also approved a modest increase to FedLine®access fees. The 2013 fee schedule for each of the priced services, except the check service, is included in the attached Federal Register notice. Fee schedules for all priced services will be available in the coming days on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial services website atFRBservices.org. The Board also approved modifications to the methodology for calculating the private sector adjustment factor (PSAF), which is used in setting fees for certain payment services provided to depository institutions. The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and profits that would have been earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve establish fees to recover the costs of providing priced services, including the PSAF, over the long run, to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector providers of payment services. The PSAF methodology is reviewed periodically to ensure that it is appropriate and relevant in light of changes that may have occurred in Reserve Bank priced-services activities, accounting standards, finance theory, and regulatory and business practices. Beginning in 2013, the Board will estimate income tax and other imputed costs from the U.S. publicly traded firm market. Previously, the estimated income tax and other imputed costs were derived from top bank holding companies under the correspondent bank model. Lastly, the Board approved the 2013 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) of $14.1 million for Reserve Bank priced services using the new model. The Board's notices are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced a formal enforcement action, including a $9 million civil money penalty, against American Express Company (Amex) and American Express Travel Related Services Company, Inc. (TRS) to address deceptive marketing and debt collection practices and associated deficiencies in compliance risk management and internal audit. Amex and TRS are both registered bank holding companies based in New York. TRS provides debt collection and marketing services to its subsidiary banks, American Express Centurion Bank (AECB) and American Express Bank, FSB (AEFSB), and also services its own credit card portfolio. In providing those services, TRS allegedly led customers to believe that their defaulted debt would be "waived" or "forgiven" by acting on a settlement offer without also disclosing the effect that settling for less than the full debt would have on the customers' future credit opportunities. TRS also allegedly made deceptive representations in credit card solicitations concerning the benefits customers would receive by acting on the offer. The Federal Reserve also found that deficiencies in compliance risk management and internal audit, which are firm-wide functions at Amex, allegedly allowed these practices to occur. The Board's action was taken in coordination with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Utah Department of Financial Institutions. Each agency is announcing formal enforcement actions against entities in the American Express organization that they supervise, which include AECB and AEFSB. TRS's credit card customers affected by the allegedly deceptive practices will be compensated according to the CFPB's enforcement action against TRS. In addition to the $9 million civil money penalty, the Board's enforcement action requires Amex and TRS to improve consumer compliance oversight and compliance risk-management and internal audit programs. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Patapsco Bancorp, Inc. and The Patapsco Bank (PDF), both of Dundalk, MarylandWritten Agreement dated October 18, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: SouthFirst Bancshares, Inc., (PDF)Sylacauga, AlabamaWritten Agreement dated September 20, 2012 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: West Concord Bancshares, Inc., West Concord, Minnesota; Farmers State Bank of West Concord, West Concord, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated November 6, 2009Terminated September 27, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday published two final rules with stress testing requirements for certain bank holding companies, state member banks, and savings and loan holding companies. The final rules implement sections 165(i)(1) and (i)(2) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act that require supervisory and company-run stress tests. Nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council will also be subject to certain stress testing requirements contained in the rules. "Implementation of the Dodd-Frank stress test requirement is an important step in the Federal Reserve's efforts to promote the health of the financial sector," Governor Daniel K. Tarullo said. "Stress testing is a key tool to ensure that financial companies have enough capital to weather a severe economic downturn without posing a risk to their communities, other financial institutions, or to the general economy." The Federal Reserve will begin conducting supervisory stress tests under the final rules this fall for the 19 bank holding companies that participated in the 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program and subsequent Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Reviews. The final rules also require these companies and their state-member bank subsidiaries to conduct their own Dodd-Frank company-run stress tests this fall, with the results to be publicly disclosed in March 2013. In general, other companies subject to the Board's final rules for Dodd-Frank stress testing will be required to comply with the final rule beginning in October 2013. Companies with between $10 billion and $50 billion in total assets that begin conducting their first company-run stress test in in the fall of 2013 will not have to publicly disclose the results of that first stress test. The Board's two final rules revise portions of the Federal Reserve's notice of proposed rulemaking to implement the enhanced prudential standards and early remediation requirements established under the Dodd-Frank Act. The Board coordinated closely with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to ensure that final stress testing rules issued by the agencies are consistent and comparable. The Board also coordinated with the Federal Insurance Office as required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The Federal Reserve will release the scenarios for this year's supervisory and company-run stress tests no later than November 15, 2012. As required by the Dodd-Frank Act, the scenarios will describe hypothetical baseline, adverse, and severely adverse conditions, with paths for key macroeconomic and financial variables. To help firms prepare to estimate their losses and revenues under the scenarios, the Federal Reserve on Tuesday released historical data for variables likely to be used in the scenarios. A revised version of these historical data, reflecting the latest information, will be published along with the scenarios. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Annual Company-Run Stress Test Requirements for Banking Organizations with Total Consolidated Assets over $10 Billion Other than Covered Companies:HTML|PDF Federal Registernotice: Supervisory and Company-Run Stress Test Requirements for Covered Companies:HTML|PDF Historical Data: 1976 through Second Quarter 2012 (Excel) Comment:Submit|View Board Votes
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace in recent months. Growth in employment has been slow, and the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending has advanced a bit more quickly, but growth in business fixed investment has slowed. The housing sector has shown some further signs of improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation recently picked up somewhat, reflecting higher energy prices. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee remains concerned that, without sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions. Furthermore, strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely would run at or below its 2 percent objective. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee will continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per month. The Committee also will continue through the end of the year its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of Treasury securities, and it is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. These actions, which together will increase the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities by about $85 billion each month through the end of the year, should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and currently anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-2015. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Dennis P. Lockhart; Sandra Pianalto; Jerome H. Powell; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Jeremy C. Stein; Daniel K. Tarullo; John C. Williams; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the action was Jeffrey M. Lacker, who opposed additional asset purchases and disagreed with the description of the time period over which a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate and exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted.
On Monday, November 5, 2012, the Federal Reserve will offer $3 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's September 8, 2010 release, this offering is part of ongoing small-value operations designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to become familiar with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Offering and Competitive Auction Parameters Competitive bids submitted at the stop-out rate will be pro-rated and will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. Non-Competitive bids are allowed in this auction. All non-competitive bids will be automatically awarded in full at the stop-out rate of the competitive auction. The minimum amount for a non-competitive bid is $10,000; the maximum amount is $5,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. Non-Competitive bids must be submitted between 10:00 a.m. ET and 2:00 p.m. ET on the auction date. Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the auction date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, results will be posted on the Term Deposit Facility Resource Center page of the Central Bank Central website (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Participant awards will be posted to the Term Deposit Facility application at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date, and participants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Distinguished Jurist Lecture, University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania As one would expect of a piece of legislation that has sixteen titles and runs 849 pages in the Statutes at Large, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act ranges widely in addressing problems both directly and indirectly associated with the financial crisis. Taken as a whole, though, the primary aim of those 849 pages can fairly be read as a reorientation of financial regulation towards safeguarding "financial stability" through the containment of "systemic risk," phrases that both recur dozens of times throughout the statute. The law, explicitly in many provisions and implicitly in many others, directs the bank regulatory agencies to broaden their focus beyond the soundness of individual banking institutions, and the market regulatory agencies to move beyond their traditional focus on transaction-based investor protection. This emphasis on financial stability and systemic risk is hardly surprising in light of the damage done by the financial crisis and the ensuing Great Recession, from which we continue to recover only slowly. Indeed, concern about financial stability and systemic risk has at times been a crucial impetus for financial reform in the United States. Much of the New Deal legislation that defined the financial regulatory structure for more than 40 years was in direct response to what we would today call systemic concerns, including banking panics and excessive leverage in equity markets. Twenty years before the New Deal, the creation of the Federal Reserve had been intended at least as much as a financial stability measure as an instrument of monetary policy. But seen in the light of more recent history, Dodd-Frank represents something of an about-face for financial regulation, which had largely neglected systemic concerns in the decades preceding the crisis. Even the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, while far-reaching in many respects, was very much a traditional piece of securities legislation insofar as it focused on investor protection. Banking law reforms enacted after the 1980s savings and loan debacle had traces of concern with financial stability, but the emphasis was still on the regulation of individual depository institutions. Most other banking law changes of the 1980s and 1990s, culminating in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in 1999, were essentially deregulatory.1These laws, along with the administrative actions that both preceded and implemented them, removed many restrictions on activities, affiliations, and the geographic reach of commercial banks without substituting new regulatory mechanisms to control the institution-specific risks that could arise from the growth of financial services conglomerates, much less the systemic risks created by the rapid integration of capital markets and traditional lending activities.2The major regulatory initiative of this period was the Basel II package of changes to capital requirements, an exercise whose shortcomings included an enhancement, rather than diminution, of regulatory incentive for procyclicality in bank lending, and thus could arguablyincreasesystemic risk. By the time financial stress began rising rapidly in the second half of 2007, systemic risk and financial instability had come to seem more theoretical than real to many regulators, academics, and financial market participants. There had been little in the way of Congressional discussion of systemic risk issues, and little in the way of well-developed recommendations. To be sure, some academics--mostly finance professors--and a few intrepid, heterodox voices among central bank research staffs identified risks that might be building and, in general terms, the need for macroprudential regulation to complement traditional microprudential oversight. But even they tended more to diagnosis and warning than to prescription. Thus, although major regulatory legislation is often preceded by long periods during which key ideas and proposals are circulated and discussed, Congress was writing on a mostly blank slate in crafting an immediate legislative response to the financial crisis. The necessarily somewhat extemporized character of Dodd-Frank has had several consequences for the development of financial stability regulation. First, many of the new authorities and requirements of Dodd-Frank require extensive elaboration through administrative rulemaking, often coordinated or agreed among three or more agencies. Second, as I will explain in a moment, the provisions of the law that use the concept of risk to financial stability as a directly applicable legal standard provide only general guidance for regulators in applying that standard. This is not unusual for statutes in new areas of regulation, but it still poses a challenge for regulators, particularly in the early stages of implementation or enforcement. Third, broad as Dodd-Frank is in some respects, it does not grant direct regulatory authority in some areas that academic and agency analysis suggests may pose systemic risk. Finally, the law made important institutional changes, creating novel governmental entities specifically designed to address financial stability, and binding existing agencies more closely together in their rulemaking and supervisory activities. The relationships among existing agencies and the evolving practice of these new entities may in turn pose some novel practical and administrative law issues. My remarks this afternoon address some aspects of the job of creating a financial stability regulatory system in light of these features of Dodd-Frank and of the fact that theories of financial stability that might inform the fashioning of this system are in many respects still undeveloped or, at the least, contested. I will begin with a brief survey of Dodd-Frank's financial stability provisions before turning to a few examples. Dodd-Frank as a Statutory Framework for Financial Stability RegulationDodd-Frank creates a legal and institutional framework within which financial stability regulation is to be developed but, with a couple of notable exceptions, it does not delineate the steps that should actually be taken to promote financial stability. A useful point of comparison is the Banking Act of 1933, which did not use the terms "financial stability" or "systemic risk," but which specified the Glass-Steagall rule separating commercial from investment banking, limited transactions of banks with their affiliates, and established the federal deposit insurance system to prevent banking runs and panics. While statutory modifications and considerable administrative implementation of course followed over the years, the key elements of the regulatory scheme for financial stability were contained within the original legislation itself. In contrast, there are relatively few Dodd-Frank provisions that more or less directly effect the policy changes intended to reduce risks to financial stability. Even the so-called Volcker Rule, which prohibits proprietary trading by banks, bank holding companies, and their affiliates,3will require considerable regulatory build-out before its constraints will be clear. Provisions that require only modest administrative interpretation, such as the limit on acquisitions that would bring a financial firm's consolidated liabilities to more than 10 percent of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of all financial companies,4are not central elements of the legislation. At the risk of some oversimplification, one can classify most uses of the financial stability concept in Dodd-Frank into four categories: (1) as a goal for a new regulatory authority, (2) as an instruction for ongoing analysis and monitoring, (3) as a direct legal standard, and (4) as a factor for consideration in decisions on applications for various proposed actions subject to regulatory approval. First, financial stability is used as a stated goal motivating a new regulatory or supervisory authority without itself being the standard used in the realization of that authority. For example, Dodd-Frank reverses the restrictions that Gramm-Leach-Bliley placed on the powers of the Federal Reserve Board to examine subsidiaries of bank holding companies regulated by other agencies by referring explicitly to the Board's need to be informed of risks within the subsidiaries that may "pose a threat to . . . the stability of the financial system of the United States."5Another example is section 165, which requires that the Federal Reserve establish a special set of prudential requirements for bank holding companies with more than $50 billion in assets in order to "prevent or mitigate risks to the financial stability of the United States that could arise from the material financial distress or failure, or ongoing activities of large, international financial institutions." Similarly, the far-reaching requirement in Title VII that five federal financial regulators establish margin requirements for uncleared swaps written by swap dealers and other major market participants is intended to "offset the greater risk to the [dealers] and the financial system arising from the use of [uncleared] swaps."6 Second, Dodd-Frank takes a number of steps to enhance the capacity of the government to monitor and analyze threats to financial stability. Most prominent among these are the creation of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and the Office of Financial Research (OFR).7The FSOC is composed of ten voting and five nonvoting members--the heads of relevant federal offices and regulatory agencies, and three representatives of state financial regulators.8As I will discuss in a moment, the FSOC as a collective entity has a limited, though important, direct regulatory role. Much of its time, however, will be spent fulfilling its mandate from Congress to assess risks to financial stability, including--where appropriate--making recommendations for action to agencies under existing regulatory authority or to Congress to fill gaps in existing authority in response to identified systemic risks.9The stated purpose of OFR is to support the FSOC and its member agencies through research, the collection and standardization of data, the development of tools for measuring and monitoring risk, and related activities.10FSOC and OFR are each also required to make an annual report to Congress on financial stability.11 The third use of financial stability in Dodd-Frank is as a direct legal standard for the exercise of a regulatory authority, as opposed to my first category of Dodd-Frank provisions, which simply cite financial stability concerns as a motivation for a regulatory or supervisory program. To date, the most conspicuous of this type of provision have been the authorities granted the FSOC to designate nonbank financial companies and financial market utilities as "systemically important." The first of these authorities is directed at financial firms that are not bank holding companies, and thus not subject to capital requirements and other parts of the holding company regulatory regime. This authority is a direct response to experience in the financial crisis. During 2008, serious problems at AIG and the five so-called "free-standing" investment banks--that is, firms not part of a bank holding company--contributed substantially to the severe stress in the financial system, with the failure of Lehman Brothers in September igniting the most acute phase of the crisis. The standard to be applied by the FSOC is whether "material financial distress at the U.S. nonbank financial company, or the nature, scope, size, scale, concentration, interconnectedness, or mix of the activities of the U.S. nonbank financial company, could pose a threat to the financial stability of the United States."12There follows a lengthy list of "considerations" to be taken into account by the FSOC. However, particularly insofar as the last of these is "any other risk-related factors that the Council deems appropriate,"13the list does not provide extensive guidance for the FSOC in applying the basic standard. Any companies so designated by the FSOC will be subject to supervision by the Federal Reserve, as well as to the special Section 165 prudential standards I mentioned earlier. To date, no firms have been designated, though the FSOC is actively considering possible designees. Of course, the five previously free-standing investment banks have either been dismantled (Lehman), converted into bank holding companies (Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley), or absorbed into a bank holding company (Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch). The other designation authority granted the FSOC is for financial market utilities, defined as multilateral transfer, clearing, or settlement systems for payments, securities, or other financial transactions among financial institutions.14Once designated as systemically important,15financial market utilities are subject to prudential standards established by the Federal Reserve, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodities Futures Trading Commission for the purpose of reducing systemic risk and supporting financial stability.16Here, in addition to providing considerations for the FSOC in making its determination, the statute elaborates the standard of "systemically important" a bit, defining that term to mean a situation "where the failure of or a disruption to the functioning of a financial market utility or the conduct of a payment, clearing or settlement activity could create, or increase, the risk of significant liquidity or credit problems spreading among financial institutions or markets and thereby threaten the stability of the financial system of the United States."17In July, the FSOC designated eight financial market utilities as systemically important and they are now subject to special risk-management standards.18 In addition to these designation authorities, Dodd-Frank grants the FSOC very broad scope for dealing with a large bank holding company or designated nonbank financial company that "poses a grave threat to the financial stability of the United States."19Upon the recommendation of the Board of Governors, the FSOC may limit mergers, products, or activities of the firm. If these actions are inadequate to mitigate the grave risk, the FSOC may require the firm to divest assets or off-balance sheet items. The fourth use of financial stability in Dodd-Frank is as a factor to be taken into account in various regulatory determinations. So, for example, the list of considerations in the International Banking Act for the Federal Reserve in determining whether to permit the establishment of a foreign bank office, or to terminate an existing such office, was augmented with a financial stability factor--specifically, whether the home country of a bank that presents a risk to the stability of the U.S. financial system has taken, or is taking, appropriate regulatory steps to mitigate that risk.20 Similarly, Dodd-Frank added "risk to the stability of the U.S. banking or financial system" to the non-exhaustive lists of factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act and the Bank Holding Company Act for consideration by banking regulators in evaluating a proposed merger or acquisition by a bank or bank holding company. There are actually three statutory provisions governing these transactions--Section 3(c) of the Bank Holding Company Act for bank acquisitions by holding companies, Section 4(j) of the Bank Holding Company Act for nonbank acquisitions by holding companies, and the Bank Merger Act for mergers by banks. The statutory standards, and thus the import of the factors, are somewhat different.21In all three instances, however, the financial stability factor is not in itself dispositive, in contrast to the statutory provisions covering designation of systemically important institutions or special actions to address grave threats to financial stability. This brief review shows how ubiquitous the concepts of financial stability and systemic risk are in Dodd-Frank. The law creates or strengthens numerous forms of regulatory authority that can be used to control numerous practices or circumstances associated with financial instability. Yet the statute itself provides only limited guidance to regulators on how to implement financial stability where it is established as a standard, or how to weigh it against economic growth and other considerations where it is used as an informing concept for a regulatory exercise or a factor to be considered in regulatory approvals. Moreover, one does not really find in the statute or in its legislative history an implicit theory of financial stability from which to infer answers to the regulatory questions just noted. Instead, Dodd-Frank directs regulation at a number of perceived vulnerabilities created by large financial firms in particular, and to some degree in the financial system as a whole. To the extent one can fairly induce an underlying principle, it is that the moral hazard associated with too-big-to-fail institutions should be counteracted in a variety of ways. The emphasis on too-big-to-fail institutions is both understandable and appropriate in light of the experiences of 2008, including the major injections of government capital to stabilize some of the nation's largest firms. And the absence of an informing, grand unified theory of financial stability is hardly surprising in light of the history to which I alluded earlier. Indeed, two years after passage of Dodd-Frank, there is not really an officially embraced consensus theory of how financial stability is undermined. The first report of the new Office of Financial Research--one of the more useful analyses of financial stability issued by the official sector--does not attempt a theory of financial stability. It defines financial stability descriptively rather than analytically, "that the financial system is operating sufficiently to provide its basic functions for the economy even under stress,"22and pragmatically tries to identify risks and vulnerabilities. Yet much of the theoretical work on financial stability of the last several years has suggested that financial instability is, in important ways, endogenous to the financial system, or at least the kind of financial system that has developed in recent decades. The Office of Financial Research report just cited went on to note that the financial crisis had "served as a painful reminder that the financial system is prone to internal instability."23Contributions to the literature by academics such as Markus Brunnermeier, Gary Gorton, Perry Mehrling, Andrew Metrick, Hyun Song Shin, Andrei Shleifer, and Jean Tirole,24although differing in some important specifics, all paint a picture of a financial system prone to instability for reasons in addition to, and quite independent of, classic too-big-to-fail concerns. Their various analyses suggest the possibility of destabilization even in a financial world with no dominant firms, but many medium-sized entities. This perspective focuses on one of the most important effects of the progressive integration of capital markets and conventional lending activities, something now popularly known as "shadow banking"--that is, credit intermediation involving maturity transformation, and often significant leverage, that is wholly or partly outside the traditional banking system. This intermediation depends critically on the creation of instruments that are thought to be safe and liquid, and as such, "cash equivalents" similar in function to insured deposits in the commercial banking system. These instruments, much desired by certain kinds of investors, are short-term liabilities of the shadow banking intermediary, which backs them with a portfolio of longer-term assets that, because of some combination of high diversification and low-default risk, are expected to perform very well under nearly all circumstances, but carry significant tail risks that are not fully appreciated ex ante. A now notorious example of a shadow banking intermediary was a special investment vehicle (SIV) sponsored by a financial firm. A SIV bought tranches of securitized mortgages with AAA credit ratings, which it financed through the issuance of short-term instruments that were regarded by investors as essentially a cash equivalent. But during the crisis, when tail risk materialized, investors came to understand that even the upper tranches of subprime and other mortgage securitizations might not be spared significant losses because of the dramatic fall in housing prices and the equally dramatic rise in defaults. At the same time, questions arose about the continued willingness and ability of sponsors to provide support to the SIVs, despite a history of their having done so on both contractual and discretionary bases. A kind of run ensued, as investors realized that their instruments were not truly "equivalent" to cash and refused to roll over their short-term funding of the shadow banking intermediary. Such SIVs are gone, but other forms of shadow banking continue in such well-established forms as money market funds and repo markets. The vulnerability of shadow banking to runs, as investors rapidly withdraw funding, can lead to systemic problems as consequential as those associated with classic runs on traditional banks. If shadow banking intermediaries must rapidly liquidate longer-term assets that they can no longer fund, the impact extends across the financial system. The resulting declines in asset prices trigger margin calls on other investors, who may then need to delever by selling their own holdings, accelerating the fire sale of these, and potentially other, assets. In the worst case, the result can be the kind of generalized asset price decline and liquidity freeze observed at the height of the financial crisis. Dodd-Frank does include some significant provisions that, when implemented, could mitigate some of the risks associated with the shadow banking system and the potential for fire sales more generally. Among these are the requirements for margining of over-the-counter derivatives, increased use of central clearing facilities for derivatives, and higher prudential standards for systemically important financial market utilities. But Dodd-Frank does not fashion a far-reaching system of regulatory authority for the shadow banking system to parallel the one it creates for systemically important institutions, or even to address fully the significant connections - through implicit support and other channels - between the shadow banking system and systemically important institutions. This is particularly noteworthy, as there is clearly some potential for enhanced capital, liquidity, and other prudential requirements for bank holding companies to cause more activity to migrate to the shadow banking system. With this background, I turn now to a closer look at a few instances of the challenges both in elaborating the financial stability standards of Dodd-Frank with respect to systemically important institutions and in addressing the shadow banking system. Evaluating Financial Stability Concerns Associated with Large InstitutionsAs a prelude to this discussion, let me acknowledge that this is hardly the first time Congress has enacted intentionally protean statutory standards in response to a serious economic problem, and then relied on some combination of administrative regulation, law enforcement, and the courts to develop and adapt those standards as learning and experience grow. The antitrust laws provide a good example. The clause "contract, combination, or conspiracy in restraint of trade"25that is so familiar to us today posed its own major challenge of interpretation immediately after passage of the Sherman Act in 1890. Indeed, in the first cases brought under Section 1, both the Justice Department and the Supreme Court came close to reasoning that a very broad range ofcontracts by definition restrained some trade and thus might be illegal.26These interpretations were soon abandoned, but they stand as an admonition that early decisions under a new law can, in retrospect, look to have been somewhat makeshift. Systemic Risk Capital SurchargesMy first example is drawn from the Federal Reserve Board's experience in developing enhanced capital standards for bank holding companies with more than $50 billion in assets, as required by Section 165 of Dodd-Frank. As I noted a few moments ago, this is one of the Dodd-Frank provisions that establishes financial stability as its aim, but not as a direct statutory standard. Section 165 requires that the standards intended to prevent risks to financial stability increase in stringency, based on the same non-exhaustive list of factors used for the designation of nonbank systemically important financial firms,27but provides no further guidance. In undertaking this task, we began with the premise that a financial stability motivation for capital requirements is necessarily somewhat different from the institution-centered approach of traditional capital standards, as embodied in the various Basel capital frameworks. Firm-centered requirements are informed by asking what level of capital would be necessary to allow the firm to remain a viable financial intermediary even after absorbing losses that, within a fairly high level of confidence, might be encountered over some relevant timeframe. The financial stability approach begins from the fact that there would be very large negative externalities associated with the disorderly failure of any systemically important financial institution, distinct from the costs incurred by the firm and its stakeholders. The failure of such a firm, especially in a period of stress, significantly increases the chances that other financial firms will themselves experience great stress, for two reasons. First, direct counterparty impacts can lead to a classic domino effect. Second, because losses in a tail event are much more likely to be correlated for firms deeply engaged in trading, structured products, and other capital market instruments, all such firms are vulnerable to accelerating losses as troubled firms sell their assets into a declining market. Enhanced capital requirements should take into account these costs that a systemically important firm's failure will inflict on the rest of the financial system, not the amount of loss its shareholders and creditors will incur. Thus, the aim of financial stability capital standards is to reduce further the probability that the firm might fail under stress through holding additional capital. These additional capital requirements can also help offset any funding advantage derived from the perceived status of such institutions as too-big-to-fail. In acting on this rationale for capital standards to mitigate risks to financial stability, we first sought to ensure that there would be an international initiative to develop financial stability capital standards for global systemically important financial institutions, since the severe distress or failure of a foreign banking institution of broad scope and global reach could have effects on the U.S. financial system comparable to those caused by failure of a similar domestic firm. The Basel Committee agreed to take up this agenda and is well on its way to completing a framework covering more than two dozen large financial firms from around the world. Our intention has been to make our enhanced capital standards under Section 165 congruent with the Basel Committee's framework. The task of determining how much additional capital is needed to reduce the probability of a systemically important firm's failure to more acceptable levels is not a straightforward one. Conceptually, there is a good starting point, in what has been termed the "expected impact" approach, which calls for additional capital to reduce the probability of the firm's failure sufficiently to equalize the expected impact on the financial system of the failure of a systemically important firm and the failure of a banking firm just outside systemic status.28But implementing this concept is complicated by the fact that, despite some very useful metrics that have been developed in the last few years for measuring the systemic risk associated with a particular firm, there is certainly no generally accepted approach.29Each has its shortcomings as well as its strengths. Thus it is not realistic to think that, at least in the foreseeable future, the concept of a capital surcharge precisely offsetting the systemic risk actually created by that firm can be achieved in practice. Indeed, differences among reasonable assumptions in applying the expected impact approach led to a fairly broad range of potential surcharges. The 1-2 ½ percent amounts negotiated within the Basel Committee are at the low end of that range, reflecting a good deal of caution--frankly, a bit more caution than I think would have been desirable, even given the uncertainties. Moreover, the Basel Committee decided to use "buckets," grouping banks presenting roughly similar risks, rather than a customized calibration based on a single score. Even though the Basel Committee does have an algorithm that produces such a score, it recognized that there is inevitably imprecision involved, and thus will look for obvious breaks in these scores in order to assign the banks to a limited number of buckets carrying differing capital surcharges.30 Financial Stability Analysis in Merger ApplicationsThe second interpretive challenge, which I will address in more detail, arises from the addition of a financial stability factor to the review conducted by the Federal Reserve Board of proposed mergers and acquisitions involving banks and bank holding companies.31In some respects, this process resembles the pre-merger reviews conducted by the antitrust agencies under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act. But the differences are also instructive. One is that under the Bank Holding Company Act, the impact of a transaction on financial stability is not itself dispositive. The Board could approve an acquisition even if it determined that there was some adverse effect on financial stability if it also determined that the transaction would produce benefits outweighing the financial stability concerns by, for example, increasing competition or efficiencies or public convenience. This balancing requirement contrasts with an antitrust pre-merger review, in which the focus is solely on whether the transaction would substantially lessen competition.32The statutory formulation appears to reflect a Congressional supposition that, like many social desiderata, the pursuit of financial stability may at times require trade-offs with other desirable aims. This conclusion is reinforced by other parts of Dodd-Frank, such as the earlier-mentioned provision permitting extraordinary measures to be imposed on a firm, but only if it is found to pose agravethreat to financial stability. Another salient point of difference is that Hart-Scott-Rodino was not enacted until 1976, following more than 60 years of merger analysis by the antitrust agencies and merger jurisprudence by the courts. Indeed, the agencies had already published a set of merger guidelines in 1968. While the Antitrust Division or the Federal Trade Commission could, and did, begin pre-merger reviews with a well-developed analytic framework, there is no legacy of administrative or judicial analysis of the financial stability effects of mergers. We literally have had to start from scratch. Let me describe just a few of the conceptual and practical issues that have already arisen in discussions at the Board on some hypothetical situations that might arise in implementing the required consideration of financial stability.33 One important issue is raised by the possibility that an acquisition may decrease the chances of material distress at a financial firm while simultaneously increasing the potential negative externality on the financial system as a whole should the firm nonetheless become seriously compromised. To borrow credit risk terminology, the probability of default (PD) may be reduced, but the loss given default (LGD) may increase. You can imagine this circumstance where, for example, an acquisition would demonstrably reduce a firm's dependence on short-term wholesale funding by providing more deposits or other reliable funding sources, but where the firm's increased size and market connections would compound the damage to counterparties, intermediation, and asset markets in the event of unmanageable stress. In such a case, are risks to financial stability increased, unaffected on balance, or actually decreased? In theory, as is done in credit risk modeling to calculate capital needs, one could multiply PD by LGD to yield a single "systemic financial risk" number for both the status quo and the post-acquisition firm, in order to determine--or at least create a presumption of--which outcome is preferable from a financial stability perspective. This would be the financial stability equivalent of the Herfindahl–Hirschman Index (HHI) in antitrust.34But we are still in the relatively early stages of exploring the utility of different approaches to measuring both these variables, and we do not have a single well-established metric for either variable today. As already noted in my discussion of systemic risk surcharges, the quantification of a "systemic loss given default" seems particularly challenging. A second issue is time contingency. Consider an acquisition that, in calm times, seems pretty clearly to increase the systemic footprint of an already large, interconnected acquiring institution without having a material positive effect on the resilience of that firm during a stress period. That starkly stated circumstance would seem a prototypical case in which a conclusion of an adverse effect on financial stability would be reached. But now suppose that the target firm is already under substantial pressure in an increasingly stressed financial environment and that the potential acquirer appears relatively strong. A case could be made that allowing the acquisition in that circumstance wouldsupportfinancial stability by relieving funding and other counterparty pressures, and forestalling distressed asset sales and other problematic developments. Continuing my comparison to antitrust law, this outcome would be an analogue to a failing firm defense. Of course, this was precisely the rationale in 2008 for the government not only permitting, but encouraging, JP Morgan's acquisition of Bear Stearns and Washington Mutual, Bank of America's acquisition of Merrill Lynch and, to some degree, Wells Fargo's acquisition of Wachovia.35The result is that the concentration at the top of the U.S. financial services industry is even greater than before the crisis. Allowing the acquisition I have hypothesized here could buy some immediate stabilization, but at the cost of arguably greater moral hazard and risks to financial stability over the medium term. The orderly liquidation authority for systemically important institutions created by Dodd-Frank may provide a third alternative, but even if implemented successfully and as intended, the new Title II would be most effective in containing moral hazard by ensuring that shareholders and management of the failed firm bear heavy costs. It would not necessarily prevent all the damage to the financial system and the broader economy that would attend failure of a large financial firm. A third kind of issue arises specifically because of the transaction-driven nature of the Bank Holding Company Act merger review provisions. Some of these issues are procedural or practical in nature. For example, in evaluating the impact of a proposed acquisition on financial stability, should a firm get "credit" for recent or planned actions to reduce its systemic footprint through sales of subsidiaries or other assets? This would be an analogue to the divestitures that are often required as a condition of merger approvals by the antitrust agencies. If a similar idea were implemented in the financial stability context, should the package of asset acquisitions and reductions be negotiated beforehand with supervisors and, if so, would that package itself have to be subject to Board approval? Other issues presented by the focus on specific transactions go deeper. Suppose a large regional bank and a broker-dealer proposed to merge. Standing alone, that transaction might well look to increase risks to financial stability, not only because of the initial combined size of the firms, but because the broker-dealer operation would presumably grow when affiliated with a larger commercial bank, since the merged firm could offer a greater range of services to clients. But would prohibiting that transaction mean that the current small group of very large, integrated financial firms would have their market positions essentially protected by the financial stability considerations? Such an outcome would be ironic indeed. The Federal Reserve could, if it so chose, avail itself of the discretion to balance different effects by allowing the merger on pro-competition grounds. Such a decision would place the Fed in the position of effectively deciding broader questions of industry structure in the context of a single case. But, then again, a prohibition of the merger would do the same, the only difference being the substantive structure being chosen. Yet even before this kind of balancing of positive and adverse effects was reached, there would surely be an argument that ensconcing the existing large integrated firms would itself increase risks to financial stability, since these firms that are each the product of prior mergers might be the only ones capable of growing more in key parts of the financial services market. Here again, the absence of a theory of financial stability that informs the law complicates the problem, though it is not altogether clear that convergence around such a theory would solve it. The foregoing questions underscore the difficulties entailed in anticipating the range of financial issues that may be presented in merger cases and in trying to resolve the issues that have been anticipated solely through consideration of hypotheticals. This conclusion is one of the reasons the Federal Reserve decided not to develop and issue a rule or detailed guidance on the financial stability factor. There simply isn't the accumulation of experience and of thoughtful evaluation of these issues by people both in and out of government to inform something akin to the merger guidelines published by the antitrust agencies. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve is very much taking a case-by-case approach to these reviews. As described in a recent order, "the Board expects that it will generally find a significant adverse effect if the failure of the resulting firm, or its inability to conduct regular-course-of-business transactions, would likely impair financial intermediation or financial market functioning so as to inflict damage on the broader economy."36The Board will consider a variety of factors that could indicate the potential for damage, including the size of the resulting firm, the availability of substitute providers for any critical products or services, the interconnectedness of the firm with the banking and financial system, the contribution of the firm to the complexity of the financial system, and the extent of cross-border activities of the firm.37I would expect that, over time, our discussion of these factors in the context of specific transactions will provide firms, their attorneys, and other members of the public with more guidance as to how a specific case is likely to be analyzed. At some point, we and others in the official sector may become comfortable enough with a particular measure of systemic risk that it will be a starting point for analysis in these cases. But I suspect it will be much longer, if ever, before such a measure could provide the extent of presumptive sorting that HHI does in antitrust analysis today. While the absence of experience and a comprehensive informing theory make detailed guidance infeasible in the foreseeable future, I do think we should be able to elaborate certain categories of presumptive approvals and denials more quickly. Before I suggest how, let me emphasize that here I am speaking for myself only, since the full Board will address these issues only in future orders. We have already suggested a limited presumptive safe harbor where an acquisition involves less than $2 billion in assets or results in a firm with less than $25 billion in total assets.38Personally, I would set the size of the resulting firm higher than $25 billion, but somewhat lower than the $50 billion Dodd-Frank threshold over which a firm is subject to special prudential standards. At the other end of the spectrum, I would urge a strong, though not irrebuttable, presumption of denial for any acquisition by any firm that falls in the higher end of the list of global systemically important banks developed by the Basel Committee for purposes of assessing capital surcharges.39Firms at the lower end of the Basel Committee list, or that U.S. authorities may later designate as domestic systemically important banks under a parallel Basel Committee exercise,40might have a slightly less robust, but still significant presumption against acquisitions. I would not apply the presumption in the case of certainde minimisacquisitions or in cases where asset dispositions were judged to offset any increase in systemic risk from the proposed new acquisition. It is reasonable to ask why these negative presumptions are appropriate, given my general view that the absence of both experience and consensus theory make a case-by-case approach necessary. One answer is that, notwithstanding the fact that analytic tools for assessing a firm's systemic footprint are in a relatively early stage of development, everything wedoknow suggests that the firms on the Basel Committee list strongly implicate the kinds of systemic considerations mentioned by Congress. Second, it does seem incumbent on us to provide at leastsomeguidance to firms where we can, particularly to inform smaller, less connected firms of the kinds of mergers that are unlikely to raise financial stability concerns and, conversely, to give firms that are already of systemic importance a sense of which mergers will face very close scrutiny. A third answer is that, once an acquisition is consummated, Dodd-Frank provides only narrow authority to order divestiture on financial stability grounds. Though the Board can recommend action by the FSOC, I have already noted that the test for such action is "grave threat to financial stability," presumably a significantly higher standard than the "risk to financial stability" that can constitute an adverse effect for purposes of Sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act. Unlike Section 7 of the Clayton Act, which permits the antitrust authorities either to restrain a merger beforehand or undo it thereafter, the Federal Reserve's authority under the Bank Holding Company Act to disallow the merger on financial stability grounds appears to lapse after the merger is completed, but for the narrow authority vested in the FSOC. Of course, one motivation for the passage of Hart-Scott-Rodino in 1976 was the perceived reluctance of courts to order potentially disruptive divestitures once companies had completed the merger. In any case, the legal and practical impediments to such action counsel an additional measure of caution by the Federal Reserve in considering acquisitions by firms that can reasonably be expected to raise significant financial stability concerns. For all the attention paid to financial stability analysis in the last few years, it is still--relatively speaking--a fledgling enterprise. Even if we hypothesize a viable working theory of financial stability that commands a rough consensus, translating that theory into administrable standards and processes is a task that will take years.41But while the absence of well-established systemic risk measures may counsel caution in approaching merger analysis, and while it has surely already affected the formulation of capital surcharges in the Basel Committee, it may well be leaving a gap in financial stability regulation. One of the difficulties in building out a financial stability analysis is the absence of an upper bound point of reference. There is no statutory basis for identifying a certain systemic footprint above which the risks to financial stability are not worth bearing compared to whatever possible benefits may be associated with the operation of the largest, most interconnected firms. Similarly, the absence in the financial stability area of the equivalent of the monopolization provision in Sherman Act Section 2 to complement the merger provisions in Clayton Act Section 7 creates an anomalous regulatory feature. It means that the current structure for financial stability regulation permits substantial increases in systemic risk by an institution, so long as it is generated from internal growth. To the extent that a growing systemic footprint increases perceptions of at least some residual too-big-to-fail quality in such a firm, notwithstanding the panoply of measures in Dodd-Frank and our regulations, there may be funding advantages for the firm, which reinforces the impulse to grow. There is, then, a case to be made for specifying an upper bound. In these circumstances, however, with the potentially important consequences of such an upper bound and of the need to balance different interests and social goals, it would be most appropriate for Congress to legislate on the subject. If it chooses to do so, there would be merit in its adopting a simpler policy instrument, rather than relying on indirect, incomplete policy measures such as administrative calculation of potentially complex financial stability footprints. The idea along these lines that seems to have the most promise would limit the non-deposit liabilities of financial firms to a specified percentage of U.S. gross domestic product, as calculated on a lagged, averaged basis. In addition to the virtue of simplicity, this approach has the advantage of tying the limitation on growth of financial firms to the growth of the national economy and its capacity to absorb losses, as well as to the extent of a firm's dependence on funding from sources other than the stable base of deposits. While Section 622 of Dodd-Frank contains a financial sector concentration limit, it is based on a somewhat awkward and potentially shifting metric of the aggregated consolidated liabilities of all "financial companies." Of course, the difficult question would be the applicable percentage of GDP. The answer would depend on a judgment as to how much of an impact the economy could absorb. It would also entail a judgment as to how large and complex a firm needs to be in order to achieve significant economies of scale and scope that carry social benefit. Depending on the answers to these questions, there may be a need to balance the relevant costs and benefits. There would also be important secondary questions such as whether to exclude from a firm's calculated liabilities only insured deposits and which asset base to use in calculating non-deposit liabilities. And depending on how Congress answered all these questions, there could well be need for defining transition periods and compliance margins. Even good answers to all these questions would produce a policy instrument that could seem excessively blunt to some. But this is a debate well worth having. Financial Stability and the Shadow Banking SystemHaving just a few months ago devoted an entire speech to the shadow banking system,42I wanted to spend more time today on the interpretive issues just discussed. However, to give a sense of the complementary regulatory challenges in dealing with the shadow banking system, let me describe one specific, current issue and just briefly mention a much broader concern. The specific issue is that of money market funds. As many of us in the government have pointed out, money market funds remain a major part of the shadow banking system and a key potential systemic risk even in the post-crisis financial environment. In fact, the industry's survival in its present form is likely due in no small part to the unprecedented interventions by the Treasury and the Federal Reserve in providing insurance and liquidity support, respectively, to the industry in response to the run prompted by the failure of the Reserve Primary Fund in 2008. The interesting point here is that a regulatory agency, the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC), has ample regulatory authority to address the systemic risk problem. Indeed, the legality of money market funds continuing to publish a fixed net asset value (NAV) of one dollar per share, even as the actual value of the underlying assets varies within a modest range, is itself the consequence of the SEC's Rule 2a-7, which exempts money market mutual funds from the requirement of a floating NAV generally applicable to open-end mutual funds. In amending its rules in 2010, the SEC took some good first steps to improve the resilience of money market funds, but many--including Chairman Schapiro--do not believe these are sufficient to mitigate the run potential in money market funds. Unfortunately, a majority of the current SEC commissioners has to this point been opposed to moving forward with the reform measures Chairman Schapiro has proposed. The FSOC, meanwhile, has endorsed further reform along these general lines. The question, then, is how the FSOC and its other member agencies should proceed given that the SEC has declined to act. I should note here that, during the debates preceding Dodd-Frank, some versions of proposals for what eventually became the FSOC would have empowered the FSOC to override agency action or inaction within its sphere of authority. Others, including many who favored strong reforms, opposed this power, which would have created a kind of super-agency with veto authority over all the regulators. Instead, the FSOC has the more limited authority to present an agency with recommendations for action and the right to receive an explanation should the agency not accept those recommendations. As you may have seen, two weeks ago Treasury Secretary Geithner sent a letter to the members of the FSOC in his capacity as its chair, in which he urged the Council to use its authority under Section 120 of Dodd-Frank, and to consider alternative actions to reduce the structural vulnerabilities associate with money market funds "in the event the SEC is unwilling to act in a timely manner."43These alternatives could include FSOC designation of money market funds as systemically important and thus subject to the prudential requirements promulgated under Dodd-Frank. They could also include action by FSOC member agencies, such as the bank regulatory agencies imposing restrictions on regulated financial institutions' ability to sponsor, borrow from, invest in, or provide credit to money market funds that do not have structural protections. From my perspective, at least, each of the options open to the FSOC and the rest of its constituent agencies is decidedly a second-best alternative as compared to a change in SEC rules to remove the fixed net asset value exception, to require a capital buffer that would staunch or buffer runs, or measures of similar effect. And, when I say second-best here, I mean to include the funds themselves. The protective tools available to the rest of us do not fit the problem precisely and thus will not regulate at the least cost to the funds while still mitigating financial risk. But that is the legal situation we all confront. My hope, of course, is that recent indications that other SEC commissioners are now willing to move forward with reforms will lead to the SEC adopting first-best measures in the near-term. The money market fund example is a noteworthy case study in substantial part because of the interesting institutional issues it raises. More generally, though, the capacity of private financial market actors to create what are, at least in normal times, considered cash equivalents raises broader financial stability questions. Specifically, there may be a need for new macroprudential instruments, such as comprehensive authority to impose margins on all cash-like instruments, regardless of whether a firm creating those instruments is a regulated entity such as a bank holding company. Such possibilities obviously carry significant consequences, not just for the liquidity available to the financial system, but also for values such as the concentration of governmental authority. This is a topic on which much further thought is needed. ConclusionIt may not always be the case that the most interesting time to be involved in a regulatory area is at its early stages, but I am reasonably certain it applies to the formation of a system for the regulation of systemic risk. From the standpoint of a regulator, the key challenge in these early stages is to be neither excessively self-confident about what we know about financial stability so as to produce unfortunate unintended consequences, nor excessively tentative so as to fail to take steps to counter the very real risks that do exist, in keeping with the aims stated by Congress. As I hope was apparent, that effort at balance informed my suggestions as to how we should apply the financial stability factor in our pre-merger reviews under the Bank Holding Company Act. Before concluding, I want to make one final reference to antitrust law. As you know, the evolution of antitrust in recent decades was heavily influenced by the work of academics--specifically, law professors and industrial organization economists. That was due in part, I think to the practice of the Antitrust Division of the Justice Department and the Competition Bureau of the Federal Trade Commission recruiting so many present and future academics to work in those agencies for a few years. Indeed, quite a few heads of the Antitrust Division and the FTC were themselves academics, often law professors. The result was a cross-pollination of theoretical advances and institutionally grounded knowledge that is unusual, if not unique in regulatory areas. While it may be difficult to replicate this pattern in the nascent field of financial stability regulation, there is ample room--and need--for some version of this cross-pollination. Issues such as those I have discussed today can only profit from an academic perspective, informed by practical and institutional considerations. Obviously, I am standing this afternoon in front of an almost ideal audience to provide that perspective, and I look forward to hearing your lectures in the future. 1.For example, the Garn-St. Germain Act of 1982, P.L. 97-320; 96 Stat. 1469, authorized banks to offer a deposit account with deregulated interest rates, and the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking & Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, P.L. 103-328; 108 Stat. 2338, substantially liberalized restrictions on interstate banking.Return to text 2.Section 108 of Gramm-Leach-Bliley did mention financial stability, but in the context of requiring a study of potential subordinated debt requirements for large insured depository institutions and bank holding companies whose failure could adversely affect financial stability.Return to text 3.DFA § 619.Return to text 4.DFA § 622, adding Section 14 to the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841 et seq.).Return to text 5.DFA §604(b), amending §5(c)(2) of the Banking Holding Company Act.Return to text 6.Section 731, amending Commodities Exchange Act by adding new Section 4s--this is §4s(e)(3)(A).Return to text 7.Others include the authority granted the SEC to require reporting of certain information by hedge funds (§ 404) and the creation of a new Federal Insurance Office, which is charged with "identifying issues or gaps in the regulation of insurance that could contribute to a systemic crisis in the insurance industry or the United States financial system." 31 USC 313 (c)(1)(A), as added by DFA §502.Return to text 8.There are ten voting members and five non-voting members. The voting members are the Secretary of the Treasury, who serves as the Chairperson of the FSOC; the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; the Comptroller of the Currency; the Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission; the Chairperson of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; the Chairperson of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission; the Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency; the Chairman of the National Credit Union Administration Board; and an independent member with insurance expertise. The non-voting members are the Director of the OFR, the Director of the Federal Insurance Office, a state insurance commissioner selected by the state insurance commissioners, a state banking supervisor chosen by the state banking supervisors, and a state securities commissioner designated by the state securities supervisors.Return to text 9.DFA §120. The FSOC is also required to issue an annual report to Congress assessing the impact of market and regulatory developments on, and threats to, the financial stability of the United States. DFA§ 112(a)(2)(N).Return to text 10.DFA §153 (a).Return to text 11.DFA §111(2)(N) and §153(d).Return to text 12.DFA §113(C)(1).Return to text 13.DFA § 113(a)(2)(K).Return to text 14.DFA §803 (6).Return to text 15.For financial market utilities, unlike nonbank financial firms, the likelihood of becoming systemically important is enough to authorize designation. DFA §804 (a)(1). This same provision allows designation of "payment, clearing, or settlement activities," presumably regardless of who conducts those activities.Return to text 16.DFA §805.Return to text 17.DFA §803 (9).Return to text 18.U.S. Department of the Treasury (2012). "Financial Stability Oversight Council Makes First Designations in Effort to Protect Against Future Financial Crises," press release, July 18.Return to text 19.DFA §121(a).Return to text 20.DFA §173.Return to text 21.The two dealing with the acquisition of merger of banks simply require that each factor be "taken into consideration," whereas the provision for acquisition of nonbanks requires consideration of the factors in the context of a determination of whether the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that outweigh possible adverse effects."12 USC 1843(j)(2)(A). Somewhat confusingly, and a bit unaccountably, the wording of the financial stability factor also differs. In the Bank Holding Company §4(j)(2)(A) and Bank Merger Act lists, the new factor is simply "risk to the stability of the United States banking or financial system." In the Bank Holding Company Act §3(c)list, the factor is "greater or more concentrated risks to the stability of the United States banking or financial system." While the import of this different wording does not seem great, it is unclear why it was chosen in this provision and not in the Bank Merger Act, which also covers bank acquisitions.Return to text 22.Office of Financial Research, U.S. Department of the Treasury,2012 Annual Report (PDF)(Washington: Office of Financial Research), p. 1.Return to text 23.Office of Financial Research,2012 Annual Report, p. 16.Return to text 24.Some representative examples include: Markus Brunnermeir, Andrew Crocket, Charles Goodhart, Avinash D. Persaud, and Hyun Shin (2009), "The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation," Geneva Reports on the World Economy 11 (Geneva, Switzerland: International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, June); Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick (2010), "Regulating the Shadow Banking System," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, Fall), pp. 261-297; Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (2012), "Neglected Risks, Financial Innovation, and Financial Fragility,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 104, issue 3, pp. 452-468; Perry Mehrling (2011),The New Lombard Street(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press); Jean Tirole (2011), "Illiquidity and All Its Friends,"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 49, issue 2, pp. 287-325.Return to text 25.15 U.S.C. §1.Return to text 26.See, e.g., United States v. Trans-Missouri Freight Assn., 166 U.S. 290 (1897).Return to text 27.Section 165 (b)(3) adds two additional considerations: 1) whether the firm owns an insured depository institution and 2) the nonfinancial activities and affiliations of the firm.Return to text 28.For example, if the loss to the financial system from the failure of a systemically important firm would be five times that resulting from failure of the non-systemic firm, then the firm would have to hold additional capital sufficient to make the expected probability of failure one-fifth that of the non-systemic institution.Return to text 29.Among the useful efforts along these lines are a measure of Conditional Value-at-Risk (CoVaR) (See Tobias Adrian and Markus Brunnermeier (2011),CoVaR (PDF), Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 348 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September) and a measure of systemic risk based on each firm's contribution to the expected capital shortfall of the entire financial system in a crisis (See Christian T. Brownlees and Robert F. Engle (2011), "Volatility, Correlation and Tails for Systemic Risk Measurement," New York University Working Paper (New York: New York University, June). The concept behind the latter measure is also described in Viral V. Acharya, Christian Brownlees, Farhang Farazmand, and Matthew Richardson, "Measuring Systemic Risk,," inRegulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New Architecture of Global Finance(Wiley Publishers, 2011), pp. 87-119. Updated systemic risk rankings are maintained by the authors at http://vlab.stern.ny.edu. A helpful review of the efforts to measure systemic risk is Monica Billio, Mila Getmansky, Andrew W. Lo, and Loriana Pelizzon (2010), "Measuring Systemic Risk in the Finance and Insurance Sectors," MIT Sloan School Working Paper 4774-10 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Sloan School of Management, March).Return to text 30.It is worth noting, in this regard, that in developing systemic risk capital requirements one early idea was to construct a continuously varying function for calculating a systemic risk surcharge. That is, a formula for calculating a firm's "systemic footprint" based on relevant characteristics such as size of assets, liabilities, counterparty exposures, and the like would yield a specific capital surcharge for each firm with more than $50 billion in assets. While the difficulties with this approach went beyond the false precision that it would have given the surcharge, that was certainly one consideration in declining to adopt this approach.Return to text 31.Another important provision requiring interpretation of financial stability as a legal standard is the designation of systemically important nonbank institutions by the FSOC. As noted earlier, this is an instance in which an evaluation of financial stability effects is the direct test for action. In implementing this authority the FSOC took a methodical, comparative approach. Details can be found in Financial Stability Oversight Council (2012), "Authority to Require Supervision and Regulation of Certain Nonbank Financial Companies," Federal Register, vol. 77 (April 11), pp. 21637. In the first stage of the process it has established, the FSOC applies a purely quantitative screen in order to identify nonbank financial companies that merit further consideration. In Stage 2, the Council conducts an in-depth analysis of each firm that has been identified through the Stage 1 screens, based on information that is either publicly available or already in the possession of financial regulators. After this analysis is complete, firms that the Council believes merit further consideration will be moved into Stage 3, during which information will also be collected directly from the firms. On the basis of this review, the Council may vote by the necessary two-thirds majority to designate the firm as systemically important. The Council has also elaborated, in general terms, the conditions under which it would determine that a "threat to financial stability" may exist and the transmission channels through which distress at a firm could affect the broader economy. What is noteworthy for my purposes today--beyond the elaborate nature of this exercise--is that ultimately the FSOC will make each determination on a very company-specific basis, with attention to the particular risks posed by each individual company. Indeed, recognizing that the assessment of different kinds of financial firms may require varying analytic frameworks, the FSOC has segmented its work. So, for example, it will consider asset managers and hedge funds separately from other forms of financial intermediaries.Return to text 32.In fact, of course, the antitrust agencies and the courts have over the years given greater or lesser weight to possible efficiencies resulting from a merger, thereby introducing a consideration other than competition as such.Return to text 33.As noted earlier, the two governing provisions in the Bank Holding Company Act differ somewhat. For the present purpose of discussing financial stability analysis, however, we need not dwell on these differences.Return to text 34.The HHI is calculated by squaring the market share of each firm in a particular market and then adding those squared market shares. The antitrust agencies have specified the relative level of scrutiny that can be expected from particular combinations of changes in, and post-merger HHIs, although they are careful to point out that HHI is not a "rigid screen." U.S. Department of Justice, Horizontal Merger Guidelines §5.3 (Aug. 19, 2009).Return to text 35.In the Wells-Wachovia and JPMorgan-Washington Mutual cases, concerns about the impact of Wachovia's failure on the Deposit Insurance Fund may also have played a role.Return to text 36.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Capital One Financial Corporation, McLean, Virginia,Order Approving the Acquisition of a Savings Association and Nonbanking Subsidiaries (PDF), FRB Order No. 2012-2 (Feb. 14, 2012) at p. 28.Return to text 37.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Order Approving Acquisition, pp. 28-29.Return to text 38.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Order Approving Acquisition, p. 30.Return to text 39.There are eight U.S. banks on this list, as well as many foreign-based firms with significant U.S. operations. However, the buckets to which they will be assigned will not be finalized under more up-to-date data is available and analyzed next year. Once final agreement has been reached by the Basel Committee, ordering the systemically important banks into categories with progressively increasing surcharges, the Federal Reserve Board intends to propose matching provisions for covered U.S. banks under its Section 165 authority. In conducting our annual reviews of the capital levels and planning processes of major U.S. bank holding companies, we have already instructed the eight firms on the Basel Committee list to include their estimated required surcharge in their plan for reaching their ultimate capital requirement.Return to text 40.The Basel Committee has not yet completed its work on this initiative. Its proposal has been published in Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Consultative Document on a Framework for Dealing with Domestic Systemically Important Banks (June 2012). The proposal is that national authorities would designate these institutions (as compared to the global systemically important banks, which are to be designated by the Basel Committee itself), and that the nature of the enhanced loss absorbency for any such institutions also be left to national discretion (as compared to the global systemically important banks, for which capital surcharges are to be required and their amounts specified by the Basel Committee).Return to text 41.A paper by Katharina Pistor explains how the regulatory implications of three different theories of financial stability would differ. Katharina Pistor (2012), "On the Theoretical Foundations for Regulating Financial Markets," Columbia Law School Public Law & Legal Theory Working Paper 12-304, June.Return to text 42.Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), "Shadow Banking After the Financial Crisis," remarks delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Conference on Challenges in Global Finance, San Francisco, California, June 12.Return to text 43.Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner (2012), letter to members of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, September 27.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Economic Club of Indiana, Indianapolis, Indiana Good afternoon. I am pleased to be able to join the Economic Club of Indiana for lunch today. I note that the mission of the club is "to promote an interest in, and enlighten its membership on, important governmental, economic and social issues." I hope my remarks today will meet that standard. Before diving in, I'd like to thank my former colleague at the White House, Al Hubbard, for helping to make this event possible. As the head of the National Economic Council under President Bush, Al had the difficult task of making sure that diverse perspectives on economic policy issues were given a fair hearing before recommendations went to the President. Al had to be a combination of economist, political guru, diplomat, and traffic cop, and he handled it with great skill. My topic today is "Five Questions about the Federal Reserve and Monetary Policy." I have used a question-and-answer format in talks before, and I know from much experience that people are eager to know more about the Federal Reserve, what we do, and why we do it. And that interest is even broader than one might think. I'm a baseball fan, and I was excited to be invited to a recent batting practice of the playoff-bound Washington Nationals. I was introduced to one of the team's star players, but before I could press my questions on some fine points of baseball strategy, he asked, "So, what's the scoop on quantitative easing?" So, for that player, for club members and guests here today, and for anyone else curious about the Federal Reserve and monetary policy, I will ask and answer these five questions: What Are the Fed's Objectives, and How Is It Trying to Meet Them?The first question on my list concerns the Federal Reserve's objectives and the tools it has to try to meet them. As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve is charged with promoting a healthy economy--broadly speaking, an economy with low unemployment, low and stable inflation, and a financial system that meets the economy's needs for credit and other services and that is not itself a source of instability. We pursue these goals through a variety of means. Together with other federal supervisory agencies, we oversee banks and other financial institutions. We monitor the financial system as a whole for possible risks to its stability. We encourage financial and economic literacy, promote equal access to credit, and advance local economic development by working with communities, nonprofit organizations, and others around the country. We also provide some basic services to the financial sector--for example, by processing payments and distributing currency and coin to banks. But today I want to focus on a role that is particularly identified with the Federal Reserve--the making of monetary policy. The goals of monetary policy--maximum employment and price stability--are given to us by the Congress. These goals mean, basically, that we would like to see as many Americans as possible who want jobs to have jobs, and that we aim to keep the rate of increase in consumer prices low and stable. In normal circumstances, the Federal Reserve implements monetary policy through its influence on short-term interest rates, which in turn affect other interest rates and asset prices.1Generally, if economic weakness is the primary concern, the Fed acts to reduce interest rates, which supports the economy by inducing businesses to invest more in new capital goods and by leading households to spend more on houses, autos, and other goods and services. Likewise, if the economy is overheating, the Fed can raise interest rates to help cool total demand and constrain inflationary pressures. Following this standard approach, the Fed cut short-term interest rates rapidly during the financial crisis, reducing them to nearly zero by the end of 2008--a time when the economy was contracting sharply. At that point, however, we faced a real challenge: Once at zero, the short-term interest rate could not be cut further, so our traditional policy tool for dealing with economic weakness was no longer available. Yet, with unemployment soaring, the economy and job market clearly needed more support. Central banks around the world found themselves in a similar predicament. We asked ourselves, "What do we do now?" To answer this question, we could draw on the experience of Japan, where short-term interest rates have been near zero for many years, as well as a good deal of academic work. Unable to reduce short-term interest rates further, we looked instead for ways to influence longer-term interest rates, which remained well above zero. We reasoned that, as with traditional monetary policy, bringing down longer-term rates should support economic growth and employment by lowering the cost of borrowing to buy homes and cars or to finance capital investments. Since 2008, we've used two types of less-traditional monetary policy tools to bring down longer-term rates. The first of these less-traditional tools involves the Fed purchasing longer-term securities on the open market--principally Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by government-sponsored enterprises such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The Fed's purchases reduce the amount of longer-term securities held by investors and put downward pressure on the interest rates on those securities. That downward pressure transmits to a wide range of interest rates that individuals and businesses pay. For example, when the Fed first announced purchases of mortgage-backed securities in late 2008, 30-year mortgage interest rates averaged a little above 6percent; today they average about 3-1/2 percent. Lower mortgage rates are one reason for the improvement we have been seeing in the housing market, which in turn is benefiting the economy more broadly. Other important interest rates, such as corporate bond rates and rates on auto loans, have also come down. Lower interest rates also put upward pressure on the prices of assets, such as stocks and homes, providing further impetus to household and business spending. The second monetary policy tool we have been using involves communicating our expectations for how long the short-term interest rate will remain exceptionally low. Because the yield on, say, a five-year security embeds market expectations for the course of short-term rates over the next five years, convincing investors that we will keep the short-term rate low for a longer time can help to pull down market-determined longer-term rates. In sum, the Fed's basic strategy for strengthening the economy--reducing interest rates and easing financial conditions more generally--is the same as it has always been. The difference is that, with the short-term interest rate nearly at zero, we have shifted to tools aimed at reducing longer-term interest rates more directly. Last month, my colleagues and I used both tools--securities purchases and communications about our future actions--in a coordinated way to further support the recovery and the job market. Why did we act? Though the economy has been growing since mid-2009 and we expect it to continue to expand, it simply has not been growing fast enough recently to make significant progress in bringing down unemployment. At 8.1 percent, the unemployment rate is nearly unchanged since the beginning of the year and is well above normal levels. While unemployment has been stubbornly high, our economy has enjoyed broad price stability for some time, and we expect inflation to remain low for the foreseeable future. So the case seemed clear to most of my colleagues that we could do more to assist economic growth and the job market without compromising our goal of price stability. Specifically, what did we do? On securities purchases, we announced that we would buy mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by the government-sponsored enterprises at a rate of $40 billion per month. Those purchases, along with the continuation of a previous program involving Treasury securities, mean we are buying $85 billion of longer-term securities per month through the end of the year. We expect these purchases to put further downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, including mortgage rates. To underline the Federal Reserve's commitment to fostering a sustainable economic recovery, we said that we would continue securities purchases and employ other policy tools until the outlook for the job market improves substantially in a context of price stability. In the category of communications policy, we also extended our estimate of how long we expect to keep the short-term interest rate at exceptionally low levels to at least mid-2015. That doesn't mean that we expect the economy to be weak through 2015. Rather, our message was that, so long as price stability is preserved, we will take care not to raise rates prematurely. Specifically, we expect that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economy strengthens. We hope that, by clarifying our expectations about future policy, we can provide individuals, families, businesses, and financial markets greater confidence about the Federal Reserve's commitment to promoting a sustainable recovery and that, as a result, they will become more willing to invest, hire and spend. Now, as I have said many times, monetary policy is no panacea. It can be used to support stronger economic growth in situations in which, as today, the economy is not making full use of its resources, and it can foster a healthier economy in the longer term by maintaining low and stable inflation. However, many other steps could be taken to strengthen our economy over time, such as putting the federal budget on a sustainable path, reforming the tax code, improving our educational system, supporting technological innovation, and expanding international trade. Although monetary policy cannot cure the economy's ills, particularly in today's challenging circumstances, we do think it can provide meaningful help. So we at the Federal Reserve are going to do what we can do and trust that others, in both the public and private sectors, will do what they can as well. What's the Relationship between Monetary Policy and Fiscal Policy?That brings me to the second question: What's the relationship between monetary policy and fiscal policy? To answer this question, it may help to begin with the more basic question of how monetary and fiscal policy differ. In short, monetary policy and fiscal policy involve quite different sets of actors, decisions, and tools. Fiscal policy involves decisions about how much the government should spend, how much it should tax, and how much it should borrow. At the federal level, those decisions are made by the Administration and the Congress. Fiscal policy determines the size of the federal budget deficit, which is the difference between federal spending and revenues in a year. Borrowing to finance budget deficits increases the government's total outstanding debt. As I have discussed, monetary policy is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve--or, more specifically, the Federal Open Market Committee, which includes members of the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors and presidents of Federal Reserve Banks. Unlike fiscal policy, monetary policy does not involve any taxation, transfer payments, or purchases of goods and services. Instead, as I mentioned, monetary policy mainly involves the purchase and sale of securities. The securities that the Fed purchases in the conduct of monetary policy are held in our portfolio and earn interest. The great bulk of these interest earnings is sent to the Treasury, thereby helping reduce the government deficit. In the past three years, the Fed remitted $200 billion to the federal government. Ultimately, the securities held by the Fed will mature or will be sold back into the market. So the odds are high that the purchase programs that the Fed has undertaken in support of the recovery will end up reducing, not increasing, the federal debt, both through the interest earnings we send the Treasury and because a stronger economy tends to lead to higher tax revenues and reduced government spending (on unemployment benefits, for example). Even though our activities are likely to result in a lower national debt over the long term, I sometimes hear the complaint that the Federal Reserve is enabling bad fiscal policy by keeping interest rates very low and thereby making it cheaper for the federal government to borrow. I find this argument unpersuasive. The responsibility for fiscal policy lies squarely with the Administration and the Congress. At the Federal Reserve, we implement policy to promote maximum employment and price stability, as the law under which we operate requires. Using monetary policy to try to influence the political debate on the budget would be highly inappropriate. For what it's worth, I think the strategy would also likely be ineffective: Suppose, notwithstanding our legal mandate, the Federal Reserve were to raise interest rates for the purpose of making it more expensive for the government to borrow. Such an action would substantially increase the deficit, not only because of higher interest rates, but also because the weaker recovery that would result from premature monetary tightening would further widen the gap between spending and revenues. Would such a step lead to better fiscal outcomes? It seems likely that a significant widening of the deficit--which would make the needed fiscal actions even more difficult and painful--would worsen rather than improve the prospects for a comprehensive fiscal solution. I certainly don't underestimate the challenges that fiscal policymakers face. They must find ways to put the federal budget on a sustainable path, but not so abruptly as to endanger the economic recovery in the near term. In particular, the Congress and the Administration will soon have to address the so-called fiscal cliff, a combination of sharply higher taxes and reduced spending that is set to happen at the beginning of the year. According to the Congressional Budget Office and virtually all other experts, if that were allowed to occur, it would likely throw the economy back into recession. The Congress and the Administration will also have to raise the debt ceiling to prevent the Treasury from defaulting on its obligations, an outcome that would have extremely negative consequences for the country for years to come. Achieving these fiscal goals would be even more difficult if monetary policy were not helping support the economic recovery. What Is the Risk that the Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Will Lead to Inflation?A third question, and an important one, is whether the Federal Reserve's monetary policy will lead to higher inflation down the road. In response, I will start by pointing out that the Federal Reserve's price stability record is excellent, and we are fully committed to maintaining it. Inflation has averaged close to 2 percent per year for several decades, and that's about where it is today. In particular, the low interest rate policies the Fed has been following for about five years now have not led to increased inflation. Moreover, according to a variety of measures, the public's expectations of inflation over the long run remain quite stable within the range that they have been for many years. With monetary policy being so accommodative now, though, it is not unreasonable to ask whether we are sowing the seeds of future inflation. A related question I sometimes hear--which bears also on the relationship between monetary and fiscal policy, is this: By buying securities, are you "monetizing the debt"--printing money for the government to use--and will that inevitably lead to higher inflation? No, that's not what is happening, and that will not happen. Monetizing the debt means using money creation as a permanent source of financing for government spending. In contrast, we are acquiring Treasury securities on the open market and only on a temporary basis, with the goal of supporting the economic recovery through lower interest rates. At the appropriate time, the Federal Reserve will gradually sell these securities or let them mature, as needed, to return its balance sheet to a more normal size. Moreover, the way the Fed finances its securities purchases is by creating reserves in the banking system. Increased bank reserves held at the Fed don't necessarily translate into more money or cash in circulation, and, indeed, broad measures of the supply of money have not grown especially quickly, on balance, over the past few years. For controlling inflation, the key question is whether the Federal Reserve has the policy tools to tighten monetary conditions at the appropriate time so as to prevent the emergence of inflationary pressures down the road. I'm confident that we have the necessary tools to withdraw policy accommodation when needed, and that we can do so in a way that allows us to shrink our balance sheet in a deliberate and orderly way. For example, the Fed can tighten policy, even if our balance sheet remains large, by increasing the interest rate we pay banks on reserve balances they deposit at the Fed. Because banks will not lend at rates lower than what they can earn at the Fed, such an action should serve to raise rates and tighten credit conditions more generally, preventing any tendency toward overheating in the economy. Of course, having effective tools is one thing; using them in a timely way, neither too early nor too late, is another. Determining precisely the right time to "take away the punch bowl" is always a challenge for central bankers, but that is true whether they are using traditional or nontraditional policy tools. I can assure you that my colleagues and I will carefully consider how best to foster both of our mandated objectives, maximum employment and price stability, when the time comes to make these decisions. How Does the Fed's Monetary Policy Affect Savers and Investors?The concern about possible inflation is a concern about the future. One concern in the here and now is about the effect of low interest rates on savers and investors. My colleagues and I know that people who rely on investments that pay a fixed interest rate, such as certificates of deposit, are receiving very low returns, a situation that has involved significant hardship for some. However, I would encourage you to remember that the current low levels of interest rates, while in the first instance a reflection of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy, are in a larger sense the result of the recent financial crisis, the worst shock to this nation's financial system since the 1930s. Interest rates are low throughout the developed world, except in countries experiencing fiscal crises, as central banks and other policymakers try to cope with continuing financial strains and weak economic conditions. A second observation is that savers often wear many economic hats. Many savers are also homeowners; indeed, a family's home may be its most important financial asset. Many savers are working, or would like to be. Some savers own businesses, and--through pension funds and 401(k) accounts--they often own stocks and other assets. The crisis and recession have led to very low interest rates, it is true, but these events have also destroyed jobs, hamstrung economic growth, and led to sharp declines in the values of many homes and businesses. What can be done to address all of these concerns simultaneously? The best and most comprehensive solution is to find ways to a stronger economy. Only a strong economy can create higher asset values and sustainably good returns for savers. And only a strong economy will allow people who need jobs to find them. Without a job, it is difficult to save for retirement or to buy a home or to pay for an education, irrespective of the current level of interest rates. The way for the Fed to support a return to a strong economy is by maintaining monetary accommodation, which requires low interest rates for a time. If, in contrast, the Fed were to raise rates now, before the economic recovery is fully entrenched, house prices might resume declines, the values of businesses large and small would drop, and, critically, unemployment would likely start to rise again. Such outcomes would ultimately not be good for savers or anyone else. How Is the Federal Reserve Held Accountable in a Democratic Society?I will turn, finally, to the question of how the Federal Reserve is held accountable in a democratic society. The Federal Reserve was created by the Congress, now almost a century ago. In the Federal Reserve Act and subsequent legislation, the Congress laid out the central bank's goals and powers, and the Fed is responsible to the Congress for meeting its mandated objectives, including fostering maximum employment and price stability. At the same time, the Congress wisely designed the Federal Reserve to be insulated from short-term political pressures. For example, members of the Federal Reserve Board are appointed to staggered, 14-year terms, with the result that some members may serve through several Administrations. Research and practical experience have established that freeing the central bank from short-term political pressures leads to better monetary policy because it allows policymakers to focus on what is best for the economy in the longer run, independently of near-term electoral or partisan concerns. All of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee take this principle very seriously and strive always to make monetary policy decisions based solely on factual evidence and careful analysis. It is important to keep politics out of monetary policy decisions, but it is equally important, in a democracy, for those decisions--and, indeed, all of the Federal Reserve's decisions and actions--to be undertaken in a strong framework of accountability and transparency. The American people have a right to know how the Federal Reserve is carrying out its responsibilities and how we are using taxpayer resources. One of my principal objectives as Chairman has been to make monetary policy at the Federal Reserve as transparent as possible. We promote policy transparency in many ways. For example, the Federal Open Market Committee explains the reasons for its policy decisions in a statement released after each regularly scheduled meeting, and three weeks later we publish minutes with a detailed summary of the meeting discussion. The Committee also publishes quarterly economic projections with information about where we anticipate both policy and the economy will be headed over the next several years. I hold news conferences four times a year and testify often before congressional committees, including twice-yearly appearances that are specifically designated for the purpose of my presenting a comprehensive monetary policy report to the Congress. My colleagues and I frequently deliver speeches, such as this one, in towns and cities across the country. The Federal Reserve is also very open about its finances and operations. The Federal Reserve Act requires the Federal Reserve to report annually on its operations and to publish its balance sheet weekly. Similarly, under the financial reform law enacted after the financial crisis, we publicly report in detail on our lending programs and securities purchases, including the identities of borrowers and counterparties, amounts lent or purchased, and other information, such as collateral accepted. In late 2010, we posted detailed information on our public website about more than 21,000 individual credit and other transactions conducted to stabilize markets during the financial crisis. And, just last Friday, we posted the first in an ongoing series of quarterly reports providing a great deal of information on individual discount window loans and securities transactions. The Federal Reserve's financial statement is audited by an independent, outside accounting firm, and an independent Inspector General has wide powers to review actions taken by the Board. Importantly, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) has the ability to--and does--oversee the efficiency and integrity of all of our operations, including our financial controls and governance. While the GAO has access to all aspects of the Fed's operations and is free to criticize or make recommendations, there is one important exception: monetary policymaking. In the 1970s, the Congress deliberately excluded monetary policy deliberations, decisions, and actions from the scope of GAO reviews. In doing so, the Congress carefully balanced the need for democratic accountability with the benefits that flow from keeping monetary policy free from short-term political pressures. However, there have been recent proposals to expand the authority of the GAO over the Federal Reserve to include reviews of monetary policy decisions. Because the GAO is the investigative arm of the Congress and GAO reviews may be initiated at the request of members of the Congress, these reviews (or the prospect of reviews) of individual policy decisions could be seen, with good reason, as efforts to bring political pressure to bear on monetary policymakers. A perceived politicization of monetary policy would reduce public confidence in the ability of the Federal Reserve to make its policy decisions based strictly on what is good for the economy in the longer term. Balancing the need for accountability against the goal of insulating monetary policy from short-term political pressure is very important, and I believe that the Congress had it right in the 1970s when it explicitly chose to protect monetary policy decisionmaking from the possibility of politically motivated reviews. ConclusionIn conclusion, I will simply note that these past few years have been a difficult time for the nation and the economy. For its part, the Federal Reserve has also been tested by unprecedented challenges. As we approach next year's 100th anniversary of the signing of the Federal Reserve Act, however, I have great confidence in the institution. In particular, I would like to recognize the skill, professionalism, and dedication of the employees of the Federal Reserve System. They work tirelessly to serve the public interest and to promote prosperity for people and businesses across America. The Fed's policy choices can always be debated, but the quality and commitment of the Federal Reserve as a public institution is second to none, and I am proud to lead it. Now that I've answered questions that I've posed to myself, I'd be happy to respond to yours. 1.The Fed has a number of ways to influence short-term rates; basically, they involve steps to affect the supply, and thus the cost, of short-term funding.Return to text
Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Institute of International Finance Annual Membership Meeting, Tokyo, Japan I greatly appreciate the invitation from the Institute of International Finance to participate in this session on Japan's role in the global economy. Today, I will offer some reflections on factors holding back the recovery in advanced economies, the contribution that emerging Asia can make in boosting global growth, and the challenges facing Japan. We have seen marked differences in the strength of countries' recoveries from the global financial crisis. Most advanced economies are growing very slowly and operating well short of potential. By historical standards, their performance is even more anemic that we would have expected, given the nature of the previous recession. This shortfall likely reflects the unusually limited scope for fiscal stimulus at present, which very accommodative monetary policies have not been able to fully offset. The recovery from the global recession of emerging market economies, especially in Asia, has been more robust, but even these economies are slowing in the face of weak global demand, and they would benefit from further progress toward a more balanced model of growth led by domestic demand. Finally, until its tragic earthquake and tsunami, Japan was also recovering more rapidly than the other advanced economies. But it, too, faces issues with the longer-run sustainability of its debt as well as other structural challenges that need to be addressed. The Weakness of the Recovery in the Advanced EconomiesThe global financial crisis resulted in the most severe worldwide recession since the Great Depression. Historically, such crises tend to leave persistent scars on the real economy, and the current weak recovery in the advanced economies appears to be no exception. Economists at the Federal Reserve Board have added to the growing body of research analyzing recessions and their aftermath, focusing specifically on the factors that determine the pace of recovery once the economy has hit bottom.1They find that recoveries tend to be faster following deeper recessions, but slower following long recessions. Recoveries from recessions associated with housing busts also tend to be unusually weak. This research finds that for the advanced economies--especially Europe and the United States--the growth in output has been somewhat weaker than past history would have suggested, even accounting for the depth and duration of the last downturn. Although monetary policy has been highly accommodative, the pace of fiscal consolidation in Europe and the United States has been much greater during this recovery than is typical following severe recessions. Additionally, in Europe, financial strains have been acute, helping to push the region back into recession. In the United States, spillovers from Europe and a still-depressed housing market also help account for our tepid recovery and elevated unemployment. As I will discuss a bit later, Japan has fared somewhat better, but faces significant challenges of its own. The Role of Emerging AsiaIn contrast to the advanced economies, emerging market economies, particularly in Asia, recovered sharply from the global downturn, in part by using countercyclical fiscal and monetary policies to bolster domestic demand. Based on the research I referred to earlier, the recovery in the Asian economies appears on pace with what we might have expected, given the severity of the previous recession. This swift recovery has not only benefited Asia, but the global economy as well. Lately, however, the momentum in the emerging Asian economies has weakened, in part as their exports to Europe and the United States have slowed. Exports to China from other countries in the region have also weakened, partly because of the unwinding of China's earlier stimulus programs, but also because China's exports to the advanced economies have slowed, thus lowering its demand for imported parts and components. For the moment, emerging Asia is offsetting weakness in external demand through accommodative monetary and fiscal policies. But ultimately, it would be desirable, both for the region and for the global economy, if emerging Asia were able to rely less on temporary policy stimulus and more on a fundamental rebalancing of growth toward domestic demand. To be sure, progress toward rebalancing has already occurred, as evidenced by the substantial reduction in current account surpluses in the region since the onset of the global crisis. However, some of this adjustment likely reflects cyclical factors, and, moreover, the aggregate current account of emerging Asia remains substantially in surplus. Greater reliance on domestic demand would not only help shield Asia's economic growth from the weakness in the advanced economies; it would also boost the well-being of its citizens by enabling them to consume a greater share of the output they produce. Moreover, transforming emerging Asia into an independent engine of global growth would put the global economy on a much surer footing, thus helping to achieve the Group of Twenty nations' commitment to strong, sustainable, and balanced growth. What about Japan?Finally, I would like to turn to Japan, whose experience combines elements of both its emerging Asian neighbors and of other advanced economies. Like other Asian economies, Japan shares a history of current account surpluses and export-dependent growth. Also like other Asian economies, the Japanese economy bounced back faster from the global financial crisis, at least prior to its tragic earthquake and tsunami, than most advanced economies, and more robustly than in any Japanese recovery since the mid-1970s. Strong exports to the rest of Asia supported this rebound. However, Japan has not been immune to the slowdown in trade affecting the region. Japanese exports have flattened out since about the middle of 2010, contributing to a negative trade balance for the first time since 1980. Like its neighbors, Japan will need to look for alternative engines of growth. Notwithstanding its similarities to emerging Asia, the Japanese economy faces fiscal and demographic challenges similar to those of other advanced economies in Europe and the United States. Japanese government spending helped propel the economy's bounceback from recession, but it has also added to public debt, which the International Monetary Fund now projects will rise to 237 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) this year, the largest among the major advanced economies.2Along with this high debt, aging of the population and slow GDP growth pose important concerns for fiscal sustainability. To date, the savings of Japanese household and firms have been more than enough to finance the government deficit; indeed, interest rates on government debt have fallen to near record lows. Accordingly, Japan, like the United States, has the scope to carry out fiscal consolidation plans that address long-run sustainability issues without endangering near-term growth prospects. Currently, policymakers in both Japan and the United States face the challenge of designing policies that provide a credible commitment to medium-term deficit reduction without disrupting the fragile recovery. But once in place, such policies should help reduce uncertainty and boost household and business confidence. Japan would also benefit from measures to increase its potential growth, which is generally estimated to have fallen to less than 1 percent and could decline further as population aging progresses. It is widely believed that easing regulations could promote faster productivity growth, particularly in the services sector. Declines in the working-age population also make it desirable to boost labor force participation. Higher employment and faster productivity gains would help to boost economic activity, enhance fiscal sustainability, and restore Japan's contributions to global economic growth. ConclusionGrowth in the advanced economies is still hampered by critical challenges and full recovery is likely to take several years. Emerging market economies, particularly in Asia, have performed better, but both they and the global economy more generally would benefit by further rebalancing of their growth toward domestic demand. Japan initially bounced back more quickly than other advanced economies from the global financial crisis, but its growth has slowed recently, and it also faces serious fiscal and structural challenges. By addressing these challenges, Japan can enhance its long-term prospects and continue to play a leading role in Asia and the global economy. 1.See Greg Howard, Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2011), "Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different?" International Finance Discussion Papers 1037 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).Return to text 2.See International Monetary Fund (2012), "Taking Stock: A Progress Report on Fiscal Adjustment," World Economic and Financial Surveys,Fiscal Monitor,Table 3: General Government Debt, 2008-13, p. 17 (Washington: IMF, October).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from August 13 through September 10, 2012. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 12-13, 2012. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the September 12-13, 2012 meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on a quarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 12-13, 2012:HTML|PDF
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the "Challenges of the Global Financial System: Risks and Governance under Evolving Globalization," A High-Level Seminar sponsored by Bank of Japan-International Monetary Fund, Tokyo, Japan Thank you. It is a pleasure to be here. This morning I will first briefly review the U.S. and global economic outlook. I will then discuss the basic rationale underlying the Federal Reserve's recent policy decisions and place these actions in an international context. U.S. and Global OutlookThe U.S. economy has faced significant headwinds, and, although the economy has been expanding since mid-2009, the pace of our recovery has been frustratingly slow. The headwinds include the effects of deleveraging by households, the still-weak U.S. housing market, tight credit conditions in some sectors, spillovers from the situation in Europe, fiscal contraction at all levels of government, and concerns about the medium-term U.S. fiscal outlook. In this environment, households and businesses have been quite cautious in increasing spending. Accordingly, the pace of economic growth has been insufficient to support significant improvement in the job market; indeed, the unemployment rate, at 7.8 percent, is well above what we judge to be its long-run normal level. With large and persistent margins of resource slack, U.S. inflation has generally been subdued despite periodic fluctuations in commodity prices. Consumer price inflation is running somewhat below the Federal Reserve's 2 percent longer-run objective, and survey- and market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained well anchored. The global economic outlook also presents many challenges, as you know. Fiscal and financial strains have pushed Europe back into recession. Japan's economy is recovering from last year's tragic earthquake and tsunami, and it continues to struggle with deflation and persistent weak demand. And in the emerging market economies, the rapid snap-back from the global financial crisis has given way to slower growth in the face of weak export demand from the advanced economies. The soft tone of global activity is yet another headwind for the U.S. economy. Looking ahead, economic projections of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants prepared for the Committee's September meeting called for the economic recovery to proceed at a moderate pace in coming quarters, with the unemployment rate declining only gradually. FOMC participants generally expected that inflation was likely to run at or below the Committee's inflation goal of 2 percent over the next few years. The Committee also judged that there were significant downside risks to this outlook, importantly including the potential for an intensification of strains in Europe and an associated slowing in global growth. Federal Reserve's Recent Policy ActionsAll of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy decisions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices. With the disappointing progress in job markets and with inflation pressures remaining subdued, the FOMC has taken several important steps this year to provide additional policy accommodation. In January, the Committee noted that it anticipated that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate at least through late 2014--a year and a half later than in previous statements. In June, policymakers decided to continue through year-end the maturity extension program (MEP), under which the Federal Reserve purchases long-term Treasury securities and sells short-term ones to help depress long-term yields. At its September meeting, with the data continuing to signal weak labor markets and no signs of significant inflation pressures, the FOMC decided to take several additional steps to provide policy accommodation. It extended the period over which it expects to maintain exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate from late 2014 to mid-2015. Moreover, the Committee clarified that it expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy for a considerable period after the economic recovery strengthens. The FOMC coupled these changes in forward guidance with additional asset purchases, announcing that it will purchase agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at a pace of $40 billion per month, on top of the $45 billion in monthly purchases of long-term Treasury securities planned for the remainder of this year under the MEP. The FOMC also indicated that it would continue to purchase agency MBS, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ other tools as appropriate until the outlook for the labor market improves substantially in a context of price stability. The open-ended nature of these new asset purchases, together with their explicit conditioning on improvements in labor market conditions, will provide the Committee with flexibility in responding to economic developments and instill greater public confidence that the Federal Reserve will take the actions necessary to foster a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. An easing in financial conditions and greater public confidence should help promote more rapid economic growth and faster job gains over coming quarters. As I have said many times, however, monetary policy is not a panacea. Although we expect our policies to provide meaningful help to the economy, the most effective approach would combine a range of economic policies and tackle longer-term fiscal and structural issues as well as the near-term shortfall in aggregate demand. Moreover, we recognize that unconventional monetary policies come with possible risks and costs; accordingly, the Federal Reserve has generally employed a high hurdle for using these tools and carefully weighs the costs and benefits of any proposed policy action. International Aspects of Federal Reserve Asset PurchasesAlthough the monetary accommodation we are providing is playing a critical role in supporting the U.S. economy, concerns have been raised about the spillover effects of our policies on our trading partners. In particular, some critics have argued that the Fed's asset purchases, and accommodative monetary policy more generally, encourage capital flows to emerging market economies. These capital flows are said to cause undesirable currency appreciation, too much liquidity leading to asset bubbles or inflation, or economic disruptions as capital inflows quickly give way to outflows. I am sympathetic to the challenges faced by many economies in a world of volatile international capital flows. And, to be sure, highly accommodative monetary policies in the United States, as well as in other advanced economies, shift interest rate differentials in favor of emerging markets and thus probably contribute to private capital flows to these markets. I would argue, though, that it is not at all clear that accommodative policies in advanced economies impose net costs on emerging market economies, for several reasons. First, the linkage between advanced-economy monetary policies and international capital flows is looser than is sometimes asserted. Even in normal times, differences in growth prospects among countries--and the resulting differences in expected returns--are the most important determinant of capital flows. The rebound in emerging market economies from the global financial crisis, even as the advanced economies remained weak, provided still greater encouragement to these flows. Another important determinant of capital flows is the appetite for risk by global investors. Over the past few years, swings in investor sentiment between "risk-on" and "risk-off," often in response to developments in Europe, have led to corresponding swings in capital flows. All told, recent research, including studies by the International Monetary Fund, does not support the view that advanced-economy monetary policies are the dominant factor behind emerging market capital flows.1Consistent with such findings, these flows have diminished in the past couple of years or so, even as monetary policies in advanced economies have continued to ease and longer-term interest rates in those economies have continued to decline. Second, the effects of capital inflows, whatever their cause, on emerging market economies are not predetermined, but instead depend greatly on the choices made by policymakers in those economies. In some emerging markets, policymakers have chosen to systematically resist currency appreciation as a means of promoting exports and domestic growth. However, the perceived benefits of currency management inevitably come with costs, including reduced monetary independence and the consequent susceptibility to imported inflation. In other words, the perceived advantages of undervaluation and the problem of unwanted capital inflows must be understood as a package--you can't have one without the other. Of course, an alternative strategy--one consistent with classical principles of international adjustment--is to refrain from intervening in foreign exchange markets, thereby allowing the currency to rise and helping insulate the financial system from external pressures. Under a flexible exchange-rate regime, a fully independent monetary policy, together with fiscal policy as needed, would be available to help counteract any adverse effects of currency appreciation on growth. The resultant rebalancing from external to domestic demand would not only preserve near-term growth in the emerging market economies while supporting recovery in the advanced economies, it would redound to everyone's benefit in the long run by putting the global economy on a more stable and sustainable path. Finally, any costs for emerging market economies of monetary easing in advanced economies should be set against the very real benefits of those policies. The slowing of growth in the emerging market economies this year in large part reflects their decelerating exports to the United States, Europe, and other advanced economies. Therefore, monetary easing that supports the recovery in the advanced economies should stimulate trade and boost growth in emerging market economies as well. In principle, depreciation of the dollar and other advanced-economy currencies could reduce (although not eliminate) the positive effect on trade and growth in emerging markets. However, since mid-2008, in fact, before the intensification of the financial crisis triggered wide swings in the dollar, the real multilateral value of the dollar has changed little, and it has fallen just a bit against the currencies of the emerging market economies. ConclusionTo conclude, the Federal Reserve is providing additional monetary accommodation to achieve its dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. This policy not only helps strengthen the U.S. economic recovery, but by boosting U.S. spending and growth, it has the effect of helping support the global economy as well. Assessments of the international impact of U.S. monetary policies should give appropriate weight to their beneficial effects on global growth and stability. 1.See, for example, Atish R. Ghosh, Jun Kim, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Juan Zalduendo (2012), "Surges (PDF)," International Monetary Fund Working Paper WP/12/22 (Washington: IMF, January); International Monetary Fund (2011),Recent Experiences in Managing Capital Inflows--Cross-Cutting Themes and Possible Policy Framework(PDF)(Washington: IMF, February); and Kristin J. Forbes and Francis E. Warnock (forthcoming), "Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and Retrenchment,"Journal of International Economics.Return to text