Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examination procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small asset-size threshold are not subject to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for urban wage earners and clerical workers, not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 2.23 percent increase in the CPI index for the period ending in November 2012, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2013. The agencies will publish the adjustments in the Federal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). Federal RegisterNotice:HTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examination procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small asset-size threshold are not subject to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for urban wage earners and clerical workers, not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 2.23 percent increase in the CPI index for the period ending in November 2012, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2013. The agencies will publish the adjustments in the Federal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). Federal RegisterNotice:HTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examination procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small asset-size threshold are not subject to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for urban wage earners and clerical workers, not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 2.23 percent increase in the CPI index for the period ending in November 2012, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2013. The agencies will publish the adjustments in the Federal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). Federal RegisterNotice:HTML|PDF
Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the Global Research Forum, International Finance and Macroecomomics, Sponsored by the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Thanks very much. It's a pleasure to be part of this panel on the future of financial globalization. I will focus my remarks on one important aspect of this issue--namely, the growing use of wholesale dollar funding by global financial institutions. I'll begin by briefly discussing research I've been doing, along with my coauthors Victoria Ivashina and David Scharfstein, which examines some of the consequences of this funding model during times of market stress.1I'll then touch on the policy implications of this and related work. But first, the usual disclaimer: The views that follow are my own and do not necessarily reflect the thinking of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. By way of background, the dollar liabilities of foreign banks have grown rapidly in the past two decades and now stand at about $8 trillion, roughly on par with those of U.S. banks.2A significant proportion of foreign banks' dollar liabilities are raised via U.S. branches, most of which are legally precluded from raising deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The main source of funding for these branches, therefore, comes from uninsured wholesale claims such as large time deposits, making the cost and availability of such dollar funding highly sensitive to changing perceptions of these banks' creditworthiness. In our work, we asked how shocks to the ability of foreign banks to raise dollar funding might lead to changes in their lending. We began with a simple conceptual model: Imagine a European bank that lends in euros to European firms and in dollars to U.S. firms. To finance its euro-denominated lending, it funds itself by issuing insured euro deposits to its local retail deposit base. By contrast, to finance its dollar-denominated lending, it raises funds in the wholesale dollar market. Because the bank's dollar liabilities are uninsured, an adverse shock to the bank's perceived creditworthiness will result in a spike in its dollar funding costs. At the same time, the cost to the bank of funding in euros is unchanged to the extent that its euro deposits are insured. So we might expect such a shock to induce the bank to shift its funding away from the U.S. wholesale market and toward the European deposit market. But what are the consequences of this adjustment, both for the geographic distribution of its lending and for the functioning of foreign exchange (FX) swap markets?3 Note that if the bank wants to maintain the volume of its dollar-based lending, it will have to tap its insured deposit base to raise more euros and then swap these euros into dollars using the FX swap market. However, if the induced funding realignment is big enough, and if arbitrageurs have limited capacity to take the other side of the trade, this large swap demand can cause a breakdown in the usual covered-interest-parity (CIP) relationship--a breakdown of the sort that we have seen during times of extreme market stress. In this case, the direction of the deviation would be such that the cost of synthetic dollar borrowing--in other words, euro borrowing combined with an FX swap--would go up and would approach that of the now-elevated cost of funding directly in the wholesale dollar market. And given that any method of dollar funding--direct or synthetic--has become more expensive relative to euro funding, it then follows that an adverse shock to a global bank's perceived creditworthiness leads to a decline in its dollar-denominated lending relative to its euro-denominated lending. So, two principal effects of the dollar funding shock are intimately connected: a widening of the so-called CIP basis in the FX swap market, and a reduction in credit supply to firms that borrow in dollars.4 To test the model's implications, my coauthors and I focused on events in the second half of 2011, when the credit quality of a number of large euro-area banks became a concern and U.S. prime money market funds sharply reduced their lending to those banks. In a span of four months, the exposure of money funds to euro-area banks fell by half, from about $400 billion in May to about $200 billion in September.5Coincident with this contraction in dollar funding, the CIP basis widened in the direction predicted by our model, increasing the cost of obtaining synthetic dollars via the FX swap market. We used data from the international syndicated loan market to test the model's predictions about the reaction of lending to this type of funding stress. We found that dollar-denominated lending by euro-area banks fell relative to their euro-denominated lending, while this result did not hold for U.S. banks. We also found that, even holding fixed the identity of the borrowing firm, a syndicate formed to make a dollar-denominated loan during this period was less likely to include euro-area banks, while the same was not true of syndicates making euro-denominated loans. Finally, euro-area banks that relied most on funding from U.S. money market funds also cut back most sharply on their dollar-denominated lending.6 This last result is similar to one in recent work by my Fed colleagues Ricardo Correa, Horacio Sapriza, and Andrei Zlate.7They documented that the U.S. branches of foreign banks that experienced the most shrinkage in their dollar-denominated large time deposits--funding that had been mostly provided by money market funds prior to mid-2011--cut their U.S.-based commercial and industrial lending by more than banks that fared better on this score. Taken together, these findings have two types of policy implications: one for central bank responses to dollar funding pressures and another for measures to regulate foreign banking firms that rely heavily on short-term wholesale funding. This analysis underscores that the Federal Reserve's temporary dollar liquidity swap lines with the European Central Bank and other central banks are an effective response to stresses in dollar funding markets. Last week, the FOMC approved the extension of these swap lines through February 1, 2014. These lines have helped avert fire sales of dollar assets and maintain the flow of credit to U.S. households and firms. Although we documented cutbacks in dollar lending in the latter half of 2011 by foreign banks reliant on wholesale dollar funding, those cutbacks likely would have been more pronounced in the absence of the swap lines I will now turn to regulation. It is useful to bear in mind that our current regulatory regime evolved during a period when the U.S. operations of foreign banks were largely net recipients of funding from their parents. However, their reliance on less stable, short-term wholesale funding increased significantly in the decade leading up to the financial crisis, when U.S. branches of foreign banks began borrowing large volumes of dollars to send to their foreign parents. Such activity increases the vulnerabilities I described earlier. And it may not only pose the risk of a cutback in lending, but could also threaten the safety and soundness of the foreign banks themselves--and of the U.S. entities exposed to those banks. The regulation of U.S. branches of foreign banks has changed little over the past decade, even in the face of these significant changes in the global banking landscape. However, last week, the Federal Reserve Board proposed new rules for foreign banking organizations that would address some of the concerns that I've discussed and thereby mitigate the attendant risks to U.S. financial stability. These proposed rules apply enhanced prudential standards to foreign banking organizations and are designed to increase their resiliency. Importantly, the rules will not disadvantage foreign banks relative to domestic U.S. banking firms, but rather the rules seek to maintain a level playing field. To avoid or mitigate potential disruptions in wholesale dollar funding markets, the proposed rules require foreign banking organizations to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to meet expected near-term net outflows in a stress scenario. These rules should reduce the pressure on foreign banks that rely heavily on short-term dollar funding to either sell illiquid dollar assets or cut back on dollar lending in times of financial stress. By helping to alleviate disruptions in dollar funding markets the rules should also reduce the reliance on swap lines in a future stress episode. Finally, the central role played by money market funds in the 2011 episode is a reminder of the fragility of these funds themselves--and of the risk created by their combination of risky asset holdings, stable-value demandable liabilities, and zero-capital buffers. The events following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in 2008 provide even starker evidence of the risks that money market funds pose for the broader financial system. In light of these vulnerabilities, I welcome the recent proposed recommendations by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for further money market fund reforms.8 To conclude: Financial globalization undoubtedly brings with it substantial benefits. At the same time, it creates important challenges for financial stability and for the appropriate design of regulation. The research discussed in conferences such as this one will help us better understand and respond to these challenges. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 1.See Victoria Ivashina, David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein (2012), "Dollar Funding and the Lending Behavior of Global Banks (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Papers 2012-74 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).Return to text 2.For the dollar assets and liabilities of foreign banks, see Bank for International Settlements (2012), "Locational Banking Statistics (PDF)," December. For the assets and liabilities of domestically chartered U.S. banks, seeTable H.8, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 3.A foreign exchange swap is the simultaneous exchange of one currency for another in the spot market and an agreement to reverse this transaction at a later date at a pre-specified exchange rate.Return to text 4.The CIP basis is typically measured as the difference between the interest rate differential embedded in FX swap prices and the differential implied by foreign- and domestic-currency Libor rates.Return to text 5.See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2012), "SEC Releases Money Market Fund Portfolio and ‘Shadow NAV' Information to the Public," press release, January 31.Return to text 6.Money-fund reliance is defined as liabilities held by money funds divided by total short-term debt plus deposits.Return to text 7.See Ricardo Correa, Horacio Sapriza and Andrei Zlate (2012), "Liquidity Shocks, Dollar Funding Costs and the Bank Lending Channel During the European Sovereign Crisis (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 2012-1059 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).Return to text 8.See U.S Department of the Treasury (2012), "Financial Stability Oversight Council Releases Proposed Recommendations for Money Market Mutual Fund Reform," press release, November 13.Return to text
Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the Global Research Forum, International Finance and Macroecomomics, Sponsored by the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Thanks very much. It's a pleasure to be part of this panel on the future of financial globalization. I will focus my remarks on one important aspect of this issue--namely, the growing use of wholesale dollar funding by global financial institutions. I'll begin by briefly discussing research I've been doing, along with my coauthors Victoria Ivashina and David Scharfstein, which examines some of the consequences of this funding model during times of market stress.1I'll then touch on the policy implications of this and related work. But first, the usual disclaimer: The views that follow are my own and do not necessarily reflect the thinking of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. By way of background, the dollar liabilities of foreign banks have grown rapidly in the past two decades and now stand at about $8 trillion, roughly on par with those of U.S. banks.2A significant proportion of foreign banks' dollar liabilities are raised via U.S. branches, most of which are legally precluded from raising deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The main source of funding for these branches, therefore, comes from uninsured wholesale claims such as large time deposits, making the cost and availability of such dollar funding highly sensitive to changing perceptions of these banks' creditworthiness. In our work, we asked how shocks to the ability of foreign banks to raise dollar funding might lead to changes in their lending. We began with a simple conceptual model: Imagine a European bank that lends in euros to European firms and in dollars to U.S. firms. To finance its euro-denominated lending, it funds itself by issuing insured euro deposits to its local retail deposit base. By contrast, to finance its dollar-denominated lending, it raises funds in the wholesale dollar market. Because the bank's dollar liabilities are uninsured, an adverse shock to the bank's perceived creditworthiness will result in a spike in its dollar funding costs. At the same time, the cost to the bank of funding in euros is unchanged to the extent that its euro deposits are insured. So we might expect such a shock to induce the bank to shift its funding away from the U.S. wholesale market and toward the European deposit market. But what are the consequences of this adjustment, both for the geographic distribution of its lending and for the functioning of foreign exchange (FX) swap markets?3 Note that if the bank wants to maintain the volume of its dollar-based lending, it will have to tap its insured deposit base to raise more euros and then swap these euros into dollars using the FX swap market. However, if the induced funding realignment is big enough, and if arbitrageurs have limited capacity to take the other side of the trade, this large swap demand can cause a breakdown in the usual covered-interest-parity (CIP) relationship--a breakdown of the sort that we have seen during times of extreme market stress. In this case, the direction of the deviation would be such that the cost of synthetic dollar borrowing--in other words, euro borrowing combined with an FX swap--would go up and would approach that of the now-elevated cost of funding directly in the wholesale dollar market. And given that any method of dollar funding--direct or synthetic--has become more expensive relative to euro funding, it then follows that an adverse shock to a global bank's perceived creditworthiness leads to a decline in its dollar-denominated lending relative to its euro-denominated lending. So, two principal effects of the dollar funding shock are intimately connected: a widening of the so-called CIP basis in the FX swap market, and a reduction in credit supply to firms that borrow in dollars.4 To test the model's implications, my coauthors and I focused on events in the second half of 2011, when the credit quality of a number of large euro-area banks became a concern and U.S. prime money market funds sharply reduced their lending to those banks. In a span of four months, the exposure of money funds to euro-area banks fell by half, from about $400 billion in May to about $200 billion in September.5Coincident with this contraction in dollar funding, the CIP basis widened in the direction predicted by our model, increasing the cost of obtaining synthetic dollars via the FX swap market. We used data from the international syndicated loan market to test the model's predictions about the reaction of lending to this type of funding stress. We found that dollar-denominated lending by euro-area banks fell relative to their euro-denominated lending, while this result did not hold for U.S. banks. We also found that, even holding fixed the identity of the borrowing firm, a syndicate formed to make a dollar-denominated loan during this period was less likely to include euro-area banks, while the same was not true of syndicates making euro-denominated loans. Finally, euro-area banks that relied most on funding from U.S. money market funds also cut back most sharply on their dollar-denominated lending.6 This last result is similar to one in recent work by my Fed colleagues Ricardo Correa, Horacio Sapriza, and Andrei Zlate.7They documented that the U.S. branches of foreign banks that experienced the most shrinkage in their dollar-denominated large time deposits--funding that had been mostly provided by money market funds prior to mid-2011--cut their U.S.-based commercial and industrial lending by more than banks that fared better on this score. Taken together, these findings have two types of policy implications: one for central bank responses to dollar funding pressures and another for measures to regulate foreign banking firms that rely heavily on short-term wholesale funding. This analysis underscores that the Federal Reserve's temporary dollar liquidity swap lines with the European Central Bank and other central banks are an effective response to stresses in dollar funding markets. Last week, the FOMC approved the extension of these swap lines through February 1, 2014. These lines have helped avert fire sales of dollar assets and maintain the flow of credit to U.S. households and firms. Although we documented cutbacks in dollar lending in the latter half of 2011 by foreign banks reliant on wholesale dollar funding, those cutbacks likely would have been more pronounced in the absence of the swap lines I will now turn to regulation. It is useful to bear in mind that our current regulatory regime evolved during a period when the U.S. operations of foreign banks were largely net recipients of funding from their parents. However, their reliance on less stable, short-term wholesale funding increased significantly in the decade leading up to the financial crisis, when U.S. branches of foreign banks began borrowing large volumes of dollars to send to their foreign parents. Such activity increases the vulnerabilities I described earlier. And it may not only pose the risk of a cutback in lending, but could also threaten the safety and soundness of the foreign banks themselves--and of the U.S. entities exposed to those banks. The regulation of U.S. branches of foreign banks has changed little over the past decade, even in the face of these significant changes in the global banking landscape. However, last week, the Federal Reserve Board proposed new rules for foreign banking organizations that would address some of the concerns that I've discussed and thereby mitigate the attendant risks to U.S. financial stability. These proposed rules apply enhanced prudential standards to foreign banking organizations and are designed to increase their resiliency. Importantly, the rules will not disadvantage foreign banks relative to domestic U.S. banking firms, but rather the rules seek to maintain a level playing field. To avoid or mitigate potential disruptions in wholesale dollar funding markets, the proposed rules require foreign banking organizations to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to meet expected near-term net outflows in a stress scenario. These rules should reduce the pressure on foreign banks that rely heavily on short-term dollar funding to either sell illiquid dollar assets or cut back on dollar lending in times of financial stress. By helping to alleviate disruptions in dollar funding markets the rules should also reduce the reliance on swap lines in a future stress episode. Finally, the central role played by money market funds in the 2011 episode is a reminder of the fragility of these funds themselves--and of the risk created by their combination of risky asset holdings, stable-value demandable liabilities, and zero-capital buffers. The events following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in 2008 provide even starker evidence of the risks that money market funds pose for the broader financial system. In light of these vulnerabilities, I welcome the recent proposed recommendations by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for further money market fund reforms.8 To conclude: Financial globalization undoubtedly brings with it substantial benefits. At the same time, it creates important challenges for financial stability and for the appropriate design of regulation. The research discussed in conferences such as this one will help us better understand and respond to these challenges. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 1.See Victoria Ivashina, David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein (2012), "Dollar Funding and the Lending Behavior of Global Banks (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Papers 2012-74 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).Return to text 2.For the dollar assets and liabilities of foreign banks, see Bank for International Settlements (2012), "Locational Banking Statistics (PDF)," December. For the assets and liabilities of domestically chartered U.S. banks, seeTable H.8, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 3.A foreign exchange swap is the simultaneous exchange of one currency for another in the spot market and an agreement to reverse this transaction at a later date at a pre-specified exchange rate.Return to text 4.The CIP basis is typically measured as the difference between the interest rate differential embedded in FX swap prices and the differential implied by foreign- and domestic-currency Libor rates.Return to text 5.See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2012), "SEC Releases Money Market Fund Portfolio and ‘Shadow NAV' Information to the Public," press release, January 31.Return to text 6.Money-fund reliance is defined as liabilities held by money funds divided by total short-term debt plus deposits.Return to text 7.See Ricardo Correa, Horacio Sapriza and Andrei Zlate (2012), "Liquidity Shocks, Dollar Funding Costs and the Bank Lending Channel During the European Sovereign Crisis (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 2012-1059 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).Return to text 8.See U.S Department of the Treasury (2012), "Financial Stability Oversight Council Releases Proposed Recommendations for Money Market Mutual Fund Reform," press release, November 13.Return to text
Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the Global Research Forum, International Finance and Macroecomomics, Sponsored by the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Thanks very much. It's a pleasure to be part of this panel on the future of financial globalization. I will focus my remarks on one important aspect of this issue--namely, the growing use of wholesale dollar funding by global financial institutions. I'll begin by briefly discussing research I've been doing, along with my coauthors Victoria Ivashina and David Scharfstein, which examines some of the consequences of this funding model during times of market stress.1I'll then touch on the policy implications of this and related work. But first, the usual disclaimer: The views that follow are my own and do not necessarily reflect the thinking of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. By way of background, the dollar liabilities of foreign banks have grown rapidly in the past two decades and now stand at about $8 trillion, roughly on par with those of U.S. banks.2A significant proportion of foreign banks' dollar liabilities are raised via U.S. branches, most of which are legally precluded from raising deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The main source of funding for these branches, therefore, comes from uninsured wholesale claims such as large time deposits, making the cost and availability of such dollar funding highly sensitive to changing perceptions of these banks' creditworthiness. In our work, we asked how shocks to the ability of foreign banks to raise dollar funding might lead to changes in their lending. We began with a simple conceptual model: Imagine a European bank that lends in euros to European firms and in dollars to U.S. firms. To finance its euro-denominated lending, it funds itself by issuing insured euro deposits to its local retail deposit base. By contrast, to finance its dollar-denominated lending, it raises funds in the wholesale dollar market. Because the bank's dollar liabilities are uninsured, an adverse shock to the bank's perceived creditworthiness will result in a spike in its dollar funding costs. At the same time, the cost to the bank of funding in euros is unchanged to the extent that its euro deposits are insured. So we might expect such a shock to induce the bank to shift its funding away from the U.S. wholesale market and toward the European deposit market. But what are the consequences of this adjustment, both for the geographic distribution of its lending and for the functioning of foreign exchange (FX) swap markets?3 Note that if the bank wants to maintain the volume of its dollar-based lending, it will have to tap its insured deposit base to raise more euros and then swap these euros into dollars using the FX swap market. However, if the induced funding realignment is big enough, and if arbitrageurs have limited capacity to take the other side of the trade, this large swap demand can cause a breakdown in the usual covered-interest-parity (CIP) relationship--a breakdown of the sort that we have seen during times of extreme market stress. In this case, the direction of the deviation would be such that the cost of synthetic dollar borrowing--in other words, euro borrowing combined with an FX swap--would go up and would approach that of the now-elevated cost of funding directly in the wholesale dollar market. And given that any method of dollar funding--direct or synthetic--has become more expensive relative to euro funding, it then follows that an adverse shock to a global bank's perceived creditworthiness leads to a decline in its dollar-denominated lending relative to its euro-denominated lending. So, two principal effects of the dollar funding shock are intimately connected: a widening of the so-called CIP basis in the FX swap market, and a reduction in credit supply to firms that borrow in dollars.4 To test the model's implications, my coauthors and I focused on events in the second half of 2011, when the credit quality of a number of large euro-area banks became a concern and U.S. prime money market funds sharply reduced their lending to those banks. In a span of four months, the exposure of money funds to euro-area banks fell by half, from about $400 billion in May to about $200 billion in September.5Coincident with this contraction in dollar funding, the CIP basis widened in the direction predicted by our model, increasing the cost of obtaining synthetic dollars via the FX swap market. We used data from the international syndicated loan market to test the model's predictions about the reaction of lending to this type of funding stress. We found that dollar-denominated lending by euro-area banks fell relative to their euro-denominated lending, while this result did not hold for U.S. banks. We also found that, even holding fixed the identity of the borrowing firm, a syndicate formed to make a dollar-denominated loan during this period was less likely to include euro-area banks, while the same was not true of syndicates making euro-denominated loans. Finally, euro-area banks that relied most on funding from U.S. money market funds also cut back most sharply on their dollar-denominated lending.6 This last result is similar to one in recent work by my Fed colleagues Ricardo Correa, Horacio Sapriza, and Andrei Zlate.7They documented that the U.S. branches of foreign banks that experienced the most shrinkage in their dollar-denominated large time deposits--funding that had been mostly provided by money market funds prior to mid-2011--cut their U.S.-based commercial and industrial lending by more than banks that fared better on this score. Taken together, these findings have two types of policy implications: one for central bank responses to dollar funding pressures and another for measures to regulate foreign banking firms that rely heavily on short-term wholesale funding. This analysis underscores that the Federal Reserve's temporary dollar liquidity swap lines with the European Central Bank and other central banks are an effective response to stresses in dollar funding markets. Last week, the FOMC approved the extension of these swap lines through February 1, 2014. These lines have helped avert fire sales of dollar assets and maintain the flow of credit to U.S. households and firms. Although we documented cutbacks in dollar lending in the latter half of 2011 by foreign banks reliant on wholesale dollar funding, those cutbacks likely would have been more pronounced in the absence of the swap lines I will now turn to regulation. It is useful to bear in mind that our current regulatory regime evolved during a period when the U.S. operations of foreign banks were largely net recipients of funding from their parents. However, their reliance on less stable, short-term wholesale funding increased significantly in the decade leading up to the financial crisis, when U.S. branches of foreign banks began borrowing large volumes of dollars to send to their foreign parents. Such activity increases the vulnerabilities I described earlier. And it may not only pose the risk of a cutback in lending, but could also threaten the safety and soundness of the foreign banks themselves--and of the U.S. entities exposed to those banks. The regulation of U.S. branches of foreign banks has changed little over the past decade, even in the face of these significant changes in the global banking landscape. However, last week, the Federal Reserve Board proposed new rules for foreign banking organizations that would address some of the concerns that I've discussed and thereby mitigate the attendant risks to U.S. financial stability. These proposed rules apply enhanced prudential standards to foreign banking organizations and are designed to increase their resiliency. Importantly, the rules will not disadvantage foreign banks relative to domestic U.S. banking firms, but rather the rules seek to maintain a level playing field. To avoid or mitigate potential disruptions in wholesale dollar funding markets, the proposed rules require foreign banking organizations to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to meet expected near-term net outflows in a stress scenario. These rules should reduce the pressure on foreign banks that rely heavily on short-term dollar funding to either sell illiquid dollar assets or cut back on dollar lending in times of financial stress. By helping to alleviate disruptions in dollar funding markets the rules should also reduce the reliance on swap lines in a future stress episode. Finally, the central role played by money market funds in the 2011 episode is a reminder of the fragility of these funds themselves--and of the risk created by their combination of risky asset holdings, stable-value demandable liabilities, and zero-capital buffers. The events following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in 2008 provide even starker evidence of the risks that money market funds pose for the broader financial system. In light of these vulnerabilities, I welcome the recent proposed recommendations by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for further money market fund reforms.8 To conclude: Financial globalization undoubtedly brings with it substantial benefits. At the same time, it creates important challenges for financial stability and for the appropriate design of regulation. The research discussed in conferences such as this one will help us better understand and respond to these challenges. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 1.See Victoria Ivashina, David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein (2012), "Dollar Funding and the Lending Behavior of Global Banks (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Papers 2012-74 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).Return to text 2.For the dollar assets and liabilities of foreign banks, see Bank for International Settlements (2012), "Locational Banking Statistics (PDF)," December. For the assets and liabilities of domestically chartered U.S. banks, seeTable H.8, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 3.A foreign exchange swap is the simultaneous exchange of one currency for another in the spot market and an agreement to reverse this transaction at a later date at a pre-specified exchange rate.Return to text 4.The CIP basis is typically measured as the difference between the interest rate differential embedded in FX swap prices and the differential implied by foreign- and domestic-currency Libor rates.Return to text 5.See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2012), "SEC Releases Money Market Fund Portfolio and ‘Shadow NAV' Information to the Public," press release, January 31.Return to text 6.Money-fund reliance is defined as liabilities held by money funds divided by total short-term debt plus deposits.Return to text 7.See Ricardo Correa, Horacio Sapriza and Andrei Zlate (2012), "Liquidity Shocks, Dollar Funding Costs and the Bank Lending Channel During the European Sovereign Crisis (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 2012-1059 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).Return to text 8.See U.S Department of the Treasury (2012), "Financial Stability Oversight Council Releases Proposed Recommendations for Money Market Mutual Fund Reform," press release, November 13.Return to text
The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank are today announcing an extension of the existing temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements through February 1, 2014. Previously, these swap arrangements had been authorized through February 1, 2013. These central banks are also extending through February 1, 2014 the network of temporary bilateral liquidity swap arrangements that enable the provision of liquidity in each jurisdiction in any of their currencies should market conditions so warrant. The bilateral liquidity swap arrangements had been authorized through February 1, 2013. The Bank of Japan will consider an extension of both sets of swap arrangements at its next Monetary Policy Meeting. Information on the actions taken by other central banks is available at the following websites: Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached table and charts summarizing the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents for the December 11-12 meeting of the Committee. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the December 11-12 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released on a quarterly schedule. Projections materials (PDF)|Accessible Figures
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the designation of the chairs and deputy chairs of the Federal Reserve Banks for 2013. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as chair and a second as deputy chair. Following are the names of the chairs and deputy chairs designated by the Board for 2013: BostonKirk A. Sykes, President, New Boston's Urban Strategy America Fund, Boston, Massachusetts, renamed Chair. William D. Nordhaus, Sterling Professor of Economics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, renamed Deputy Chair. New YorkEmily K. Rafferty, President, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York, named Chair. Kathryn S. Wylde, President and Chief Executive Officer, Partnership for New York City, New York, New York, renamed Deputy Chair. PhiladelphiaJeremy Nowak, Former President, William Penn Foundation and Former Chief Executive Officer, The Reinvestment Fund, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, renamed Chair. James E. Nevels, Chairman, The Swarthmore Group, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chair. ClevelandRichard K. Smucker, Chief Executive Officer, The J.M. Smucker Company, Orrville, Ohio, named Chair. Christopher M. Connor, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, The Sherwin-Williams Company, Cleveland, Ohio, named Deputy Chair. RichmondChair -- To be announced. Linda D. Rabbitt, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Rand Construction Corporation, Washington, D.C., renamed Deputy Chair. AtlantaThomas I. Barkin, Director, McKinsey & Company, Atlanta, Georgia, named Chair. Carol B. Tomé, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, The Home Depot, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chair. ChicagoJeffrey A. Joerres, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ManpowerGroup, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, named Chair. Greg Brown, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Motorola Solutions, Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois, named Deputy Chair. St. LouisWard M. Klein, Chief Executive Officer, Energizer Holdings, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, renamed Chair. Sharon D. Fiehler, Executive Vice President and Chief Administrative Officer, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, renamed Deputy Chair. MinneapolisMary K. Brainerd, President and Chief Executive Officer, HealthPartners, Minneapolis, Minnesota, renamed Chair. Randall J. Hogan, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Pentair, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chair. Kansas CityBarbara Mowry, Chief Executive Officer, GoreCreek Advisors, Greenwood Village, Colorado, named Chair. Steve Maestas, Managing Partner, NAI Maestas and Ward Commercial Real Estate, Albuquerque, New Mexico, named Deputy Chair. DallasHerbert D. Kelleher, Founder and Chairman Emeritus, Southwest Airlines, Dallas, Texas, renamed Chair. Myron E. Ullman III, Retired Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, J.C. Penney Company, Inc., Plano, Texas, renamed Deputy Chair. San FranciscoPatricia E. Yarrington, Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Chevron Corporation, San Ramon, California, named Chair. Roy A. Vallee, Retired Executive Chairman, Avnet, Inc., Phoenix, Arizona, named Deputy Chair. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Tennessee Valley Financial Holdings, Inc., Oak Ridge, TennesseeWritten Agreement dated September 26, 2011Terminated November 20, 2012 For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Anadarko Bank & Trust Company, Anadarko, OklahomaWritten Agreement dated August 13, 2007Terminated November 27, 2012 Hanmi Financial Corporation and Hanmi Bank, both of Los Angeles, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated November 2, 2009Terminated December 4, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcementactions listed below: Community Bankers Trust Corporation, Glen Allen, Virginia, and Essex Bank, Tappahannock, VirginiaWritten Agreement dated April 21, 2011Terminated December 5, 2012 The Northwestern Bank, Chippewa Falls, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated April 27, 2010Terminated December 6, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: NASB Financial, Inc. (PDF), Grandview, MissouriWritten Agreement dated November 29, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a consent order to cease and desist and a civil money penalty assessment of $100 million against Standard Chartered PLC, London, Standard Chartered Bank, London, and the bank's branch in New York. The orders address unsafe and unsound practices related to inadequate and incomplete responses to examiner inquiries as well as insufficient oversight of its compliance program for U.S. economic sanctions, Bank Secrecy Act, and anti-money-laundering requirements. A significant portion of the penalty is being assessed in connection with the alleged unsafe and unsound practices related to information provided to Federal Reserve examiners, and represents one of the largest penalties assessed by the Board for such practices. Under the cease and desist order, Standard Chartered must improve its program for compliance with U.S. economic sanctions, Bank Secrecy Act, and anti-money-laundering requirements. The United Kingdom's Financial Services Authority, the home country supervisor of Standard Chartered, has agreed to assist the Federal Reserve in the supervision of the cease and desist order. In separate, coordinated actions, the U.S. Department of Justice and the District Attorney for New York County announced the execution of deferred prosecution agreements with Standard Chartered. The deferred prosecution agreements provide for $227 million in forfeiture against Standard Chartered. In addition, the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control announced a settlement of $132 million with Standard Chartered for apparent violations of its economic sanctions regulations, which is deemed satisfied by the forfeiture announced by the Department of Justice. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday issued a consent cease and desist order against HSBC Holdings plc, London, United Kingdom, (Holdings) and assessed a $165 million civil money penalty against Holdings and its subsidiary in the United States, HSBC North America Holdings, Inc., New York, New York (HNAH). The civil money penalty is the largest the Federal Reserve has assessed as a result of unsafe and unsound practices related to insufficient compliance with Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering requirements, and U.S. economic sanctions. Holdings conducts its banking operations in the United States through HNAH, which owns and controls HSBC Bank USA, N.A., (HBUS) and various other bank and non-bank subsidiaries. The orders address inadequate oversight by Holdings and HNAH of anti-money laundering controls and U.S. dollar clearing practices used by the firm's banking subsidiaries in the United States and abroad. A government investigation found that due to these oversight deficiencies, Holdings' banking subsidiary in Mexico engaged in a substantial number of high-risk transactions with the firm's subsidiary bank in the United States. Investigations also found compliance gaps at the firm's subsidiaries in Europe and the Middle East that enabled sanctioned entities to illegally route dollar payments through the U.S. financial system. When combined with separate, coordinated actions by the Department of Justice, the District Attorney for the County of New York, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the payments made by Holdings, HNAH, and HBUS in forfeitures and penalties in connection with the money-laundering and sanctions violations total approximately $1.9 billion. Separate assessments by the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control and Financial Crimes Enforcement Network will be deemed satisfied by payments made to other federal agencies. The Federal Reserve's order requires Holdings to improve its programs and practices to ensure full compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act, anti-money laundering requirements, and U.S. economic sanctions. The United Kingdom's Financial Services Authority, the home country supervisor of Holdings, has agreed to assist the Federal Reserve in the supervision of the order. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: BSA Financial Services, Inc. (PDF), Saint Augustine, FloridaWritten Agreement dated December 4, 2012 For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday issued a Supervision and Regulation letter summarizing changes made in recent years to its program for consolidated supervision of large financial institutions. The updated approach incorporates a stronger focus on the stability of the financial system and broader economy as a whole, while making improvements to the Federal Reserve's program to promote resiliency of individual firms. The letter is intended to provide greater clarity about supervisory objectives and expectations so that institutions and the general public can better understand the Federal Reserve's focus in supervising these large firms. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. SR letter 12-17/CA 12-14
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday proposed rules to strengthen the oversight of U.S. operations of foreign banks. The proposal would require foreign banking organizations with a significant U.S. presence to create an intermediate holding company over their U.S. subsidiaries, which would help facilitate consistent and enhanced supervision and regulation of the U.S. operations of these foreign banks. Foreign banks would also be required to maintain stronger capital and liquidity positions in the United States, helping to increase the resiliency of their U.S. operations. “The proposed rulemaking is another important step toward strengthening our regulatory framework to address the risks that large, interconnected financial institutions pose to U.S. financial stability,” Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke said. The proposal implements provisions of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act in a manner that addresses the risks associated with the increased complexity, interconnectedness, and concentration of the U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations. “Applicable regulations have changed relatively little in the last decade, despite a significant and rapid transformation in the U.S. activities of foreign banks, many of which moved beyond their traditional lending activities to engage in substantial, and often complex, capital market activities,” Governor Daniel K. Tarullo said. “The crisis revealed the resulting risks to U.S. financial stability.” The proposal generally applies to foreign banking organizations with a U.S. banking presence and totalglobalconsolidated assets of $50 billion or more. More stringent standards are proposed for foreign banking organizations with combinedU.S.assets of $50 billion or more. The Board proposed a number of measures, including: The proposal also includes measures regarding capital stress tests, single-counterparty credit limits, overall risk management, and early remediation. The Federal Reserve is proposing a substantial phase-in period to give foreign banking organizations time to adjust to the new rules. Foreign banking organizations with global consolidated assets of $50 billion or more on July 1, 2014, would be required to meet the new standards on July 1, 2015. The Federal Reserve consulted with other members of the Financial Stability Oversight Council in developing the proposal. Comments from the public will be accepted through March 31, 2013. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Comments on this proposal:View For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes Video of the Open Board meeting Meeting Materials
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October suggests that economic activity and employment have continued to expand at a moderate pace in recent months, apart from weather-related disruptions. Although the unemployment rate has declined somewhat since the summer, it remains elevated. Household spending has continued to advance, and the housing sector has shown further signs of improvement, but growth in business fixed investment has slowed. Inflation has been running somewhat below the Committee’s longer-run objective, apart from temporary variations that largely reflect fluctuations in energy prices. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee remains concerned that, without sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions. Furthermore, strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely will run at or below its 2 percent objective. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee will continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per month. The Committee also will purchase longer-term Treasury securities after its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of Treasury securities is completed at the end of the year, initially at a pace of $45 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and, in January, will resume rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. Taken together, these actions should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. The Committee views these thresholds as consistent with its earlier date-based guidance. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Dennis P. Lockhart; Sandra Pianalto; Jerome H. Powell; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Jeremy C. Stein; Daniel K. Tarullo; John C. Williams; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the action was Jeffrey M. Lacker, who opposed the asset purchase program and the characterization of the conditions under which an exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate. Statement Regarding Purchases of Treasury Securities and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Brookings Institution Conference on Structuring the Financial Industry to Enhance Economic Growth and Stability, Washington, D.C. It is a pleasure to be at Brookings today for this forum on the industrial organization (IO) of the financial industry. As I have suggested previously, when one considers the significance of issues concerning industry structure for the design of an effective and efficient regulatory system to contain systemic risk, it is surprising that relatively little research has been undertaken in this area, even in the aftermath of the financial crisis.1 Of course, good empirical research takes time, and I welcome this opportunity to contribute to a discussion of an agenda for research on industry structure. I will begin by briefly explaining why this agenda is both important and challenging. Then I will address one issue of particular significance--that of scale and scope economies, especially as they relate to policy proposals directed at the too-big-to-fail (TBTF) problem in financial markets. The Promise and Challenge of an IO Research Agenda for the Financial IndustryThe value of an IO research agenda for shaping a regulatory system to protect financial stability lies both in ascertaining costs that may result from specific regulatory measures and in revealing industry dynamics that may suggest how regulatory measures may be more effective. The importance of understanding the costs of various regulatory measures is self-evident. As I will discuss shortly, IO can help determine the circumstances in which firm size or industry concentration is associated with economies of scope and scale that carry social benefits. Any reduction in such benefits would be an unintended cost of financial stability policies. Conversely, if firm size or industry concentration is found to stem only from market power or from funding advantages associated with too-big-to-fail policies or perceptions, then some policies aimed at diminishing systemic risk would have the added benefit of mitigating market failures. Less obvious, perhaps, is the potential for IO research to inform financial stability regulation by illuminating industry dynamics that may not be intuitively apparent. For example, unlike firms in most other industries, large financial institutions transact with one another on a nearly continuous basis and regularly maintain contractual relationships carrying substantial future obligations. The daily operations of most firms in the financial industry depend to a much greater extent on the conditions of their competitors than do such operations of firms in other industries. By extending work on patterns of cooperation and competition among firms in other industries to the financial sector, IO might help shape regulatory structures that can reduce the potential for contagion during periods of financial stress.2 As important as IO research can be in developing financial regulation, the financial sector is in key respects sufficiently different from other industries as to limit the relevance of at least some existing research. In addition to the just-noted contractual interconnectedness of competing firms, the combination of correlated asset holdings, maturity transformation, and mark-to-market accounting means that distress at one firm leading to asset fire sales can create problems at competing firms. Finally, the presence of systemic risk in financial-sector intermediation adds an important consideration not normally present in IO analysis of other industries. Thus, as noted earlier, too-big-to-fail problems can affect the analysis. Also, prudential regulation can create opportunities for arbitrage both among products and practices in the regulated sector and between the regulated and unregulated sectors. Although the characteristics of the financial sector may limit the relevance of conclusions from IO research in other sectors, they do not limit the relevance of the questions about industry structure and relationships asked by IO economists. They argue, instead, for combining the IO approach with the specialized learning of finance, a part of economics that has grown so important precisely because of the manifold ways in which the financial sector differs from other industries. Scale and Scope Economies in the Financial SectorThere are few topics within IO more familiar than that of scale and scope economies.3And there are few reform proposals that have been put forward more regularly since the start of the financial crisis than those to limit in some manner the scale and scope of financial firms. Notwithstanding the coincidence of these two facts, there is relatively little recent academic research on scale and scope economies in the financial sector and almost none pertinent to the operations of large financial conglomerates. The sources of scale and scope economies in the financial sector are generally similar to those found in other industries. Cost-reducing scale economies are available in areas where fixed costs are reasonably high, such as in information technology and other infrastructure systems. Network-effect economies are seen in the large distribution networks that allow securities dealers to offer clients wider sources of funds for issues of debt and equity instruments. Broad geographic reach allows firms to offer integrated global payments, collection, or other services to internationally active clients. There may be scope economies for banks and their customers when a variety of services is provided, thereby reducing information and other transactions costs. A range of relevant economies can be illustrated with a simple example. A firm engaged in merger and acquisitions advisory work needs to assemble a team with many areas of expertise. A scale economy may be available because the average cost of advising on a single transaction will be lower if the firm is involved in more transactions, thus fully employing the team and facilitating greater spillovers of sector-specific information across transactions. By providing financing for the transaction, the firm may also be able to achieve a scope economy because its financing activities can leverage off the information developed by the merger and acquisition adviser, thereby reducing due diligence costs. Moreover, a client's own transactions costs may be lowered when the firm is able to provide most or all of the financing because its balance sheet is large enough to fund the acquisition without breaching applicable internal or regulatory lending limits. Similarly, a client may lower its transactions costs by using a single firm for both advising and financing.4 The paucity of empirical work means we can only hypothesize these scale and scope economies, though intuition and observation may make some hypotheses stronger than others. Even assuming, as I think reasonable, that most or all the economies I have identified would hold up to empirical assessment, the crucial questions would remain as tohowbig orhowintegrated financial firms need to be in order to attain these economies. The relative dearth of work that would help answer these questions can be attributed to a number of factors.5First, the sample size of the very largest firms is obviously small, limiting the ability of researchers to derive precise statistical relationships between cost, on the one hand, and firm scale and scope, on the other. This problem of sample size is exacerbated by the fact that there has been tremendous growth in the size, complexity, and concentration of the financial sector over the past 15 years or so. Second, there are serious limitations on the data available to researchers, and thus any useful discussion of an analytic agenda for research on financial industry structure must include an agenda for overcoming proprietary and other constraints on developing appropriate data sources. For example, data on the use of a variety of financial services by specific customers is generally unavailable to researchers. Third, even if appropriate data become available, it may be quite difficult to isolate costs for particular banking activities, given the number of products and activities offered by even moderately complex financial institutions. Two additional considerations bear mentioning in mapping out the issues associated with scale and scope economies in the financial sector. The first is a well-known qualification to the proposition that scale and scope can be beneficial--the possibility that firms may grow so large as to facediseconomiesof scope and scale. Although existing empirical work is again scant, one often hears the suggestion that complexity and agency problems may lead to diseconomies for financial firms under certain circumstances, a proposition that should be considered alongside the hypotheses for positive scale and scope effects.6 The second point is that the size and composition of a financial firm's balance sheet play a complicated role in producing economies of scope and scale. To be sure, a large trading book or custody business might produce social benefits by allowing a bank to match or clear both sides of transactions at lower cost. And large balance sheets would appear to enable banks to diversify or hedge their positions and to access a variety of funding sources, thereby reducing their cost of capital. But conventional IO-type analysis, which would tend to interpret lower funding costs as evidence of scale economies, is potentially misleading. Consider, in this regard, my observation of a moment ago that a large balance sheet may reduce a bank's cost of capital. If lower funding costs do result from the diversification of risks and funding sources made possible by a large balance sheet, they would indeed suggest the existence of scale economies. But they may also result from the belief of some counterparties that a firm with a very large balance sheet is TBTF, and thus at least some liabilities of that firm will be backed by the government in a time of financial stress. In this instance, lower funding costs actually suggest a market failure induced by the distortion arising from the implicit government guarantee. In practice, both scale economies and market failure may play a role. Although the moral hazard associated with TBTF funding is a significant issue, it is also reasonably discrete and susceptible to countervailing policy measures such as capital requirements and credible resolution mechanisms. Some strands of finance research suggest more profound implications for certain configurations of financial industry structure. For example, numerous papers suggest that the very large balance sheets of very large financial firms tend to be highly correlated, such that a shock to certain asset classes is likely to reverberate quickly on the balance sheets of most large firms as fire sales and subsequent mark-to-market effects affect even stronger firms.7If this conclusion is valid, then the apparent economies associated with very large balance sheets may be transitory or, more precisely, contingent on the absence of serious shocks to certain asset classes. It is precisely at this intersection between questions of industry structure and of the behavior of financial markets that a joint venture between IO and finance is most important. As I noted earlier, such an effort could not only help fill out an assessment of the social benefits associated with the size and industry structure of financial firms, but it could also lend insight into the kinds of measures that may be most effective in containing systemic risk. Application to Specific Policy ProposalsTo illustrate more concretely how analysis of scope and scale economies is relevant to the development of a regulatory system designed to safeguard financial stability, I want to turn to three proposals currently being debated in policy circles: (1) breaking up large financial institutions by reinstating Glass-Steagall restrictions or by imposing other prohibitions on affiliations of commercial banks with certain business lines; (2) placing a cap on the nondeposit liabilities of financial institutions; and (3) requiring financial institutions above a specified size to hold minimum amounts of long-term debt available for conversion to equity to avoid or facilitate an orderly resolution of a troubled firm. Breaking up firms by business lineProposals to reimpose a Glass-Steagall prohibition on affiliations between commercial and investment banks have been met with the rejoinder that the origins of the financial crisis do not trace back very clearly to these affiliations. Many firms at the center of the crisis would have been essentially unchanged had Glass-Steagall been in effect. Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and Merrill Lynch did not have sizable insured depository institutions, while Countrywide and Washington Mutual had few if any activities that could be termed investment banking. Wachovia did have a securities affiliate that was sizable, though hardly an industry leader, but its downfall seems pretty clearly connected to its exposure to subprime mortgages that it had written directly or acquired through mergers with other institutions. Proponents of breaking up firms by business line may reply that the next financial crisis will not likely have the same genesis as the last, and that separating commercial from investment banking could at least mitigate the risks of extending the safety net provided depository institutions to underwriting, trading, and other activities of very large firms. But an IO perspective suggests that the proposal could entail substantial costs. The reinstatement of Glass-Steagall would mean that bank clients could no longer retain one financial firm that would have the capacity to offer the whole range of financing options--from lines of credit to public equity offerings--depending on a client's needs and market conditions. Moreover, many banks that are far too small ever to be considered TBTF do provide some capital market services to their clients--often smaller businesses--a convenience and possible cost savings that would be lost under Glass-Steagall prohibitions.8 With the present state of research, it is virtually impossible to quantify the social benefits of these economies. However, what seems the likelihood of nontrivial benefits from current affiliations is a good reason to be cautious about adopting this proposal. Capping nondeposit liabilitiesProposals to place a cap on a bank's nondeposit liabilities as a fraction of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) have been promoted as more directly responsive to the sources of systemic risk than are proposals to reinstate Glass-Steagall or to cap the total assets of a bank. Many studies of the financial crisis demonstrate that the reliance of large financial firms on nondeposit funding made them, and the financial system as a whole, susceptible to the dramatic runs that peaked in the fall of 2008. For the largest U.S. financial firms, nondeposit liabilities today are highly correlated with the systemic risk measures used at the Federal Reserve Board to measure interconnectedness and complexity for purposes of evaluating the financial stability effects of mergers. Another attraction of this form of proposal is that, even as it places constraints on the potential size and composition of a firm's balance sheet, it allows relative flexibility to the firm in meeting that constraint, particularly when compared with proposals for prohibitions on commercial bank affiliations with other financial firms. A firm could shrink its balance sheet by shedding less profitable assets of its choosing. It could also shift its funding model more toward deposits (assuming, of course, it does not exceed applicable deposit caps). There are also ways to refine the proposal further, such as by weighting the nondeposit liabilities in the numerator of the ratio based on their duration. In short, as I have previously noted, there is considerable conceptual appeal in these proposals.9 Nonetheless, there are several important questions raised by the nondeposit cap idea. Foremost among these is the decision about the appropriate percentage of GDP that would constitute the cap. The determination of this limit would presumably be based on a number of considerations, including an evaluation of the capacity of the U.S. economy and financial system to absorb the losses resulting from the failure of a large firm. Several salient considerations are also suggested by a combined IO-finance perspective. First, of course, is the key issue of how the functioning of funding markets is affected by the participation of very large counterparties using very large amounts of short-term wholesale funding, particularly under conditions of financial stress. This issue falls more on the finance, rather than the IO, side of the merged perspective. But it may be that aspects of industry structure, including some of the competition/cooperation issues mentioned earlier, affect this analysis. Also, an IO-finance perspective might identify possible alternatives to a nondeposit liability cap that achieve much the same financial stability goals at lower potential cost. Second is the question of scale and scope economies associated with nondeposit funding, the answer to which would help determine the limit at which significant social benefits might be lost, to be balanced against the avoidance of social costs arising from systemic events. Even with the flexibility noted earlier, a firm might have to sacrifice certain economies of scope or scale to meet a cap. If analysis finds scale and scope economies unlikely to be realized beyond a certain level of activity, then policymakers would have a point of reference for setting the cap. A third question is how second- and third-tier institutions might respond as the largest firms reposition, and perhaps shed, parts of their balance sheets. These institutions may well be purchasers of assets sold by the largest firms. They may also choose to take advantage of the lower demand, and correspondingly lower prices, for short-term funding by increasing their own short-term borrowing. Research might cast light on the extent to which various forms of a liability cap would affect market structure, the degree to which reduced activities by some firms would be taken up by others, and how such changes might affect the stability of the financial system. In sum, the IO-finance perspective could contribute significantly to an elaboration and evaluation of this policy proposal. In the process, it could advance what I regard as the most important remaining task of financial regulatory reform--determining the most effective and efficient ways to deal with short-term funding markets, often characterized as the shadow banking system, that are inherently subject to runs. Requiring minimum levels of long-term debtProposals to require large financial firms to hold minimum levels of long-term debt are offered as a way to facilitate the orderly resolution of such firms. Variations on this general theme have gathered momentum as the Financial Stability Board, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, and other groups have explored ways to make large financial firms more readily resolvable, thereby giving national authorities a third choice between the unattractive options of bailout and disorderly failure. The basic idea is that the maintenance of minimum levels of long-term debt at the top holding company level will allow a resolving authority to transfer operating subsidiaries of the failed firm to a functioning bridge entity, while leaving behind in a receivership the equity and sufficient long-term debt to absorb the original firm's losses. Eventually, the resolving authority could recapitalize the bridge entity by exchanging claims of the long-term unsecured creditors of the parent for equity, long-term debt of the bridge, or both. In the United States, this approach is consonant with the Federal Deposit Insurance Company's stated preference for a "single-entry" strategy in dealing with the resolution of systemically important firms under the orderly liquidation authority of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). But it is also consistent with variants on resolution mechanisms being implemented in other jurisdictions around the world. A minimum long-term debt requirement could lend greater confidence that the combination of equity owners and long-term debt holders would be sufficient to bear all losses at the firm, thereby counteracting the moral hazard associated with taxpayer bailouts while avoiding disorderly failures. To the degree the orderly resolution mechanisms established in the United States and elsewhere thus command greater credibility, the result should be enhanced market discipline, which in turn could enhance financial stability. As with the two other policy ideas, the details of a minimum long-term debt proposal matter when it comes to assessing costs and benefits. There will surely be some costs associated with such a requirement (though it is notable that, at present, large U.S. firms have substantial amounts of long-term debt on their balance sheets). Like a capital surcharge for the largest, most complex institutions, these costs will fall only on the largest institutions. But this is by design, in accordance with the principle--reflected in the Dodd-Frank Act--that the largest, most complex institutions should be subject to stricter regulation precisely because they are more complex and because their failure would have greater negative externalities for the financial system and the economy more generally. Thus, if there is a modest effect on industry structure, it would be an intended --rather than unintended or undesirable--consequence of the regulation. In general, at least at the levels of minimum long-term debt that are being discussed in various international forums, the proposal would not seem to carry significant hurdles to realizing available economies of scope and scale. ConclusionMy very brief review of these three proposals has tried to show how a combined IO-finance perspective can contribute to the policymaking process and what priorities for research might be. For the proposal to reenact Glass-Steagall, that perspective suggested the potential for considerable social costs. Application of the perspective to the proposal for a nondeposit liability cap revealed a number of important questions, an analysis of which could help determine the elements of such a proposal that would be most effective, identify costs, and possibly suggest alternative means to the same policy goals. In the case of the third proposal, for minimum long-term debt requirements, the perspective did not immediately suggest any unfavorable unintended consequences, thereby perhaps strengthening its appeal as a near-term policy priority. I have only grazed the surface of useful work that may spring from this hybrid subdiscipline. And, as with policy-relevant areas in which considerable work has already been done, we will never have all the analysis we might like before deciding whether to act and, if so, how. That is the condition that usually prevails in policymaking. But I am encouraged that Brookings has assembled this forum, which I hope will be a catalyst for much more academic activity in this area. 1. There is work at the Federal Reserve Board on some relevant topics. See, for example, Li and Schüroff’s (2012) working paper, which shows that about 30 large and highly interconnected "central dealers" provide valuable forms of liquidity to hundreds of smaller periphery dealers while simultaneously offering more immediate, but more expensive, execution to investors relative to those offered to periphery firms. Dan Li and Norman Schüroff (2012), "Dealer Networks," Social Science Research Network Working Papers Series, March 15.Return to text 2. This topic is addressed at somewhat greater length in Daniel K. Tarullo (2011), "Industrial Organization and Systemic Risk: An Agenda for Further Research," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Board Conference on the Regulation of Systemic Risk, Washington, September 15.Return to text 3.Scale economiesexist where average costs decline as a product or service is provided in larger quantities.Scope economiesexist where average costs for a product or service are lower if it is produced jointly with another product or service.Return to text 4. The mergers and acquisitions example suggests a somewhat different source of competitive advantage for certain firms, arising from the fact that a firm may, over time, acquire sufficient experience that it can provide, in essence, a more sophisticated product to its clients, which may also choose such a firm in part because they can be assured they have retained the most experienced and knowledgeable advisers. This phenomenon, familiar in IO studies of a range of service industries, can lead to a "natural" concentration in certain subsectors, even where scale and scope economies do not suggest that such concentration is driven by cost efficiencies.Return to text 5. A recent study conducted on behalf of The Clearing House tackles some of these questions. This study makes a useful effort to estimate separately scale and scope economies for a variety of financial activities, rather than inferring such economies from firm-level consolidated data. However, the study exemplifies some of the challenges mentioned in this speech, relying as it does on proprietary data for a small sample of firms, as well as case studies and interviews, for the empirical analysis. The Clearing House (2011), "Understanding the Economics of Large Banks (PDF)" (New York: The Clearing House, November 7).Return to text 6. There is some research that could provide useful starting points for more focused IO work. For example, a 2010 paper by Klein and Saidenberg finds a discount on profitability and market value for more complex banks. Because the authors control for bank size, the paper does not squarely address scale and scope issues, but it pursues the kinds of questions that could usefully be asked in that context. Peter G. Klein and Marc R. Saidenberg (2010), "Organizational Structure and the Diversification Discount: Evidence from Commercial Banking,"Journal of Industrial Economics, vol. 58 (March), pp. 127-55. "Agency problems" refers in this context to divergences in the incentives of management and shareholders that create possibilities for management to make decisions in their own, rather than shareholders', interests, as well as for potentially expensive monitoring mechanisms for shareholders seeking to limit agency costs.Return to text 7. See, for example, the following two papers and the references therein: Franklin Allen, Ana Babus, and Elena Carletti (2012), "Asset Commonality, Debt Maturity and Systemic Risk,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 104 (June), pp. 519-34; and Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (2011), "Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 29-48.Return to text 8. A variation on the Glass-Steagall reinstatement proposal is to prohibit only securities trading by affiliates of insured depository institutions. This proposal may also negate certain economies of scope, which seem quite likely to exist in firms that make markets in securities that they have underwritten, and thus also economies of scale, which may be realized by making markets in other securities once a firm is in that business. Note in this regard that the so-called Volcker rule, included in the Dodd-Frank Act, prohibits onlyproprietarytrading, not all trading. Whatever the practical difficulties of distinguishing proprietary from nonproprietary trading, the distinction in the legislation rests on the apparent assumption that there are efficiencies to be gained in having underwriting firms trade.Return to text 9. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), "Financial Stability Regulation," speech delivered at the Distinguished Jurist Lecture, University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, October 10.Return to text