Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Four federal financial regulatory agencies on Tuesday issued supervisory guidance on allowance for loan and lease losses (ALLL) estimation practices associated with loans and lines of credit secured by junior liens on one- to four-family residential properties. The agencies issued the guidance to reiterate policy and to remind regulated financial institutions to monitor all credit quality indicators relevant to credit portfolios, including junior liens. Examples of junior liens include second mortgages and home equity lines of credit taken out by mortgage borrowers. The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency reiterate key concepts included in generally accepted accounting principles and existing ALLL supervisory guidance related to the ALLL and loss estimation practices. Regulators also remind institutions to follow appropriate risk-management principles in managing junior lien loans and lines of credit.
Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin At the Maryland Bankers Association First Friday Economic Outlook Forum, Baltimore, Maryland Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you this afternoon. It is always a pleasure to be back in Baltimore and to see so many old friends. I was here during the most intense days of the financial crisis, and I will never forget how bankers worked around the clock to ensure that the credit needs of Maryland residents and businesses could continue to be met--a dedicated effort that benefited communities across the state. That episode is behind us now, but community banks continue to face numerous challenges, including challenges from an enhanced regulatory regime that has evolved in the wake of the crisis. This regime includes the potential effects of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). From my many conversations with you, I have a sense of the challenges that you face regarding the changing regulatory landscape. Against that backdrop, I appreciate the opportunity to speak at the First Friday Economic Outlook, at the start of a promising new year, and share my thoughts with you on two vitally important topics: how the Federal Reserve's monetary policy aims to increase the availability of credit to foster economic growth, and how we are tailoring our examination and supervision of community banks to ensure that we are not inadvertently constraining lending. I believe that examination and supervision of community banks is a timely and important topic. Why do I say that? Because, as I will discuss shortly, lending by community banks plays an important role in the ongoing economic recovery, especially by providing credit to small businesses. And it is absolutely critical that examination and supervision do not produce outcomes that are barriers to small business expansion. Unlike most other businesses, banks are subject to a system of examination and supervision, developed over the past century, that has particular and deliberate characteristics: regular on-site visits by specially trained examiners; exit meetings between examiners and bank senior management to explain examination findings; written examination reports with narratives and metrics describing the findings of the examiners; and, if necessary, follow-up on action items that the bank must pursue to remedy specific problems. The ultimate focus of examination and supervision is the safety and soundness of the bank, as well as compliance with laws and an assessment of the bank's ability to withstand risks and shocks. Community bankers are very much accustomed to opening their doors to examiners for their on-site visits. I'm not sure if James Anthony made it here today from his bank in Chestertown, but I want to share with you two memorable conversations I had with James when I was the Maryland Commissioner of Financial Regulation. In one conversation, James told me how he left the glamour and fast pace of being a management consultant in New York City to return to the relative peace and serenity and awesome natural beauty of the Eastern Shore to run Chesapeake Bank and Trust where, he said, he could awaken each morning to the sights and sounds of the swallows and geese on the bay. In the second memorable conversation, James told me that my examiners in their dark suits were not only taking up all the spaces in the bank parking lot and occupying all the booths in the diner, but they were also, in his words, "scaring the bejesus" out of the same swallows and geese alighting on the bay, not to mention some residents of Chestertown who were convinced by the arrival of the many dark suits that the bank was on the verge of collapse. So from that point on, we implemented more "town-friendly" approaches to examining our banks, including less-formal dress guidelines and more gentle parking practices for our examiners. I share this anecdote with you because it illustrates a mindset and approach that I bring with me to Washington every day of maintaining a focus on how what we do at the Board affects local communities. Lingering a moment longer on the culture of bank examination and supervision, it may come as a surprise to some of the nonbankers in the room that community bankers typically welcome effective and appropriate examination and supervision. They value supervision because they know that good examiners will help them to be proactive and identify problems early, and because a strong and durable banking system is in everyone's best interest. When I was appointed by Governor O'Malley as commissioner at the onset of the financial crisis, one of my first observations was that I was going to have a very hard time retaining and attracting good examiner talent, which was critical to helping manage the crisis. To get the resources needed to ensure that we maintained a strong, experienced examination staff, I faced two major hurdles: I had to deal with the state budget folks, and I had to make the case for higher assessments from the banks. Needless to say, I was rather dreading the conversation when I picked up the phone to call Kathleen Murphy, the president and chief executive officer of the Maryland Bankers Association. But I was pleasantly surprised to hear her say that not only did Maryland bankers want examiners who were well trained and held a level of expertise--so much so that they would pay for it--but that she would be willing to testify as such to the state legislature's finance committee. That attitude underscores how the examination and supervision functions are embraced and factored into the business of being an excellent community bank. My perspective on the examination and supervision function has only deepened during my term as a Governor at the Federal Reserve Board. Indeed, being a Governor in the post-financial-crisis era has made me much more sensitive to the importance of making sure we conduct examination and supervision in a way that helps ensure we think through potential consequences, such as unnecessarily hindering lending to creditworthy borrowers. Access to credit, after all, is a critical factor supporting recovery in our economy. Monetary Policy and Credit AvailabilityTo gain some perspective on this issue, let's set aside for a moment the beautiful Eastern Shore and the examiners in their new business-casual attire, taking the bus to the banks, and approach examination and supervision from the perspective of monetary macroeconomics and the Federal Reserve's decisionmaking over the past several years. As most of you know, the economy began slowing in late 2007 and early 2008 and turned sharply downward in the autumn of 2008 when the financial crisis intensified, resulting in the worst recession in many decades. By the end of 2009, the unemployment rate reached a horrifying 10 percent, corresponding to more than 15 million Americans being out of work, with all of the attendant social consequences--including lost income and wealth, mortgage foreclosures, family strains, health problems, and so on. Officially, the recovery from the recession began in the third quarter of 2009, but the pace of recovery has been modest. Moreover, we know that the recession was deeper and the recovery weaker than had previously been thought. The resulting financial strains on many businesses and households have been severe. This consequence is starkly evident in the recent pattern of loan delinquency rates. Delinquency rates have been slow to return to their pre-recession levels, with some of these measures, such as those associated with certain categories of real estate loans, staying still quite elevated today. Against this backdrop, the Federal Reserve's data show that after contracting for several quarters, lending by smaller domestic banks generally resumed expanding around the middle of last year. Although measures of community banks' profitability have risen from their recession lows, pressures on the banks' profitability and credit quality remain as a result of the lingering weak macroeconomic fundamentals, especially the stubbornly high amount of unemployment. In that regard, although the pace of employment growth has picked up in recent months and the unemployment rate has fallen some, the labor market remains quite weak. At the end of 2011, more than 13 million Americans were out of work. An additional 8 million workers were classified as "part time for economic reasons" because their hours had been cut back or they were unable to find a full-time job. In addition, about 2-1/2 million Americans were classified as "marginally attached" to the labor force because even though they wanted to get a job, they had not searched for one in the past four weeks. And almost half of that group--nearly 1 million individuals--had given up searching for employment altogether because they did not believe any jobs were available to them. The unemployed, the underemployed, the marginally attached, and the discouraged can speak powerfully to the slow pace of the recovery. The economic data in this regard correspond to what I have seen firsthand since being at the Federal Reserve. I have traveled to once-robust cities in the Midwest and in other parts of the country. I have walked through foreclosed homes and have seen blighted neighborhoods. I have visited unemployment insurance offices and job training centers, and I have met lots of people who have been out of work for more than a year or two--out of work for so long that some of them are embarrassed to show their resumes to potential employers. These circumstances have called for forceful policy measures. In normal times, the Federal Reserve adjusts the stance of monetary policy largely through changes in the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) target for the federal funds rate. The Federal Reserve then adjusts the supply of reserves in the banking system through open market operations to keep the federal funds rate close to the FOMC's target rate. The current and anticipated level of the target federal funds rate then influences the level of many other interest rates in the economy. For example, a reduction in the FOMC's target rate tends to reduce borrowing rates for households and businesses, including auto loan rates, mortgage rates, and rates on business loans. With cheaper borrowing rates, consumers tend to increase their purchases of houses, cars, and various other goods and services. In response, businesses ramp up their production to meet the increased level of sales. Moreover, with lower costs of financing for new equipment and structures, businesses may be inclined to increase their own spending on investment projects that they might previously have seen as only marginally profitable. The Federal Reserve's monetary policy has been accommodative since the onset of the financial crisis. In particular, the federal funds rate target, which stood at 5‑1/4 percent in mid‑2007, was subsequently reduced to a range of 0 to 1/4 percent by the end of 2008, and that target range has been maintained since then. Given the magnitude of the financial crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve clearly needed to provide additional monetary accommodation beyond simply keeping short-term interest rates close to zero. Consequently, like a number of other major central banks around the world, the FOMC has been deploying unconventional policy tools to promote the economic recovery. In particular, we have provided conditional forward guidance about the likely future path of the federal funds rate, and we have engaged in balance sheet operations that involve changes in the size and composition of our securities holdings. Broadly speaking, these policy tools affect the economy through channels that are similar to those of conventional monetary policy. Specifically, forward guidance and balance sheet operations have been employed to put downward pressure on interest rates; lower interest rates, in turn, reduce the costs of borrowing for households and businesses and also boost household wealth, thereby providing economic stimulus. In my judgment, our deployment of unconventional policy tools has been completely appropriate to help promote the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Ideally, monetary policy decisions would be informed by precise quantitative information about the effects of each tool. We do our best in this regard, and I can certainly attest that the FOMC reviews an enormous amount of information and analysis in reaching its decisions. That said, even in normal times, uncertainty is intrinsic to real-world monetary policymaking. Uncertainty about the effects of policy is particularly relevant under current circumstances where the scope for conventional monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound on the federal funds rate, leaving unconventional tools as the only means of providing further monetary accommodation. However, certain factors could be constraining the channels through which monetary policy accommodation affects the economy. In particular, many small businesses appear to be facing unusual obstacles in obtaining credit. If times were more typical, we would expect a smooth transmission in which lower interest rates would fuel credit expansion that would be used to finance expanding payrolls, capital investment, inventories, and other short-term operating expenses. Nonetheless, the latest Federal Reserve Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, which was taken in October, indicated that although domestic banks continued to ease standards on their commercial and industrial loans, the net fraction reporting easing on such loans to smaller firms (those with annual sales of less than $50 million) remained low.1Moreover, in recent quarters the fraction easing standards for smaller firms generally has been below that for loans to large and middle-sized firms. In its November survey, the National Federation of Independent Business continued to indicate a sizable proportion of small businesses reporting that credit has become more difficult to obtain.2These businesses not only expect credit to become tighter in coming months but--like other businesses--remain concerned about the broader economic outlook. Supervision and Examination of Large and Community BanksWhile the ability of businesses to access credit is a function of many factors, it is my view that the examination and supervision of the lender should not hinder the ability of creditworthy businesses to access credit. To be clear, I do not think this is occurring in any significant way, but it is an issue that we at the Federal Reserve focus on continually. Of course, banks are far more likely to be able to lend when they are in sound financial condition. In that regard, I am encouraged that community banks are faring better in the current environment. There is still considerable uncertainty about the health of residential and commercial real estate markets in many parts of the country, and many community banks' balance sheets remain weighed down with nonperforming real estate loans. At the same time, the competitive landscape is being shaped by increasing consolidation in the industry. Having said that, despite the tough road that many community banks still must navigate, there are promising signs that conditions seem to be stabilizing. While profitability remains below long‑run historical norms, returns on equity and assets have reached their highest post-crisis levels.3Earnings have steadily improved in recent quarters despite compressed net interest margins. Although nonperforming asset ratios remain high, they have continued to decline for community banks broadly speaking, and small community banks (those with total assets of less than $1 billion) in recent quarters have registered their first overall decreases in this ratio since the crisis began. Nonetheless, we must continue to think about how we can improve the examination and supervision of community banks. One issue that we constantly must evaluate is the appropriate balance in the allocation of responsibilities between banks and examiners.4In addition, we must always think about whether the allocation of responsibilities should be different depending on whether the supervision is of a community bank rather than a large bank, especially one whose failure could significantly disrupt the broader financial system.5Specifically, there are key differences between these two sets of institutions, and these differences have implications for our supervisory framework. The way the banking industry has evolved over at least the past decade indicates a trend toward greater concentration. Ninety-nine percent of banks in the United States are community banks, with most of these holding less than $1 billion in total assets. The remaining 1 percent of banks together hold more than 80 percent of the assets in the banking system, with much of this concentrated at a handful of the very largest banks. The four largest commercial banks, each of which has more than $1 trillion in consolidated assets, collectively hold just under half of all U.S. banking assets.6 The largest commercial banks are characterized not only by their size, but also by their scope of operations and complexity. Their legal and business line structures, balance sheets, and product offerings often are extraordinarily complex. For example, they have extensive trading and capital markets activities, and make significant use of over-the-counter derivative instruments and other complex financial products. They are relatively diversified, but also tend to be more highly leveraged than smaller institutions, and often rely on more volatile wholesale funding. These organizations often are tightly interconnected, raising the prospect that the failure of one institution could rapidly destabilize the wider financial system, giving rise to the "too-big-to-fail" problem.7 The characteristics of the largest commercial banks stand in contrast with those of community banks. To be clear, community banks are not immune from taking on excessive risk. But there are reasons why risks at community banks are likely to be less dangerous to the financial system. First, community banks generally are less complex and more easily understood. Second, community banks tend to be more traditional in approach. What is often referred to as "financial engineering" is less likely to become the norm in community banks because such engineering, by definition, may pose hidden risks that could reflect poorly on community bankers' judgment and negatively affect their image in the community if these risks are realized. Third, community banks are less interconnected, so when a community bank fails, the effects are less widespread. All of these characteristics have implications for how large and complex banks should be supervised, as compared with community banks. Notably, our supervision of large banks reflects the scope and complexity of their activities as well as their interactions with other firms and possible effects on financial markets, and incorporates systemic risk considerations that could arise from the failure of these banks. This circumstance requires regulators to make capital, liquidity, and risk‑management standards more stringent for large banks than for community banks. These standards not only are being established internationally, but also are required for the largest institutions under the Dodd-Frank Act. A critical part of this supervisory process is rigorous capital planning and stress testing to ensure that the largest institutions are capable of absorbing unforeseen shocks. The Federal Reserve, for example, requires the largest top-tier bank holding companies to submit annual capital plans and conduct rigorous stress tests as part of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review exercise.8In recognition of their systemic importance, the largest firms also are required to plan for their own orderly resolution in the event that they should fail. Because of their complexity and risk characteristics, these firms require intensive and continuous on-site supervision; the Federal Reserve has dozens of full-time examiners on site at the largest banks to monitor their risk-management systems, strategies, and operations on an ongoing basis. In the years since the crisis began, our supervision of these firms has become arguably much more intensive, which I believe is perfectly appropriate given the effect that problems at the largest firms had on the financial system and the broader economy. You may be asking, What does this have to do with community banks? Not very much--which is precisely my point. The community banking model is very different from that of the largest banks. Community banks are local by their very nature. They have deep roots in their communities. Their value proposition is that they are able and willing to take the time and effort to know and work with their customers in a way that may not be possible for a larger, more distant institution. This trait is particularly important when it comes to small business lending, where a local community bank may understand things about a prospective customer that cannot be captured in a more quantitative credit-scoring model that might be used by a larger institution. Risks at community banks tend to arise from their lending activities, whether in the form of credit or interest rate risk, and a lack of diversification can exacerbate these risks. Unlike large, complex banks, community banks typically do not rely on their investment portfolios or diversified business lines to offset low profits. All of these characteristics call for a very different model of examination and supervision than what is required for the largest banks. Just as community banks have a deep understanding of their local communities, it is important that examiners also understand local market conditions to be able to put the bank's management and credit decisions in the proper context. For example, when I was commissioner here, there was an old joke among state examiners that you never dared set foot in a bank on the Eastern Shore if you didn't know the latest monthly count of blue crabs. Strong lines of communication between examiners and community banks are vitally important. Examiners are only on site periodically at most community banks, so it is essential that when they are on site, they communicate clearly with management about supervisory concerns in order to help bankers make improvements as appropriate.9Examiners need to listen carefully to management to understand their perspective where views may differ. I also believe it is critically important for federal examiners to work closely with their state colleagues, especially since we have joint supervisory responsibility for state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System. When these working relationships are strong, the banks we jointly oversee receive supervisory messages that are consistent. The need for effective communication and feedback goes beyond the examination period. Examiners and other supervisory staff are often key sources of information on regulatory developments between examinations. We encourage our examiners to be responsive to questions from bankers and help banks understand new regulatory requirements, and they take this responsibility seriously. One of the analogies that I began to use years ago--and that I've shared with many of you--is that the risk-management system of a healthy bank can be pictured as a series of concentric circles. The inner circles consist of the systems and functions that keep the bank healthy and allow it to meet the credit needs of its community while remaining financially sound and compliant with its legal and regulatory obligations. Moving outward, additional circles include processes and checks such as internal audit, executive management committees, risk-management and internal controls, and appropriate governance by the board of directors. The outermost circle is effective supervision. The critical element of this model is that problem identification is first and foremost the responsibility of the bank, while banking supervisors kick the tires of the bank's risk-management and internal control systems. The examiners are, in this sense, a last line of defense and do not substitute for a bank's own processes for risk identification and mitigation. They are not a guarantee of the bank's ultimate success or failure. While I think this model of concentric circles generally holds true for banks of all sizes, the complexity of the largest institutions requires far more complex inner circles. Arguably, the financial crisis revealed that at many of the largest firms, the sophistication of these banks' governance, controls, and risk management did not keep pace with the rapid growth of risk. Moreover, because the potential cost of a breakdown at the largest firms includes losses that are external to the financial institution, it is essential that a strong outer circle of effective supervision be in place as an extra buffer to insulate other firms and taxpayers from systemic risk. I would suggest that the outer circle that is necessary at a systemically important bank should be far more layered than what is needed at a small community bank. Community Bank Supervision at the Federal ReserveOne way we at the Federal Reserve are working to ensure that our supervisory program is properly tailored to the wide array of institutions we supervise is to review policies that are under development with an eye toward considering the effect that these policies might have on smaller institutions. In this regard, along with my colleague Governor Betsy Duke, I serve on a subcommittee of the Board that oversees the supervision of community and small regional banking organizations. Among other things, we consider not only whether specific policies are appropriate for community banks, but also whether these policies could have the effect of reducing the availability of credit to sound borrowers. We are actively involved in providing greater clarity and specificity regarding the applicability of supervisory policies to community banks. One of the things that I try to do whenever I review policies is to draw on my experience of working with community banks in Maryland and think about the effects these policies are likely to have on community banks and the areas they serve. Ideally, our supervisory policies result in stronger community banks that are able to lend and promote sustainable economic growth in their communities. Let me conclude my remarks by again thanking you for the opportunity to share my thoughts today. I certainly don't claim to have all the answers when it comes to supervising community banks, but I hope my remarks will at least continue our conversation about how best to structure a regulatory and supervisory framework for the banking system that effectively supports the real economy and encourages sound and sustained lending to creditworthy borrowers. In order to sustain the economic recovery, we need strong, well-run community banks that operate in a framework of smart and effective supervision. I commend you for the work that you are doing every day in your communities, and I look forward to continuing the dialogue. 1. TheSenior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practicesis available on the Federal Reserve Board's website.Return to text 2. See National Federation of Independent Business (2011),NFIB Small Business Economic Trends (PDF)(Nashville: NFIB, December).Return to text 3. Observations about recent financial developments generally are based on Call Report data filed by banks as of September 30, 2011.Return to text 4. See Sarah Bloom Raskin (2011), "Community Bankers and Supervisors: Seeking Balance," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Community Bankers Conference, New York, N.Y., April 7.Return to text 5. For the purposes of these remarks and for the Federal Reserve's supervisory programs, the largest banking organizations are generally considered to be those banks and bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or greater. Oversight of approximately a dozen of the largest and most complex organizations is conducted by the Federal Reserve's Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee; see Ben S. Bernanke (2011), "Implementing a Macroprudential Approach to Supervision and Regulation," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's 47th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, Ill., May 5.Return to text 6. Of course, there are still banking organizations that are at neither end of the spectrum, which our supervisory program reflects. Regional banking organizations, for example, which are generally considered to be those banks and bank holding companies with total consolidated assets between $10 billion and $50 billion, share characteristics of both larger and smaller institutions, and we have a tailored supervisory program for those organizations. For the purposes of today's discussion, however, I would like to focus my remarks on the institutions at opposite ends of the spectrum.Return to text 7. When the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision recently issued rules for global banks that are systemically important, the methodology for determining system importance was based on five criteria: size, interconnectedness, lack of available substitutes, global/cross-jurisdictional activity, and complexity. See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2011),Global Systemically Important Banks: Assessment Methodology and the Additional Loss Absorbency Requirement(Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, November).Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Rule on Annual Capital Plans, Launches 2012 Review," press release, November 22.Return to text 9. Full-scope, on-site examinations of state member banks typically are required at least once during each 12-month period, although this may vary depending on, among other things, the size and condition of the bank. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2000),Commercial Bank Examination Manual (PDF), section 1000.1 (Washington: Board of Governors, May).Return to text
Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin At the Association of American Law Schools Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. Thank you and happy New Year. It is a pleasure to be with you today as you meet to discuss so many pressing and important issues. I know there has been much discussion at this conference about the public function of law schools and I commend you for tackling this essential challenge. In my speech today, I hope to add to the conversation a little bit by presenting a simple argument, that laws and regulations must be enforced, and enforcement must be part of what we teach lawyers and future lawmakers to study. What we think of as the rule of law encompasses not merely theories of the process by which public laws and regulations are created through particular legislative and administrative procedures, and not merely theories of how laws and regulations are interpreted by courts. The rule of law includes enforcement itself. The rule of law compels us to consider whether a rule has been crafted in such a way that it is capable of being complied with and capable of being enforced effectively by state actors. The rule of law also involves decisions about whether there has been compliance, and if not, what should be done about it. The failure of timely enforcement leads to the entrenchment of bad practices and an increase in the costs of correction. For example, turning to what will be the focus of my comments today--the role of mortgage servicers in the foreclosure crisis--the longer it takes for mortgage servicers to make the operational adjustments necessary to fix their sloppy and deceptive practices, the costlier and more difficult it becomes for them to sort them out and correct them. More fundamentally, a failure by regulators to enforce the laws and regulations as strong antidotes to financial misconduct and unsafe and unsound practices by the institutions they regulate establishes de facto acquiescence to the dominant norms of the financial marketplace. At that point, our laws become the resting place for unfair practices and broad disrespect for the law generally. This is a phenomenon that Shakespeare's Angelo observed in "Measure for Measure" when he said: We must not make a scarecrow of the law,Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,And let it keep one shape, till custom make itTheir perch and not their terror. For sure, different regulatory regimes could have different answers regarding the best way to enforce laws and regulations. As law professors teaching both the substance of law and the practice of law, I imagine you find ways within your courses and scholarship to discuss theories of enforcement--for example, the use of private rights of action versus enforcement by regulatory agencies; different enforcement tools such as memoranda of understanding, consent orders, and cease and desist agreements; how these different enforcement tools are sequenced; and whether and when violations of law should be publicized. In answering all of these questions, there is consensus that public enforcement should be used in addressing pervasive regulatory problems. Today I want to talk about how home mortgage foreclosures hurt the pace of an economic recovery, and how important it is that the severe misconduct that has been uncovered in the mortgage servicing sector be addressed through intensified public enforcement of the law as part of the overarching effort to rebuild our damaged communities and neighborhoods. Mortgage Servicing and the EconomyThe economic downturn that began in late 2007 and worsened considerably in the autumn of that year resulted in the worst recession in many decades. Although recovery from the recession officially began in the third quarter of 2009, the pace of recovery has been modest, resulting in an unemployment rate that has remained at or above 8.5 percent since mid-2009. This sustained high unemployment rate--with all the attendant social consequences, including lost income and family strains--has contributed to an unprecedented number of mortgage foreclosures throughout the nation. This wave of foreclosures is one of the factors hindering a rapid recovery in the economy. Traditionally, the housing sector, buoyed by low interest rates and pent-up demand, has played an important role in propelling economic recoveries. The increase in housing sales and construction often is accompanied by purchases of complementary goods, like furniture and appliances, which magnify the effect of the housing recovery. However, six years after house prices first began to fall, the pace of the economic recovery remains slow. Nationally, house prices have fallen by nearly one-third since their peak in the first quarter of 2006, and total homeowners' equity in the United States has shrunk by more than one-half--a loss of more than $7 trillion. The drop in house prices has had far-reaching effects on families, neighborhoods, small businesses, and the economy, in part because so many American families--more than 65 percent--own their homes. The fall in house prices has caused families to cut back on their spending and has prevented them from using their home equity to fund education expenses or start small businesses. The decline in house prices has also impeded families from benefiting from the historically low level of interest rates, as perhaps only half of homeowners who could profitably refinance have the equity and creditworthiness needed to qualify for traditional refinancing.1 Throughout the successive waves in foreclosures that have occurred since 2007, problems in mortgage servicing have emerged and persisted. These problems have included critical weaknesses in mortgage servicers' foreclosure governance processes, foreclosure document preparation processes, and oversight and monitoring of third-party law firms and other vendors. Collectively, these problems have hampered the ability of the courts and the markets to work through the foreclosure inventory in an efficient manner. Significant judicial resources are being expended on resolving the legal problems related to mortgage servicing. Indeed, the dockets of federal courts, bankruptcy courts, and state courts include numerous cases involving a wide range of troubling issues, such as claims of missing or forged promissory notes; claims that mortgage servicers have foreclosed on the houses of active-duty U.S. soldiers who are legally eligible to have foreclosures halted; sworn affidavits containing false "facts" that homeowners were in arrears for amounts not yet due; claims of falsifications of documents required to transfer ownership of the mortgage; allegations of false affidavits claiming homeowners owe fees for services never rendered; and claims of false affidavits overstating how much homeowners are behind on their payments. And this is a sampling of the legal issues related just to mortgage servicing. There is another galaxy of vexing issues surrounding recordation and title issues and claims related to an entity called the Mortgage Electronic Registration System, or MERS. Significantly, the necessarily slow pace of a judicial response to these legal issues hinders the ability of the housing market to regain function and become a driver of a more-robust economic recovery. Response to MisconductIn addition to the effect on the macroeconomy, this current judicial morass reflects profound and pervasive misconduct in mortgage servicing. It also calls for timely public enforcement. While the courts sort out--one by one--the mortgage servicing cases, the Federal Reserve, together with other federal and state regulators, must create, implement, and complete an enforcement response. Accordingly, in 2010, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies began a targeted review of mortgage servicing problems at 14 large, federally regulated financial institutions that had significant market concentrations in mortgage servicing. From these examinations, the agencies found significant problems with the mortgage servicing and foreclosure processing at all 14 of them, which collectively represent more than two-thirds of all mortgage servicing volume nationally. The problems found by the agencies pose risks to the safety and soundness of the institutions, impair the functioning of mortgage markets, and diminish overall accountability of mortgage servicers to homeowners. As a result of these findings, in April 2011 the Federal Reserve issued formal enforcement actions requiring the four mortgage servicers that it regulates and the holding companies of six national bank servicers regulated by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) to address the deficient practices in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing.2The OCC and the Office of Thrift Supervision simultaneously issued actions against mortgage servicers, resulting in enforcement actions against 14 banking institutions with mortgage servicing operations. The enforcement actions are cease and desist orders and are legally enforceable in federal court. The enforcement orders require, among other things, the mortgage servicers to submit corrective action plans addressing the errors discovered during the targeted reviews and to implement practices designed to prevent future abuses in the loan modification and foreclosure process. The plans must be acceptable to the Federal Reserve. And to be acceptable, for example, the plans must detail ways the mortgage servicer will increase and enhance the staffing and other resources allocated to the mortgage servicer's loan modification and foreclosure departments. Such requirements relate to the failure of mortgage servicers to provide adequate staffing to carry out residential mortgage loan servicing, loss mitigation, and foreclosure activities. The increased resources required by the enforcement orders are meant to improve a homeowner's ability to readily obtain information and assistance from the mortgage servicer and to decrease errors made by mortgage servicers when modifying loans or pursuing foreclosures. The corrective action plans also must address other significant mortgage servicing and foreclosure-governance shortfalls and must be designed to ensure compliance with state and federal mortgage servicing and foreclosure laws. They must also improve foreclosure management information systems; establish robust controls and oversight over the activities of third party vendors; and strengthen communication with borrowers during loss mitigation and foreclosure processes. Many of the corrective action plans mandated by the enforcement actions require mortgage servicers to change the way they conduct critical aspects of their business. For example, the corrective action plans require improved communications with borrowers before a foreclosure may proceed. In particular, the mortgage servicer must thoroughly explore loan modification options with the homeowner. The mortgage servicer must also improve the way it communicates with homeowners by establishing a "single point of contact" for homeowners in loss mitigation or foreclosure to use when they need help from the mortgage servicer in addressing problems. By having a single person at the mortgage servicer with whom to communicate, homeowners should be able to receive more reliable, accurate, and prompt information about their mortgages, modification options, and the status of any foreclosure actions. These orders also require each firm to hire an independent consultant to review the firms' past practices to identify specific cases in which these practices resulted in financial injury to specific consumers. This enforcement technique, known as a "look-back," is the current subject of much debate in the mortgage servicing context because it requires firms to use an independent consultant. The consultant reports both to the enforcing agency and to the firm, allowing the agency to better monitor and judge the completeness of the look-back. Requiring an independent review of certain banking operations is not a new enforcement tool. Historically, independent reviews have most often been required by the Federal Reserve in connection with a banking organization's money-laundering or Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctions-compliance programs. Independent reviews typically require the regulated entity to hire a third party to do more time-intensive work than the regulator has already done. The examiners have perhaps found a problem and want the institution, at its own expense rather than taxpayer expense, to do more extensive scoping and remediation. Monetary Penalties and TransparencyThe enforcement actions against these 14 institutions and the associated corrective action plans are only a start in a comprehensive enforcement response to the foreclosure crisis. Monetary penalties for the deficient practices in mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing also must be imposed against the 14 institutions. The Federal Reserve and other federal regulators must impose penalties for deficiencies that resulted in unsafe and unsound practices or violations of federal law, just as state banking commissioners and state attorneys general impose penalties for violations of state law. The Federal Reserve believes monetary sanctions in these cases are appropriate and plans to announce monetary penalties. One purpose of monetary penalties, when they are appropriately sized, is to incentivize mortgage servicers to incorporate strong programs to comply with laws when they build their business models. This is an operational purpose, but as mentioned earlier, monetary penalties also remind regulated institutions that non-compliance has real consequences; the law is not a scarecrow where the birds of prey can seek refuge and perch to plan their next attack. It is also worth noting the obvious, which is that Congress enacted some of the laws that are allegedly being violated--they are public laws. Their efficacy must be evaluated and re-evaluated by the public. This means that enforcement of laws must occur in a manner that permits an appropriate public evaluation. There is currently a lively debate about the appropriateness and value of transparency regarding the regulatory remediation required by the enforcement actions entered into with the 14 mortgage servicers. The fact that this public debate is occurring is entirely appropriate, and underscores the importance that Americans place on enforcement in the mortgage servicing context. The cease and desist orders against the 14 large mortgage servicers are publicly available; they have been fully disclosed. The corrective actions that the mortgage servicers are undertaking pursuant to the enforcement actions in an appropriate format also need to be shared with the public. Not only is the public directly and significantly affected by how the acts of mortgage servicers have contributed to the state of the economy, but cities, neighborhoods, and communities have a direct and significant interest in the role that mortgage servicers play in the value of a homeowner's investment. ConclusionToo many of the practices in the mortgage servicing industry have been developed and defended solely on the basis of "standard industry practice," but many practices were not only standard, but shoddy. This has proven true, I might add, on the underwriting and secondary-market sides of the business, and we are seeing courts reject many of those practices. Appropriately tailored enforcement against these mortgage servicing practices is necessary as one way to rebuild an important sector of the housing market. Accordingly, current deficiencies must be corrected. What's more, financial institutions need to understand that they are responsible for assessing the effects their actions will have on consumers and the country as a whole, and factor those considerations into their business decisions. We should not forget that effective enforcement of our laws can animate our efforts as policymakers, regulators, business innovators, legal educators, and lawyers in creating the conditions that must exist for the emergence of an improved mortgage-servicing model that hinders neither economic growth nor homeowners' legal security. If a law is worth having, the law is worth enforcing. Thank you. 1.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "The U.S. Housing Market: Current Conditions and Policy Considerations (PDF),"white paper (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).Return to text 2.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "Federal Reserve Issues Enforcement Actions Related to Deficient Practices in Residential Mortgage Loan Servicing and Foreclosure Processing," press release, April 13.Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Virginia Bankers Association/Virginia Chamber of Commerce 2012 Financial Forecast, Richmond, Virginia It is the start of a new year, the traditional time for making forecasts, so I am pleased to be here today to offer my perspective on recent economic developments and on the outlook for the U.S. economy. After a rough patch early in 2011, the economy appears to have regained a little momentum near the end of the year, and I expect that it will most likely continue on a path of gradual recovery in 2012. Because conditions in the housing market are such a strong drag on recovery, I will also outline some initiatives that I believe have the potential to accelerate improvement in that sector. Before I begin, I want to emphasize that the views that I will be presenting are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Board of Governors. Recent Economic DevelopmentsFollowing the sharp downturn in 2008 and the first half of 2009, real economic activity has now been expanding for more than two years (chart 1). However, the recovery has not been as strong as might have been expected given the steepness of the contraction. Early last year it threatened to stall out altogether. To be sure, economic growth in the first half of last year was depressed by some transitory factors, including high energy prices and the effects of the tragic earthquake in Japan on the production of motor vehicles. Still, even as these influences on the economy waned over the second half of 2011, economic activity appears to have increased at only a moderate pace. Perhaps the most telling measure of the subpar pace of recovery is the painfully slow improvement in the labor market. Employment gains were tepid last year and made only a small dent in the large number of people who are still out of work (chart 2). In recent months, there have been glimmers of hope seen in the job market. For example, payroll employment rose 200,000 in December and the unemployment rate, which had hovered around 9 percent for most of the year, fell to 8.5 percent, a rate that while still far too high was the lowest in 2-1/2 years (chart 3). That said, other economic data have improved more modestly, and the bulk of the evidence, including help-wanted advertising and surveys of employers' hiring plans, suggests that the job market is not poised for marked improvement in the months ahead. Indeed, my own expectation is that while the trend in unemployment will be gradually lower, the path to get there might be choppy. On a brighter note, consumer spending looked a bit stronger in the latter part of last year after an anemic first half (chart 4). The pickup in consumer spending was fairly widespread through November and, although we don't yet have a full set of December data in hand, sales of motor vehicles remained solid at an annual rate of 13.5 million units last month, and reports of holiday spending were upbeat. That said, there are some reasons not to get too optimistic about this sector of the economy: Many of the underlying forces that typically support consumer spending are still quite weak, including the high unemployment rate, sluggish income growth, sentiment that remains relatively low despite recent improvements (chart 5), and the lingering effects of the earlier declines in household wealth. Housing markets--which I will discuss in more detail shortly--have shown only slight signs of improvement: Housing demand and homebuilding (chart 6) continue to be restrained by weak income and sentiment, tight lending standards, and a large overhang of vacant properties (chart 7). As for the business sector, the uncertain durability of the recovery appears to be discouraging businesses from decisively increasing their productive capacity. Notwithstanding a surge around mid-2011, on balance, firms appear to have increased their spending on equipment and structures at a less robust pace in 2011 than they did in the prior year. The pace of inventory accumulation was also quite modest. The most recent indicators suggest more of the same: Orders and shipments of capital goods have been subdued in the past few months, commercial vacancy rates remain elevated (chart 8), and most indicators of business sentiment remain mediocre (chart 9). The government sector also continues to be a substantial drag on activity, both at the federal level (chart 10)--where defense and nondefense spending look to have dropped last year--and at the state and local levels (chart 11). The declines in state and local government expenditures reflect continuing cutbacks in both employment and construction outlays. The budgets of these governments are quite strained by the ongoing phase-out of federal stimulus grants and the weakness of local tax collections. One area of the economy that has been performing relatively favorably is the trade sector. In the third quarter, the annualized growth rate of exports of domestically produced goods and services was about 5 percent, while net exports--that is, exports less imports--contributed nearly one half of a percentage point to the increase in real GDP, about one-fourth of the overall gain (chart 12). However, in recent weeks, many forecasters have weakened their global outlooks substantially, which certainly does not bode well for U.S. exports going forward. Turning to inflation, after a surge early last year, the price index for personal consumption expenditures decelerated considerably toward the end of the year and rose at an annual rate of just 1/4 percent in the three months ending in November (chart 13). This welcome news likely reflects the waning of the effects of the large run-ups in the prices of crude oil and other commodities early last year as well as some reversal of the increase in motor vehicle prices that followed the earthquake-related supply disruptions last spring. The Economic OutlookLooking forward, my baseline forecast is for economic activity to gradually pick up steam over the next year or so. I recognize thatsome of the factors holding back the pace of activity are likely to persist.For example, with sluggish employment growth, household income may not be strong enough to support sustained increases in consumer spending. Government spending will likely continue to be a drag on economic growth going forward. Under current federal law and most projected outcomes of congressional budget negotiations, some ongoing fiscal restraint seems probable at the federal level. Moreover, state and local budgets are likely to remain under severe pressure for some time, leading these jurisdictions to continue to scale back spending. And, as I said earlier, a weak forecast for global growth indicates that net exports may provide less support to the U.S. recovery going forward. However, I do believe that the headwinds from tight credit conditions for businesses and households, with the exception of mortgage credit, are beginning to subside. Financial institutions in the United States have stronger capital positions than they did in 2008, and the Federal Reserve continues to regularly test the ability of the largest institutions to withstand economic stress (chart 14). Bank deposits have grown substantially, thereby allowing many banks to reduce their dependence on more volatile wholesale funding (chart 15). And, although loan balances have increased in recent months, they remain well below their peak levels, leaving banks with substantial liquidity. Measures of credit stress such as reductions in nonperforming assets, delinquencies, and charge-off rates show steady improvement in credit quality. As a result, most banks are now actively seeking loan growth to improve their profitability. In fact, competition for loans, along with an improving outlook for the economy, has caused lenders to ease their standards from the stringent ones applied during the recession. In the area of business lending, the Federal Reserve's latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) (chart 16) and the Survey of Terms of Business Lending (chart 17) indicate improving conditions for corporate borrowers.1To a lesser extent, but still showing some easing, are standards for small business and commercial real estate loans. In the household sector, I believe that high profile problems in the mortgage market may have distracted attention from a noticeable improvement in some measures of the household debt burden. The total debt owed by households as a share of their income, which was rising through 2007, has been falling since then (chart 18). In addition, the ratio of household debt payments to income has dropped precipitously in recent years. In a sign that consumers who still have debt are having less difficulty making their payments, delinquency and charge-off rates on credit card and auto loans have returned to pre-crisis levels (chart 19), and even mortgage delinquency rates have declined somewhat from the extraordinarily high peaks reached in late 2009. Of course, some of the causes of the declining debt ratios are not the kinds of things you would typically describe as grounds for optimism. In particular, one reason that many households owe less debt today than in recent years is that banks wrote off an unprecedented amount of loans between 2008 and 2011, much of it as a result of foreclosure or bankruptcy. However, although bankruptcies and foreclosures are wrenching events for the households involved, the associated discharge of debt can lay the foundation for a fresh start once income prospects improve. While unusually high charge-offs tell part of the declining household debt story, a drop-off in new loans--resulting from both tepid loan demand and tight loan supply--likely played a larger role. Loan demand weakened during the recession as households delayed purchasing houses and consumer goods because of rising unemployment, weak income growth, and the steep declines in household wealth. At the same time, lenders responded to high delinquency rates by tightening credit standards. Although mortgage credit conditions remain tight, much of the tightening in other consumer credit markets appears to be unwinding. As indicated on the SLOOS, the number of loan officers reporting easing standards for consumer loans now exceeds those reporting tightening standards and the willingness of banks to make consumer installment loans has rebounded (chart 20). Standards for credit cards are still restrictive relative to those that prevailed before the crisis, but this may be a response to legislation that changed the regulations governing credit cards in addition to economic conditions. But, even here, fewer loan officers reported reducing credit card limits and raising credit card interest rates relative to their cost of funds. I consider the recent signs of new life in the consumer credit markets to be cause for optimism because they suggest that when households do regain confidence in the recovery and are ready to begin spending on consumer goods again, the credit markets will not be as much of a constraint as they were during the recession. Indeed, an upside risk to my forecast is that consumers who postponed spending during the past few years could decide to unexpectedly take the plunge and make those purchases. For example, auto purchases seem to be especially good candidates for surprise as the average age of cars on the road indicates pent-up demand and credit is readily accessible. Moreover, as households gain confidence that job and income prospects are improving, that should provide a further boost to spending and loan demand. Businesses are in an even better position than households to increase spending as confidence returns. Corporate cash positions are at record highs, and corporate debt is at similarly low levels (chart 21). Although business spending has thus far powered much of the recovery, businesses have still only been spending at a pace sufficient to replace outworn capital and to support increases in capacity that are pretty modest for a business cycle recovery. As businesses become more certain of the durability of the recovery, I expect that they will become more willing to further expand productive capacity, particularly with new business equipment and software. Of course, strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. Monetary accommodation works, in part, by lowering interest rates, increasing equity prices, and bolstering the availability of credit for households and firms. But central banks around the world are finding that the beneficial effects of their monetary policies on financial conditions are being offset, to some extent, as movements in financial markets are increasingly driven by headlines regarding actual, contemplated, or even rumored action by European officials. And the potential fallout from the sovereign debt crisis in Europe remains a serious concern. Although European authorities are taking steps to address the region's fiscal problems and shore up its banking system, there is some risk that financial difficulties in the euro zone could intensify substantially. In such circumstances, the direct hit to U.S. trade associated with a deep recession in Europe could be considerable. Given the significant financial linkages between the United States and Europe, a worsening crisis in Europe would likely lead to additional strains in U.S. financial markets, resulting in yet another blow to the U.S. economy. Proposals to Support Housing Market RecoveryBack on U.S. shores, I want to focus the remainder of my discussion today on the housing and mortgage markets, which are so important for the economic recovery. As I alluded to earlier, and as I am sure you are all very well aware, housing markets have shown little sign of improvement so far in this recovery. This stands in sharp contrast to the important role that the housing sector has typically played in propelling economic recoveries (chart 22). During a downturn, reduced spending on durable goods--including housing--generates pent-up demand, which in itself helps sow the seeds of recovery. Once the cycle bottoms out, improving economic prospects and diminishing uncertainty usually help unleash this pent-up demand. This upward demand pressure is often augmented by lower interest rates, to which housing demand is typically quite responsive. Moreover, spillovers from increased housing demand--such as wealth effects from higher house prices, purchases of complementary goods such as furniture and appliances, as well as strengthening bank balance sheets--have, in the past, provided a powerful additional impetus to the recovery. Thus far, however, the housing sector has not contributed to the recovery. In addition to the lack of any meaningful improvement in residential construction, the expansion has also been hindered by the steep descent of house prices. To date, house prices have fallen by nearly one-third from their peak (chart 23), pushing home equity as a share of personal income to its lowest level on record (chart 24) and wiping out $7 trillion of housing equity. Further, this decline in housing wealth--and the associated hit to consumer confidence--has not only been a meaningful and persistent drag on overall consumer spending, it has also been enough to push nearly 12 million homeowners underwater on their mortgages, that is their houses are now worth less than their mortgage balances (chart 25). Without equity in their homes, many households who have suffered hardships such as unemployment or unexpected illness have been unable to resolve mortgage payment problems through refinancing their mortgages or selling their homes. The resulting mortgage delinquencies have ended in all too many cases in foreclosure, dislocation, and personal hardship. Neighborhoods and communities have also suffered profoundly from the onslaught of foreclosures, as the neglect and deterioration that frequently accompany vacant properties makes neighborhoods less desirable places to live and may put further downward pressure on house prices.2 The problems that led to the mortgage crisis and the potential policy solutions to those problems are numerous and varied. Even though time does not permit a full discussion of them here, I do believe that forceful and effective housing policies have the potential to significantly influence the speed and strength of our economic recovery. The Federal Reserve has already acted to reduce mortgage rates by purchasing longer-term assets, in particular through the purchase of agency mortgage-backed securities. Indeed, low rates combined with falling house prices have contributed to historically high levels of housing affordability (chart 26). At the same time, rents have been rising, which should make homeownership a more attractive option relative to rental housing (chart 27). Despite this record affordability, home purchase and mortgage refinancing activity remains muted. The failure of home sales to respond to conditions that would otherwise seem favorable to home purchases indicates that there are other factors weighing on demand for owner-occupied homes. High levels of unemployment and weak income prospects are likely precluding many households from purchasing homes. In addition, some potential buyers may be delaying house purchases out of fear of purchasing into a falling market. Weak prices also contribute to the reportedly large number of purchase contracts that are canceled due to appraisals that come in too low to support financing. Finally, many households are unable to purchase homes because of mortgage credit conditions, which are substantially tighter now than they were prior to the recession. Some of this tightening is appropriate, as mortgage lending standards were lax, at best, in the years before the peak in house prices. However, the extraordinarily tight standards that currently prevail reflect, in part, new obstacles that inhibit lending even to creditworthy borrowers. These tight standards can take many forms, including stricter underwriting, higher fees and interest rates, more stringent documentation requirements, larger required down payments, stricter appraisal standards, and fewer available mortgage products. This tightening in mortgage credit can be seen in the increase in the credit scores associated with newly originated prime and Federal Housing Administration (FHA) mortgage originations (charts 28 and 29), which suggests that borrowers who likely had access to mortgage credit a few years ago are now essentially excluded from the mortgage market. Tight standards are an obstacle to mortgage refinancing as well. The credit scores on new refinancings have risen in line with the credit scores on home purchase loans. Low or negative home equity presents an additional barrier to refinancing, with perhaps only about half of homeowners who could profitably refinance having the equity and creditworthiness needed to qualify for traditional refinancing. Although government programs have facilitated refinancing for many borrowers, many others have still not benefited from the low levels of interest rates. Surprisingly, this tightness persists even when guarantees from the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) or the FHA are available to shield lenders from credit risk. Estimates by Federal Reserve staff suggest that less than half of lenders currently offer purchase mortgages to borrowers whose credit metrics fall into the lower range of GSE purchase parameters (chart 30). Lenders reportedly attribute this hesitancy to concerns about the high cost of servicing in the event of loan delinquency, and to fears that the GSEs could force lenders to repurchase loans if the borrower defaults. Although this ability of the GSEs to "put back" loans to lenders helps protect the taxpayers from losses, an open question is whether the costs of the associated contraction in credit availability outweigh the benefits of risk mitigation. At the same time that housing demand has weakened, the number of homes for sale is elevated relative to historical norms, due in large part to the swollen inventory of homes held by banks, guarantors, and servicers after completion of foreclosure proceedings.3These properties are known as real estate owned, or REO, properties. Furthermore, sales by REO owners are often characterized as distressed sales because the regulatory and contractual constraints they face affect their options and incentives for disposing of the properties and may affect their willingness to improve the properties or to sell them at a discount, which in turn would affect home prices beyond the increase in overall supply. Since 2008, distressed sales have consistently accounted for one-third or more of existing home sales, compared with only a small fraction of sales in preceding decades (chart 31). In addition to increasing the supply of homes for sale, these distressed sales may have an effect on all house prices in a given area if appraisers do not adjust for the differences between distressed and nondistressed sales. And as these discounted transactions go on the books, they can effectively contribute to tighter credit conditions both because they might lower mortgage appraisals for nearby nondistressed properties and because mortgage lenders are motivated to offer tighter credit terms in declining markets. Taken together, these mechanisms create a negative feedback loop between prices, credit terms, and inventories of distressed property in falling markets that may cause prices to overshoot their underlying values. Given the severity of problems with supply and demand in the housing market, it is unlikely that any single policy solution will provide the full answer, but a number of different policies each have the potential to yield incremental improvement in housing and economic recovery. In the long term, policymakers will need to decide the future role, if any, that the government will play in housing finance. And they will need to decide how to best wean the GSEs away from government conservatorship. In the short term, however, I believe policymakers should at least consider policies that take into account the role the GSEs could play in hastening the healing of the housing market rather than focusing entirely on minimizing losses to the GSEs. In the end, breaking the current logjam created by large numbers of loans severely past due or in foreclosure and high levels of distressed sales should help reduce losses to the GSEs by breaking the downward cycle in prices. And, I think it is plausible that a faster recovery in the housing markets could speed, rather than slow, the end of GSE conservatorship. In recent months, a group of staff at the Federal Reserve has been studying ways in which the housing market is hindering the economic recovery and possible remedies for those difficulties. This week we published a white paper that discusses issues and trade-offs to consider in developing policies that would facilitate recovery in the housing market. It contains discussions of a number of policies that I believe, if implemented effectively, could result in better economic performance.4 For example, policies that increase credit availability for homeowners or investors seeking to purchase a home or to refinance an existing mortgage would allow more borrowers to access lower interest rates and thus improve the transmission of monetary policy to the economy. Renewed attention to a broad menu of options to modify existing mortgages would provide aid to struggling homeowners and would help to reduce the flow of foreclosed homes into distressed inventory. When foreclosure cannot be avoided, incentives provided to homeowners that encourage short sales and deeds-in-lieu of foreclosure can reduce the time and costs of foreclosure and minimize negative effects on communities. In addition, expanding the options available for holders of foreclosed properties to dispose of their inventory responsibly could reduce the number of distressed sales and the effect of those sales on home prices. For example, in many housing markets the demand for rental housing is much stronger relative to supply than in the market for owner-occupied homes. Reducing some of the barriers to converting foreclosed properties to rental units will help to redeploy the existing stock of houses in a more efficient way. Along the same lines, aggressive neighborhood stabilization efforts, including transferring low-value properties to public or nonprofit entities, such as land banks, that can manage properties that are not dealt with adequately through the private market, could lessen the effect of foreclosures on the prices of homes in the surrounding neighborhoods. Finally, the housing crisis highlighted the destructive power of weak underwriting, inadequate disclosure, conflicting incentives, incomplete data, and uneven infrastructure. Any long-term solution must address all of these issues through regulation, standardization of contracts, and effective use of technology. Private investors are not likely to return to mortgage markets until there are common standards as well as consistency and transparency in both mortgage securitization and mortgage servicing. A modern national lien registry that clearly identifies the current servicer of a mortgage and all the liens that encumber the property could increase transparency, improve the quality of mortgage servicing, and facilitate loan modifications. As I noted earlier, I believe that continued weakness in the housing market poses a significant barrier to a more vigorous economic recovery. Although there is no miracle cure here, these actions have the potential to help the economy recuperate more quickly than I currently expect it to, moving us closer to full employment sooner and improving the lives of many Americans. ConclusionTo sum up, I expect continued moderate recovery in 2012. My forecast is for the unemployment rate to gradually (and perhaps fitfully) move lower and for inflation to settle over coming quarters at or below levels consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. In this environment, I believe that the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate. However, the economic situation remains very uncertain, and I see considerable risks, on both the downside and the upside, to the forecast I've laid out here. While potential spillover from the situation in Europe certainly represents a downside risk to this forecast, I also believe that the steadily improving consumer debt picture represents an upside risk. And any acceleration in the repair of housing and mortgage markets could add even stronger momentum to recovery. As always, the FOMC will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information, and we are prepared to employ our tools as appropriate to foster economic recovery in a context of price stability. 1. See the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices and the Survey of Terms of Business Lending; data are available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/SnLoanSurveyandwww.federalreserve.gov/releases/e2, respectively.Return to text 2. See, for example, John Y. Campbell, Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak (2011), "Forced Sales and House Prices,"American Economic Review, vol. 101(15), pp. 2108-31; and John P. Harding, Eric Rosenblatt, and Vincent W. Yao (2009), "The Contagion Effect of Foreclosed Properties,"Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 66 (3), pp. 164-78.Return to text 3. Although the numbers are difficult to measure precisely, estimates by Federal Reserve staff suggest that perhaps as many as one-fourth of the 2 million houses for sale in the second quarter of 2011 were REO properties, with an anticipated future inflow of foreclosures perhaps as high as 1 million units in both 2012 and 2013.Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "The U.S. Housing Market: Current Conditions and Policy Considerations (PDF),"white paper (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).Return to text
On January 9, 2012, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $3 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were pro-rated at 5.85 percent. Resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 except that all awards below $10,000 were rounded up to $10,000. The awarded deposits will settle on January 12, 2012, and will mature on February 9, 2012. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded deposits.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached table and charts summarizing the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents for the January 24-25 meeting of the Committee. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the January 24-25 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximately quarterly schedule.Projection Materials:PDF|Accessible Figures For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the appointment of Jon Faust as special adviser in the Office of Board Members, effective January 17. Faust is the Louis J. Maccini Professor of Economics at Johns Hopkins University as well as the director of the university's Center for Financial Economics. At the Board, Faust will be joining Andrew Levin (also a special adviser) in contributing to the monetary policy process and in staffing the Federal Open Market Committee's subcommittee on communications. In addition, Faust will work closely with Steven Kamin, director of the Division of International Finance, and the Division's staff in analyzing key international issues. He also will assist the Board with other special projects as appropriate. "Jon has an exceptional breadth of expertise in international economics, monetary economics, finance, and econometrics, along with nearly two decades of prior experience in the Federal Reserve System," said Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. Prior to joining the Johns Hopkins faculty in 2006, Faust served as assistant director in the Division of International Finance. He joined the Board staff in 1991 after spending time as a visiting faculty member at Princeton University and as an economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Faust holds a Ph.D. in economics from the University of California, Berkeley, an M.Phil. in economics from Oxford University, and a B.S. in economics from the University of Iowa. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Gold Canyon Bank (PDF), Gold Canyon, ArizonaWritten Agreement dated January 4, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Southwest Florida Community Bancorp, Inc. (PDF), Fort Myers, FloridaWritten Agreement dated January 10, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Tennessee Central Bancshares, Inc. (PDF), Parsons, TennesseeWritten Agreement dated January 12, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Bank of Bartlett (PDF), Bartlett, TennesseePrompt Corrective Action Directive dated January 30, 2012 Capitol City Bancshares, Inc. (PDF), Atlanta, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated January 25, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Thursday that Chairman Ben S. Bernanke will deliver a series of lectures aimed at college students. Beginning on March 20, he will lead four classes on "The Federal Reserve and Its Role in Today's Economy" as part of a course offered to undergraduates at the George Washington University School of Business. The class will feature a variety of speakers who will discuss central banking. Chairman Bernanke's lectures are scheduled for March 20, 22, 27 and 29 and will begin at 12:45 pm EDT. Online viewing will be available to the public atwww.ustream.tv/channel/federalreserve. After the lectures, the Board will post transcripts and video recordings atwww.federalreserve.gov. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Following careful deliberations at its recent meetings, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has reached broad agreement on the following principles regarding its longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each January. The FOMC is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee's policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee's goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee judges that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate. Communicating this inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee's ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market.These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee's policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants' estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC's Summary of Economic Projections. For example, in the most recent projections, FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment had a central tendency of 5.2 percent to 6.0 percent, roughly unchanged from last January but substantially higher than the corresponding interval several years earlier. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee's assessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately, notwithstanding some slowing in global growth. While indicators point to some further improvement in overall labor market conditions, the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending has continued to advance, but growth in business fixed investment has slowed, and the housing sector remains depressed. Inflation has been subdued in recent months, and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth over coming quarters to be modest and consequently anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee also anticipates that over coming quarters, inflation will run at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee's dual mandate. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions--including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run--are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014. The Committee also decided to continue its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in September. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Dennis P. Lockhart; Sandra Pianalto; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Daniel K. Tarullo; John C. Williams; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the action was Jeffrey M. Lacker, who preferred to omit the description of the time period over which economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate.
On Monday, January 9, 2012, the Federal Reserve will offer $3 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's September 8, 2010 release, this offering is part of ongoing small-value operations designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to become familiar with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Offering and Competitive Auction Parameters Competitive bids submitted at the stop-out rate will be pro-rated and will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. Non-Competitive bids are allowed in this auction. All non-competitive bids will be automatically awarded in full at the stop-out rate of the competitive auction. The minimum amount for a non-competitive bid is $10,000; the maximum amount is $5,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. Non-Competitive bids must be submitted between 10:00 a.m. ET and 2:00 p.m. ET on the auction date. Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the auction date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, results will be posted on the Term Deposit Facility Resource Center page of the Central Bank Central website (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Participant awards will be posted to the Term Deposit Facility application at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date, and participants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application.
The Federal Reserve on Friday released blank templates showing the format of the two charts it will use on January 25 to report Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' projections of the appropriate target federal funds rate. It also released a draft of an explanatory note that will accompany the projections. The first chart, which will have shaded bars when released on January 25, will show FOMC participants’ projections for the timing of the initial increase in the target federal funds rate. The second chart, which will have dots representing policymakers’ individual projections when released on January 25, will show participants’ views of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate over the next several years and in the longer run. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Robins School of Business, Robins Executive Speaker Series, University of Richmond, Richmond, Virginia It is certainly a pleasure to be here at the University of Richmond and take part in the Robins Executive Speaker Series. Tonight I have been asked to share with you some of the memorable experiences and amazing opportunities that have shaped my journey from theater major to part-time drive-through teller to Federal Reserve Governor. I'll talk a bit about banking and the important role lending plays in the economy. I'll describe how my banking career led me to a seat on the Federal Reserve Board and how that unique perspective helped me add value after I arrived there. I will then explain some of the actions taken by the central bank at a time of extraordinary financial uncertainty, and I'll describe some of the attributes that make the Federal Reserve an institution like no other. I'll end with a few thoughts that might resonate with the students in the audience as they conclude their studies and prepare to join the workforce. Bye, Bye, Broadway--Hello, BoardroomI never planned to be a banker. I wanted to be an actress. I spent my college years pursuing a degree in dramatic art. I chose a career in banking for one simple reason: I needed a job. Regardless of economic conditions, the acting profession has an unemployment rate of about 95 percent--or so it seemed to me at the time. So I looked for something I could do almost anywhere and with hours that would leave plenty of time to pursue my dream. I found a job as a part-time drive-through teller. Later, when I needed a full-time job, I went to work in a start-up bank. And even though I didn't start out to be a banker, I found a career in that little bank. The president of the bank was a man named Burt Harrison. Burt was an old-fashioned community banker and a natural teacher. He taught me everything he knew about banking, and that was plenty. Fifteen years later, when he died suddenly of a massive heart attack, I had learned enough to take his place as chief executive officer. My banking education began with him as my mentor and with plenty of on-the-job training, which was later supplemented with industry schools and an MBA earned at night. Because the bank was just starting up, there were only 11 employees. With lots of work to be done and not many people to do it, I was able to try my hand at nearly every job at the bank and to see the results of every action that was taken. Much of my time as a community banker was spent lending to small businesses. In many banks today, small business lending is an automated process that relies on computers to analyze data and determine a borrower's creditworthiness. For me, the process was personal. It involved sitting eyeball to eyeball across the table from my customer. More often than not, the customer was someone I knew well and had been lending to for years. Occasionally, he or she represented the second or even third generation to run the business. Or the business itself was the second or third venture that I had financed for the same borrower. There were financial statements to be gathered and analyzed. Usually it was difficult, if not impossible, to separate the business and personal finances. But understanding the borrower's ability to successfully run a business was just as important as analyzing the numbers. I spent a lot of time talking to business owners about their businesses. In fact, sometimes I thought they came in looking for a sounding board for their ideas as much as they were looking for money. At times, especially during the economic downturn of the early 1990s, I had to deal with problem loans. Some were resolved through restructure and some through foreclosure. Now, as a bank regulator in the middle of a financial crisis, this deep personal understanding of the lending and loan collection process strongly influences my policy views. And I have never lost sight of the importance of those small businesses to local economies or the importance of loan availability to small businesses. From Community Banker to Central BankerI fully expected to complete my career working as a community banker in my hometown. But in early 2007, I received a call asking if I would be interested in serving as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. I was intrigued, flattered, and more than a little intimidated by the prospect. I had interacted with the Fed throughout my banking career and had even served on the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. So I knew a lot about the Federal Reserve. But there was no way that I, or anyone else, could have foreseen the tumultuous events that were about to unfold. The Federal Reserve is the central bank of the United States. The Congress created the Federal Reserve in 1913, after a series of banking panics, "to furnish an elastic currency, to afford means of rediscounting commercial paper, to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States, and for other purposes."1When I joined the Board of Governors in August 2008, the Fed's ability to respond to financial crises was about to be tested as never before. For as long as they have existed, central banks have calmed financial crises by lending to financial institutions against good collateral. Because central banks step in when other sources of funds retreat, central banks acting in this capacity are known as lenders of last resort. But that phrase doesn't mean that central banks make bad loans; nearly all of their loans are to sound borrowers with sound collateral. Banks rely on short-term funding such as overnight interbank loans or customer deposits to make the longer-term loans their customers need. If funding becomes scarce, banks become less willing to extend credit. To maintain the flow of credit to businesses and consumers, the Federal Reserve provides short-term credit to sound depository institutions as needed. To ensure that banks use the facility only as a backup source of funds, Federal Reserve loans are usually made at an above-market rate. In the Panic of 2008, liquidity needs were not confined to the banking system.2The shadow banking system, made up of investment banks, money market funds, finance companies, and investors in a wide range of debt securities, provided a large part of the credit that fueled our economy. When panic set in, it froze lending in banks and nonbanks alike and produced funding pressures across a wide range of markets and institutions. The actions taken by the Federal Reserve to fight the crisis were quite traditional in the sense that, for years, central banks have been providing liquidity by lending to financial intermediaries. But they were unconventional in that the concepts had to be adapted to fit markets and lenders that had never been supported by the Federal Reserve before. Now, I didn't live through the banking crises of the distant past or those that might have occurred in other countries. But I can tell you what it was like at the center of the most recent crisis. Funding was drying up for one institution after another and for one market after another. Our efforts to provide liquidity were criticized by some as bailouts for the banks. I can understand how it could seem that way, but I also know that every action the Fed took was directed at improving the economy rather than the well-being of the banks. We had to make many difficult decisions in the darkest days of the crisis. For me, the decisions were made a bit less difficult by several factors. First and foremost was the calm, decisive leadership by Chairman Bernanke, whose lifelong study of economics and economic history provided unique preparation for his own role in history. Almost as important were the hundreds of Fed economists, lawyers, bank supervisors, and market specialists who worked around the clock to craft creative solutions to every financial market challenge. I will never know how many hours it took to develop and implement all of the programs they presented in a series of emergency Board meetings. I do know that they responded to every question and strived to mitigate every risk that was identified. And while the strain was evident in their tired eyes, the collegiality and intellectual rigor that I have come to know as a hallmark of the Federal Reserve never wavered. Finally, for me, it was the image of all those small businesses that depended on credit to run their businesses. The Fed provided credit to banks large and small. In addition, through other programs, we supported the market for securities backed by loans to households and businesses, including loans for business equipment, inventory, insurance payments, business credit cards, and loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration. To be sure, lenders reacted to uncertain economic conditions and weaker borrowers by tightening credit standards. But with liquidity provided by the Federal Reserve, loans to borrowers who met the tighter standards continued to flow. The U.S. economy still faces challenges, but I am convinced that the forceful actions of the Federal Reserve in 2008 helped prevent what clearly would have been a far worse scenario. The Federal Reserve was originally created to guard against financial panics. But in modern times, many people think of monetary policymaking as its primary role. The Congress has given the Federal Reserve two objectives, known as our dual mandate: to foster maximum employment and price stability. In its conduct of monetary policy, the Fed influences the level of output and the level of prices in the economy through changes to interest rates and credit conditions. During more-normal times, the Federal Reserve's policymaking is focused on short-term interest rates, our main tool for steering the economy. The Fed influences the costs of borrowing to buy everything from cars to condos to computers by controlling short-term interest rates. Interest rates can be lowered to stimulate borrowing and spending when demand is otherwise weak, or raised to damp demand and curb inflation. Before I arrived in August 2008, the Federal Reserve had already responded to the weakening in the economy by aggressively lowering its federal funds rate target from 5‑1/4 percent in September 2007 to 2 percent. From a historical perspective, 2 percent is an extremely low level for interest rates. But as the financial crisis intensified and the economic outlook grew more dire in the fall of 2008, the Fed continued to cut rates. For more than three years now, our policies have held short-term interest rates close to zero. Just as the Federal Reserve used traditional concepts in unconventional ways to provide liquidity to the shadow banking system and stop the panic, once our main short‑term interest rate lever was effectively at zero, we moved beyond traditional monetary policy to purchase longer-term assets and push down longer-term interest rates. Those purchases put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates generally and helped normalize the spread between mortgage rates and long-term Treasury rates, which had widened during the financial crisis. Reducing longer-term rates influences the economy in much the same way as lowering the expected path of short-term rates. For instance, the decline in longer-term rates lowers the cost and increases the availability of capital and credit, which in turn encourages business expansion. In the most recent episode, another important result of lower rates has been a reduction in debt service burdens from existing debt. Households in particular have significantly reduced mortgage payments through refinancing. And when I see the small business owners that I used to lend to, they tell me that they could not have survived the downturn without low rates. Monetary policy decisions are made by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). While all 12 Reserve Bank presidents and all members of the Board of Governors participate in FOMC discussions, the voting members of the FOMC are made up of the members of the Board of Governors, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and four of the remaining presidents on a rotating basis.3 In normal times, monetary policy is implemented through the purchase or sale of securities, which affects the supply of bank reserves and so has an effect on short-term interest rates. But monetary policy also works by influencing expectations of future short-term interest rates and thereby affecting longer-term rates and asset prices. Central bank communications can help individuals, businesses, and investors formulate their expectations for interest rates and inflation in the future and thus influence their actions today. Recognizing the importance of communications as a policy tool, the FOMC has been engaged in a conversation about how we might better explain our framework for decisionmaking. In designing its communications, the FOMC faces complexities that make clear communication more difficult than you might think. First, we need to explain the way we think about both parts of our dual mandate. Establishing a target for inflation is a tool used by many central banks to anchor inflation expectations. Central banks can establish such a target because, over the longer run, inflation is determined primarily by monetary policy. By contrast, the level of unemployment that would be considered to be consistent with maximum employment is influenced by factors other than monetary policy that may vary over time. The difficulty for the Federal Reserve lies in communicating clearly about the employment portion of the mandate without creating an impression that the Committee is either establishing an unemployment target or ignoring that part of the mandate altogether. I do not believe that establishing an inflation target is inconsistent with a commitment to both parts of the dual mandate. On the contrary, it can help with thinking about and achieving both of our mandated objectives. For example, if having an explicit numerical target for inflation helps anchor inflation expectations over the longer run, then monetary policy will have greater flexibility to pursue the goal of maximum employment in the shorter term. The second complexity in our communication has to do with the nature of Committee decisionmaking and the unusual voting structure of our Committee. For example, when preparing for a Committee meeting, I formulate my own outlook for the economy and opinions about the best policy path to follow. But I also rely on the Committee discussion to help me decide whether or not to support the policy favored by a majority of the voting members. As long as it is within a range of policies that I would view as appropriate, and I don't believe that the potential negative consequences outweigh the expected benefits, I will support the Committee decision. Now, consider the three different ways that I might communicate my thought process. I could make my own preferences known in a public speech such as this one. Four times a year, I submit my economic projections to be combined with those of all the participants in the FOMC and published as ranges in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is then used by the Chairman to discuss the views of the Committee at a press conference. And I have the opportunity to record a vote for or against any action taken or statement issued by the Committee itself. For Reserve Bank presidents who rotate votes, communication becomes more complicated when they don't have the opportunity to vote for or against a Committee action. I think it is hard to know which communications channel--individual statements of preference, ranges that include the unattributed opinions of voting and nonvoting participants, or Committee-approved statements--is most helpful for members of the public in formulating their own expectations of policy. So far, I have talked about what the Federal Reserve has done during the time I have been there. But I haven't really told you what the Fed is or what it has been like to be a policymaker there. The Federal Reserve is an independent entity within the federal government in that its decisions do not have to be ratified by the President or any other executive branch official. The Congress, through the Federal Reserve Act, sets the Federal Reserve's goals and oversees it, but the Federal Reserve decides independently how to achieve its congressionally mandated goals. The ability to make monetary policy decisions that are free of short-term political influence is critical for central banks. This capability is especially true because the effective conduct of monetary policy requires a long-term perspective. A central bank that is subject to political pressure might opt for policies that favor rapid expansion in the near term at the expense of higher inflation in the future. Such actions would surely result in the loss of the public confidence and credibility that are needed to achieve the objectives of monetary policy. Indeed, research has shown that countries with independent central banks have better economic performance and lower inflation than countries whose central banks are not independent.4 The structure of the Federal Reserve is uniquely American in its decentralization. The Federal Reserve System is made up of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and 12 Federal Reserve Banks across the country. The members of the Board of Governors are nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. Each Reserve Bank has a board of directors drawn from business, public, labor, nonprofit, and banking leadership within its District. In consultation with the Board of Governors, the Reserve Bank directors choose a president to run the Bank.5The Board of Governors oversees the Reserve Banks and is responsible for formulating bank regulations; supervising banks; and making decisions regarding lending, other than discount window lending, to depository institutions.6 The seven members of the Board of Governors serve 14-year terms, with one term ending in January of each even-numbered year. The terms run independently of the person serving in them, and members are often appointed, as I was, to fill the unexpired portion of a term. As has been the case for most of my time on the Board, there are currently two vacancies. A third vacancy would be created when my term ends this month. However, the law permits me to serve until someone is appointed and confirmed for my seat. I think it is important to have a full Board, in part because of the volume of work, but also because it is helpful to have a diversity of backgrounds and expertise to address the breadth and complexity of the issues that require Board action. For example, with the Fed at the center of the banking system, it is useful to have someone with banking knowledge. Currently, my community banking background provides practical insight, as the Federal Reserve is highly focused on strengthening the financial system without strangling the ability of smaller banks to serve small businesses and local communities. So I am planning to stay on for a while. But as strongly as I believe in the importance of a full Board, I am hesitant to make an open-ended commitment to stay for as long as it takes to fill the current vacancies or until someone is nominated and confirmed for my seat. That said, I am still fully engaged every day with important issues that are at the center of our economic recovery. It is gratifying to have such an opportunity and to work in this unique institution. The culture of the Federal Reserve is an interesting blend of government, academia, and business. Differences of opinion regularly occur, but they are a source of strength rather than conflict within the institution. They add liveliness to the debate and richness to the decisionmaking process. The System is a treasure-trove of data, research, and institutional memory about the economy and the financial system. It is stimulating, and occasionally exhausting, to be surrounded by so much brainpower and intellectual curiosity. But everyone approaches the work with a serious sense of purpose and collegiality. It is difficult for me to describe what it is like to work there, but if you ever get the chance to do so, I would highly recommend it. Lessons LearnedNow I'd like to turn to my final task--to offer some career advice to those of you just preparing to enter the business world. As someone who has spent more years than I care to count in that world, let me begin where I began. I needed a job, just as many of you will soon. In searching for that first job or even some of the ones that come later, don't be afraid to take one at an entry level, as I did when I started as a teller, or one that seems quite daunting, regardless of your qualifications, as I faced when I joined the Federal Reserve. Look for a career that you enjoy and one that is well suited to your temperament and your talents. Remember that what you think you want most in life might not be the thing that makes you truly happy. I could have been miserable as a mediocre actress. Instead, I happened upon a deeply rewarding profession that I loved. Indeed, I have found that life usually works out for the best--if you let it. Whether you have found your perfect career or just a job to pay the bills, make the most of every assignment. I told you earlier about my banking mentor, Burt Harrison. He was always loading me up with projects. One day, while I was struggling to dig my way out from under a mountain of work, Burt came to me with yet another assignment. I looked up from the task at hand and said, "You bring me work as though you're bringing me presents." Burt huffed and returned to his office. He returned a short time later and said, "Idothink they are presents." And he was right. Those projects taught me more than any class could have. Finally, if, as I suggest, you are going to take advantage of all the opportunities that come your way, I would like to stress the importance of lifelong learning to develop the skills that will be needed to tackle new challenges. You might very well find yourself pursuing a direction different than the one you trained for in business school. But the lessons you learn here will still be important. You will need to apply the concepts you know to situations that are different than those you expected to find. And you may need to learn new concepts. Your ability to think critically and creatively, along with your skill at tracking down the information you don't have, will be among your most valuable assets. Remember that, sometimes, asking the right questions is just as important as knowing the right answers. And if you get a chance to teach others, take it. Nothing solidifies your understanding of a subject like having to communicate it clearly to others. ConclusionIn closing, I'd like to make a shameless plug for public service. Putting your knowledge and skills to work for the good of the nation is a very high ideal. I think Woodrow Wilson--the President who signed into law the Federal Reserve Act--said it well, albeit long-windedly: "You are not here merely to make a living. You are here in order to enable the world to live more amply, with greater vision, with a finer spirit of hope and achievement. You are here to enrich the world, and you impoverish yourself if you forget that errand." Aside from the obvious societal benefits, there is much to be gained personally from working to achieve the greatest good for the greatest number of people. It has been richly rewarding for me to bring decades of experience as a banker to discussions on matters that have the power to transform that very industry. And I have been fortunate to work alongside other public servants who share the commitment to bettering the lives of the people we serve by working to ensure a strong financial system and a stable economy. Thank you for the opportunity to be here today. 1.Federal Reserve Act, ch. 6, 38 Stat. 251 (1913).Return to text 2.Kevin Warsh (2009),The Panic of 2008, speech delivered at the Council of Institutional Investors 2009 Spring Meeting, Washington, April 6.Return to text 3.For more information about the FOMC, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Federal Open Market Committeewebpage.Return to text 4.See Alberto Alesina (1988), "Macroeconomics and Politics," in Stanley Fischer, ed.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 3 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), pp. 13-62; Vittorio Grilli, Donato Masciandaro, and Guido Tabellini (1991), "Political and Monetary Institutions and Public Financial Policies in the Industrial Countries,"Economic Policy,vol. 6 (13), pp. 342-92; Alex Cukierman (1992),Central Bank Strategy, Credibility, and Independence: Theory and Evidence (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press); Alex Cukierman, Steven B. Webb, and Bilin Neyapti (1992), "Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes,"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 6 (3), 353-98; Alberto Alesina and Lawrence H. Summers (1993), "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62; Alex Cukierman, Pantelis Kalaitzidakis, Lawrence H. Summers, and Steven B. Webb (1993), "Central Bank Independence, Growth, Investment, and Real Rates,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (1), pp. 95-140; and Alex Cukierman, Geoffrey P. Miller, and Bilin Neyapti (2002), "Central Bank Reform, Liberalization and Inflation in Transition Economies--An International Perspective,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49 (2), 237-64.Return to text 5.Each Federal Reserve Bank's Class B and Class C directors--that is, the directors who are selected to represent the public--appoint a president. See section 4(4), subparagraph "Fifth," of the Federal Reserve Act as amended by section 1107 of Pub. L. No. 111-203 (2010).Return to text 6.For a fuller discussion of the responsibilities of the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Banks, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2005),The Federal Reserve System: Purposes and Functions, 9th ed. (Washington: Board of Governors)Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for November 21 and December 12, 2011. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 13, 2011 and of the conference call held on November 28, 2011. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting.The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htmFor media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 28 and December 13, 2011:PDF|HTML
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the 2012 Bank Presidents Seminar, California Bankers Association, Santa Barbara, California It's a pleasure to be here this morning to address the 2012 California Bankers Association Bank Presidents Seminar. Before joining the Federal Reserve, I spent most of my career in banking, much of it as president of a community bank. So I know how important these conferences can be as you try to meet the expectations of regulators, customers, employees, communities, and shareholders--and to do so safely and profitably--with limited resources. For more than three years now I have viewed banking from a different perspective, as a regulator whose primary concerns are the safety and soundness of the banking system and consumer protection. Three years may sound brief, but I think that the intensity of my tenure more than offsets its relatively short duration. I arrived at the Federal Reserve in 2008, just in time to serve on the front lines of the combat against the collapse of our financial system. I witnessed first-hand the damage that can result from reckless lending and weak risk-management practices. As we all know, fallout from the crisis was not limited to those who engaged in the activities that were at the center of the problem. Indeed, as the crisis developed, conditions deteriorated so severely that many banks that had been considered financially strong, that had never made a single sub-prime loan, found themselves struggling for survival. This was particularly the case for banks in states like California that were most heavily impacted by a sharp deterioration in real estate markets and a significant increase in unemployment. Community bankers' efforts to address the asset quality problems that followed have been crucial to recovery. We are just now starting to reap the benefits of those efforts and are seeing some improvement in community banks in California and across the country. But while the effects of the economic crisis are receding, bankers are now facing a wave of increased regulatory requirements. For the most part, the new regulations are directed at the largest institutions, whose failure would pose the greatest risk to the financial system, or at the lending practices that led to the crisis. Even so, the changes are so sweeping that many industry analysts have questioned whether the overall weight of regulation poses a threat to the future of the community bank model. I do believe in the community bank model and its future. Indeed, I believe there is a real place for the customization and flexibility that community banks can exercise to meet the needs of local communities and small business customers. Still, the disproportionate cost of regulatory compliance for smaller institutions is real. Financial supervisors must be vigilant in efforts to maintain financial system stability and ensure that consumers are able to understand their financial product choices, no matter where they choose to bank. However, as we and other agencies craft regulations to implement the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) and adjust supervisory practices to meet these priorities, I think we must avoid a one-size-fits-all approach to supervision. To this end, the Federal Reserve last year formed a subcommittee of the Board to oversee the supervision of community and small regional banking organizations. I chair the subcommittee and am joined in this effort by Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin, who complements my community banking background with her experience as a banking lawyer and a state bank supervisor. In addition, in 2010 the Federal Reserve formed the Community Depository Institution Advisory Council (CDIAC) with membership drawn from smaller banks, thrifts, and credit unions. Council members meet with the Federal Reserve Board twice a year to share their perspectives on the lending environment, regulatory issues, and the economy.1 Today, I plan to discuss with you some ideas and initiatives that are on our subcommittee agenda as we strive for balance between our supervisory responsibilities and the effect supervisory practices have on the cost of compliance and credit availability. Before I begin, I should note that the views I will share today are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board. But I think it is also safe to say that my concern and commitment to get this right is shared by all of my colleagues on the Board of Governors and by the staff throughout the Federal Reserve System who do the really hard work every day. Clarifying Supervisory ExpectationsOne of the most daunting aspects of any comprehensive financial regulatory reform legislation such as the Dodd-Frank Act is the sheer volume of new regulatory proposals and final regulations. I still remember the experience as a banker of reading through hundreds of pages of dense language, paying close attention to the footnotes, trying to determine whether a regulation even applied to my bank and, if it did, what was expected of us. That was before we even got around to figuring out how we were going to meet the requirements, let alone what compliance was going to cost. And now, as a regulator, I still read every rule, guidance, and proposal with the knowledge that the effort expended to understand new regulatory requirements is itself an additional burden. So, in response to a suggestion that was made by one of our CDIAC members, we are now working to include, at the beginning of each regulatory proposal, final rule, or regulatory guidance, a statement outlining which banks are affected. In particular, when issuing supervisory letters, we try to state specifically if and how new guidance will apply to community banks. This way, banks won't waste resources on requirements that don't apply to them. Sometimes, this statement is relatively simple: for example, many provisions of the Dodd–Frank Act by statute apply only to the largest banks. In cases where the rules apply to all banks, but expectations vary by bank size or the degree to which banks engage in specific activities, it may be more helpful to make distinctions throughout the regulation or guidance. For example, when we proposed interagency guidance covering incentive compensation, we tried to note under each provision the simplified expectations for community banks that did not make extensive use of incentive compensation. Also helpful in clarifying supervisory expectations is the use of examples. Interagency guidance issued in 2009 covering workouts of commercial real estate (CRE) loans contained several examples of loan restructurings and how they should be classified.2I think the examples helped bankers and examiners alike understand policymakers' expectations for the regulatory treatment of loan workouts. Still, even with the examples, we heard reports that the guidance was not being implemented consistently in the field. To further ensure consistency, we conducted extensive examiner training. After the training was completed, we conducted a review of hundreds of loan files from recent examinations. Our file review indicated that, with very few exceptions, the loans were classified according to the guidance. I believe bankers come to fully understand supervisory expectations over time, as their experience grows. But when something radically changes the supervisory landscape such as new regulations, drastic changes in the economic environment, or reassignment of regulatory authority, more direct outreach might be needed. For many years, the Reserve Banks have maintained local training and outreach programs for banks in their districts. For instance, the popular "Ask the Fed" calls conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis provide bankers with an opportunity to hear Federal Reserve staff discuss recent policy initiatives and to be updated on the most common problems that examiners see in the field. The calls also provide an informal setting for bankers to ask questions on issues of concern. In addition, consumer compliance webinars have provided a forum for the Federal Reserve to discuss emerging consumer compliance issues and to answer questions from webinar participants directly.3These initiatives have been so successful that a planning group is studying options for leveraging these efforts in a coordinated, national initiative to improve communication of relevant information to community banks supervised by the Federal Reserve. Despite all efforts to communicate supervisory expectations, there are inevitably disagreements between banks and their examiners about examination findings. The Federal Reserve Ombudsman actively works with banks that have concerns about their examinations or that wish to appeal an examination finding. The Ombudsman works independently from the bank supervision chain of command and has broad authority to mediate complaints, including the authority to refer matters to committees of the Board. The Ombudsman's office also has a follow-up program in place to protect the banks that contact it from retaliation. And the Ombudsman tracks the nature and source of complaints in order to identify potential systemic problems.4 Balancing Safety and Soundness with Credit AvailabilitySince 2008, many banks have seen their assets' quality criticized and their ratings downgraded. This is not surprising given the severity of the economic downturn and the effect it had on the quality of bank assets. However, some bankers complain that examiners also tightened their approach. Indeed, we repeatedly hear that fear of examiner criticism is one of the reasons banks hesitate to lend to small businesses. We take these concerns seriously. In response, we are actively communicating with examiners and have stepped up examiner training to ensure that supervision in the field is consistent with policy. At the same time, I think it is important to continually reevaluate our supervisory policies and procedures to ensure that the policies themselves are not unnecessarily constricting credit availability. Here are a few such policies that we are currently evaluating at the Federal Reserve. CRE concentrationsFirst, is the interagency supervisory guidelines issued in 2006 that required additional risk monitoring of CRE lending whenever loans reached certain thresholds--100 percent of capital for loans secured by construction and land acquisition activities and 300 percent of capital for loans secured by total non-owner occupied commercial real estate, including construction and land acquisition activities.5Although these thresholds were never intended to be hard caps, we hear from banks that they are now widely regarded as such. Many bankers have told me that they manage their loan portfolios to stay below these thresholds and forego growth in these loan categories, even when promising, creditworthy lending prospects are available. These reports were so widespread that the Government Accountability Office (GAO) conducted a study on supervision of CRE lending and concluded that the guidance warranted clarification.6Federal Reserve staff is working with the other agencies on ways to clarify the expectations of the interagency CRE guidance and reduce any unintended restrictions on sound lending. Given the high level of losses experienced on construction and land development projects over the past several years and the number of failed banks with high concentrations of such lending, it seems prudent for banks to keep construction loan exposures at, or even well below, 100 percent of capital. However, losses on loans secured by existing non-owner occupied commercial real estate have been much more modest, suggesting that banks' efforts to maintain concentration ratios below 300 percent of capital may constrain lending for some creditworthy borrowers. Moreover, to generate loan volume without increasing real estate lending, many banks are now targeting growth in commercial and industrial (C&I) loans, a type of lending with which they may have less expertise. In fact, banks have generally experienced higher loss rates on C&I loans than on commercial real estate secured loans (excluding construction loan losses), even through the crisis. So this portfolio shift has the potential to increase rather than decrease expected losses. For my part, I believe we should retain and perhaps strengthen the 100 percent of capital guideline on construction lending and consider dropping or modifying the 300 percent guideline for non-owner occupied CRE loans. Analysis undertaken by Federal Reserve staff suggests that retaining only the 100 percent guideline on construction loans would still be adequate to identify the banks at greatest risk. And bankers would still have to manage their loan portfolios appropriately and consider the risks of concentrations. But this change would help to eliminate any perception of a cap on what, in many cases, could be prudent, secured lending. Accounting standardsOne factor that contributes to regulatory uncertainty is the intersection of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and regulatory requirements. Nowhere is this more evident than in the accounting for the allowance for loan and lease losses (ALLL). The current accounting standard requires provisions only to cover losses that have already been incurred. Conflicting views of the range of likely losses sometimes leads to a perception that the regulatory evaluation of the adequacy of ALLL levels involves something of a "black box." To further complicate things, the accounting standard generally requires estimation, using statistical analysis, of a bank's unique past loss patterns, but most community banks have neither the rich data nor the capability to perform such analysis. Federal Reserve staff is currently investigating whether there is any way to use available supervisory data to publish loss rate ranges that could be used as a starting point for any bank to calculate allowance amounts in a way that is simple to understand and not inconsistent with GAAP. Even if development of such a tool does not turn out to be feasible, staff is still working to amend its approach to clarify expectations, improve transparency, and heighten consistency. Along the same lines, I hear enough feedback about troubled debt restructurings (TDRs) to lead me to believe that it could be helpful to issue guidance clarifying the regulatory and accounting treatment of TDRs, non-performing assets, and classified loans. Even though these designations have different definitions, time frames, and regulatory consequences, they often seem to be used interchangeably. Reportedly, some bankers are reluctant to offer modifications that would help struggling borrowers and enhance the potential for ultimate repayment because they are concerned that the loan would be classified as a TDR and remain classified even after performance under the modified terms is demonstrated. Asset classificationsTaking this a step further, now might be a good time to review the definitions and usages of asset classifications. Right now, the definition of a substandard loan encompasses a broad range of assets, many of which will never sustain a loss. Yet our classification and bank rating system gives the same weight to all loans in the same classification bucket, regardless of loss potential. As a result, when a bank starts to approach a level of classification that it believes would cause examiners to downgrade its CAMELS7rating, the bank stops making loans that it believes will be classified even if there is no concern about actual losses from the loans. There was an interagency proposal issued in 20058that would have established a two-step process for classifying commercial loans. The first step would be to evaluate the loan (the probability of default) and the second step involved estimating the potential loss (the loss given default). Many larger banks already use this approach in their own internal loan classification systems. On the other hand, many commenters at the time, including those from both small and large banks, objected to the proposal for a variety of reasons and the agencies decided to table it for the time being. Still, as I went back and reviewed the proposal, it struck me that some form of such guidance could be helpful in responding to the complaint that I hear over and over that loan classifications often ignore the loss protection provided by guarantors or collateral. And I think it might allow more accurate measurement of credit risk in all loan portfolios, not just commercial loans. So we are continuing to study the idea and the effect it might have on asset quality ratings if it was applied to different portfolios. Ratings upgradesI also believe that when conditions warrant a change in CAMELS ratings, the update should take place as quickly as possible. It is always important to promptly identify problem banks and make use of all supervisory tools to foster their recovery. But I believe that as a bank stabilizes and demonstrates improvement, we should ensure that examiners move just as promptly to assign ratings that reflect the improved financial and managerial condition of the bank and free it from restrictions that could delay the bank's return to prudent lending activity. Encouraging Creative Supervisory Approaches to Emerging ProblemsSo far, I have talked mainly about making adjustments to conventional supervisory approaches. In some cases, however, I think it might make sense to challenge some of our traditional thinking. The first area that I think could benefit from a fresh approach is our requirement for the active marketing for sale of properties acquired in foreclosure, often called real estate owned, or REO, properties. While existing statutes and regulations do not prohibit financial institutions from renting REO properties, supervisory guidance encourages sales as the primary disposition tool. The problem with this requirement in the current environment is that having banks, servicers, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal Housing Administration all following the same approach with thousands of properties on the market at the same time may actually be exacerbating the slump in housing prices. Our research suggests that if lenders were permitted in some cases to rent residential REO property rather than sell it at fire-sale prices, it could better balance rental and owner-occupied markets and thus help housing prices stabilize sooner. Banks would have the opportunity to offset carrying costs and potentially increase their ultimate recovery. And the net result of removing some properties from the distress sale inventory could ultimately lead to higher recoveries for all holders of REO. Given current market conditions, banks could still divest property within statutory time frames, but with better results for themselves, surrounding property owners, and the economy. We are in the process now of exploring ways to clarify our guidance regarding rental of residential REO properties. Let me turn now to a supervisory innovation that, I believe, will prove quite valuable in ensuring the stability of our financial system: stress testing. At the height of the crisis, the Federal Reserve, working with other banking agencies, conducted stress tests on the largest financial institutions and published the results. Banks that did not appear to have sufficient capital to withstand adverse conditions were required to raise additional capital. Last year, we reviewed the largest banks' capital plans in light of stress test results and used the information to guide approvals of planned capital distributions. The Dodd-Frank Act requires annual supervisory stress tests for institutions with assets of at least $50 billion and internal stress tests for institutions with assets of $10 billion or more. There are no current bank-wide stress testing requirements for banks with assets less than $10 billion. The only expectations for smaller banks are those contained in existing guidance, such as for interest rate risk or for commercial real estate concentrations. As strongly as I believe in the concept of stress testing for capital adequacy, I don't believe that it needs to become a complicated, expensive, and burdensome process for smaller institutions with traditional business models. In many cases, smaller institutions are already incorporating the impact of adverse outcomes or stressful events into their existing risk management and business decision-making process. The capital stress testing framework that we have developed is a dynamic way of looking at potential threats to capital in the context of the company's ability to replace capital through its earnings power, the current level of capital, and plans for capital distribution. For traditional community banks, the primary threat to capital is the risk of loan losses. We now have data on losses by loan category for two periods of severe financial stress, the recent financial crisis and the savings and loan crisis. One way to test whether community banks have enough capital to withstand stress would be to apply the level of losses generally experienced in a stressed environment to bank loan portfolios to estimate potential losses. In such an analysis, a bank with concentrations in a lending category that could experience high losses during times of economic stress, such as construction lending or credit card loans, would have a high potential loss rate applied to those portfolios and thus require more capital than a bank with a more conservative portfolio. The rough estimates based on average losses by loan category could be further refined by looking at the individual bank loan classifications. We could similarly study the impact of stressful conditions on pre-provision net revenue, but I don't believe these fluctuations will have nearly as strong an impact on stressed capital as loan losses would have. And this analysis could be accomplished in smaller banks using existing call report data and supervisory asset classifications. There are two points here. First, stress testing does not necessarily have to involve additional burden on the banks. Second, and perhaps most importantly, I hope that bankers do not feel that they have to spend scarce resources trying to conform to stress testing expectations that apply only to larger institutions. Regulatory Burden and Mortgage LendingI've focused most of my remarks today on policy ideas the Federal Reserve has the authority to pursue in order to reduce regulatory burden. One area that imposes especially heavy costs of regulatory burden on community banks, but for which the Federal Reserve no longer has rule-writing authority, is mortgage lending. Community banks have long been a source of funding for mortgages that didn't fit the underwriting criteria to qualify for purchase by the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). These loans typically are held on balance sheet rather than securitized. Consequently, community banks retain 100 percent of the credit risk of these loans and have no incentive to make loans without regard to the consumer's ability to pay. But because community banks hold the loans on balance sheet, they may charge higher rates than those for prime GSE loans or include balloon payments to account for the liquidity and interest rate risk of holding the loans in portfolio. Further, community banks with small portfolios do not realize economies-of-scale so their costs are higher. And keeping up with regulatory change can be difficult, especially for banks that rely on purchased software and for loan officers who do not specialize in mortgage lending, but rather make the occasional mortgage loan to satisfy a customer need. Traditional community lending is totally different than sub-prime lending. But it is difficult to make that distinction if regulatory requirements use the interest rate on the loan as a proxy to identify sub-prime loans. No one can argue with the need for stronger regulation to prevent the lending abuses that led to the current foreclosure crisis. However, I think it would also be unfortunate if the laws and regulations put in place to require other lenders to adopt the same responsible practices long used by community banks are so complicated and expensive that they have the unintended effect of forcing some community banks to leave the market. It is difficult to think about crafting a regulatory regime that is simplified for smaller lenders that retain 100 percent of the risk they take, but I think it is important to try. The Federal Reserve had to think through a lot of these issues as we drafted proposals for escrow requirements and the definition of qualified mortgages. The Dodd-Frank Act made a start by crafting exemptions for banks in rural or underserved areas, but I think broader exemptions could be warranted for the thousands of smaller banks that make loans in small metropolitan areas or suburban areas. The Dodd-Frank Act transferred rule-writing responsibility for most mortgage-related statutes from the Federal Reserve to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). So the CFPB will be finalizing the rules for which we issued initial proposals. The CFPB has already established an office for outreach to community banks and I have discussed this issue with them. I urge you to continue to explain how the burden of regulation, including regulations covering mortgage lending, impacts the ability of community banks to meet the credit needs of their communities. ConclusionThe bottom line is that doing the necessary work of protecting our financial system and its customers comes with a cost. But that doesn't mean that we shouldn't continue to try to at least limit the burden. I hope you have noticed the number of times I have referred to reports from bankers or concerns expressed by borrowers. Even though I have experience living with regulatory burden, I still need regular feedback from bankers and consumers of banking services to understand the impact of regulation--both its effectiveness in achieving intended results and in limiting any unintended consequences. The Federal Reserve makes every effort to identify opportunities to reduce burden or improve credit availability. To assist us in this effort, I hope you will continue to point out such opportunities as you see them. 1.In addition to the national CDIAC that meets with the Board, each Reserve Bank has its own local CDIAC that provides a regional perspective to Reserve Bank management. Seehttp://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htmfor more information.Return to text 2.SeeSupervision and Regulation (SR) letter 09-7, "Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workouts."Return to text 3.Seewww.consumercomplianceoutlook.orgfor archived webinars and publications, and announcements about future events.Return to text 4.Seewww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/ombudsman.htmReturn to text 5.See SR letter 07-1, "Interagency Guidance on Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate."Return to text 6.See GAO's May 2010 report on Enhanced Guidance on Commercial Real Estate Risks Needed. For more information go towww.gao.gov/assets/320/318489.pdf (PDF).Return to text 7.To assess the bank's performance and summarize its overall condition, examiners use the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System (UFIRS), which is commonly referred to as the CAMELS rating system. The acronym CAMELS is derived from six key areas of examination focus: Capital adequacy, Asset quality, Management and board oversight, Earnings, Liquidity, and Sensitivity to market risk.Return to text 8.See "2005 Interagency Proposal on the Classification of Commercial Credit Exposures". For more information please go tohttp://www.federalreserve.gov/BoardDocs/Press/bcreg/2005/20050328/attachment.pdf.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced preliminary unaudited results indicating that the Reserve Banks provided for payments of approximately $76.9 billion of their estimated 2011 net income to the U.S. Treasury. Under the Board's policy, the residual earnings of each Federal Reserve Bank, after providing for the costs of operations, payment of dividends, and the amount necessary to equate surplus with capital paid-in, are distributed to the U.S. Treasury. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2011 estimated net income of $78.9 billion was derived primarily from $83.6 billion in interest income on securities acquired through open market operations (U.S. Treasury securities, federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgage-backed securities, and GSE debt securities). Additional earnings were derived primarily from realized gains on the sale of U.S. Treasury securities of $2.3 billion, foreign currency gains of $152 million, and income from services of $479 million. The Reserve Banks had interest expense of $3.8 billion on depository institutions' reserve balances and term deposits. Operating expenses of the Reserve Banks, net of amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Treasury and other entities for services the Reserve Banks provided as fiscal agents, totaled $3.4 billion in 2011. In addition, the Reserve Banks were assessed $1.1 billion for the cost of new currency and Board expenditures and $282 million to fund the operations of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection and Office of Financial Research. In 2011, statutory dividends totaled $1.6 billion and $375 million of net income was used to equate surplus to capital paid-in. The preliminary unaudited results include valuation adjustments as of September 30 for Term Asset–Backed Loan Facility (TALF) loans and consolidated limited liability companies, which were created in response to the financial crisis. The final results, which will be presented in the Reserve Banks' annual audited financial statements and the Board of Governors' Annual Report, will reflect valuation adjustments as of December 31. The attached chart illustrates the amount of Federal Reserve Banks' residual earnings distributed to the U.S. Treasury from 2002 through 2011 (estimated). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government Sponsored Enterprises and the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Capito, Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member Maloney, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the subcommittees, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the interagency proposal to implement the requirements of section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), commonly known as the Volcker Rule. My remarks today will focus on some of the issues faced in developing the interagency proposal. As I have previously noted in Congressional testimony, the goal of the Federal Reserve with respect to this and all other provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, is to implement the statute in a manner that is faithful to the language of the statute and that maximizes financial stability and other social benefits at the least cost to credit availability and economic growth. The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) (collectively, the "agencies") in November sought public comment on a proposal to implement the Volcker Rule. The Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) recently issued its substantially similar proposal for comment. Because of the importance and complexity of the issues raised by the statutory provisions that make up the Volcker Rule, the agencies initially provided the public a 90-day opportunity to submit comments. We recently extended the comment period for an additional 30 days, until February 13, 2012. The Federal Reserve welcomes comments on Volcker Rule implementation and has had numerous meetings with members of the public on this subject. We continue to post on our website all the comments that we receive and a summary of all the meetings that the Federal Reserve has had with members of the public about the Volcker Rule and all other provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act. Summary of statute and proposalThe statutory provisions that make up the Volcker Rule generally prohibit banking entities from engaging in two types of activities: 1) proprietary trading and 2) acquiring an ownership interest in, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with a hedge fund or private equity fund (each a covered fund). These statutory provisions apply, in general, to insured depository institutions; companies that control an insured depository institution; and foreign banks with a branch, agency, or subsidiary bank in the United States, as well as to an affiliate of one of these entities. Under the statute, proprietary trading is defined as taking a position as principal in any security, derivative, option, or contract for sale of a commodity for future delivery for the purpose of selling that position in the near term or otherwise with the intent to resell to profit from short-term price movements. The statute applies only to positions taken by a banking entity as principal for the purpose of making short-term profits; it does not apply to positions taken for long-term or investment purposes. Moreover, the statute contains a number of exemptions, including for underwriting, market making-related activities, and risk-mitigating hedging activities. The implementing rule proposed by the agencies incorporates all of these statutory definitions and exemptions. The statute also authorizes the relevant regulatory agencies to permit additional activities if they would promote and protect safety and soundness of the banking entity and the financial stability of the United States. The second major prohibition in the statute forbids any banking entity from acquiring or retaining an ownership interest in, or having certain relationships with, a covered fund. Again, the statute contains a number of exceptions, including for organizing and offering a covered fund, making limited investments in a covered fund, sponsoring and investing in loan securitizations, and risk-mitigating hedging activities. The statutory definition of a fund covered under the Volcker Rule is quite broad. The statute also quite broadly prohibits any banking entity that serves as the investment manager, adviser, or sponsor to a covered fund, or that organizes and offers a covered fund, from engaging in certain transactions with the fund, including lending to, or purchasing assets from, the fund. The statute also prohibits otherwise permissible trading and investment activities when there is a material conflict of interest with customers, clients, or counterparties, or when the activity results in an exposure to high-risk assets or trading strategies. These are significant provisions and the agencies have specifically solicited comment on disclosure requirements and other approaches to implementing these parts of the statute. Differentiating proprietary trading from market makingOne of the more difficult tasks in implementing the statutory prohibitions is distinguishing between prohibited proprietary trading activities and permissible market-making activities. This distinction is important because of the key role that market makers play in facilitating liquid markets in securities, derivatives, and other assets. At the ends of the spectrum, the distinction between pure proprietary trading and market making is straightforward. At one end, for instance, trading activities that are organized within a discrete business unit, and that are conducted solely for the purpose of executing trading strategies that are expected to produce short-term profits without any connection to customer facilitation or intermediation, are not difficult to identify. These "internal hedge fund" operations existed at many bank affiliates for quite some time before the Volcker Rule was enacted. Firms that either are or were engaged in these non-client-oriented, purely proprietary trading businesses can readily identify and wind down these activities. Indeed, some have already done so for a number of reasons, including anticipatory compliance with the Volcker Rule. At the other end of the spectrum, a textbook example would be a pure agency-based market maker that acts as an intermediary, instantaneously matching a large pool of buyers and sellers of an underlying asset without ever having to take a position in the asset itself. Profits are earned either solely by charging buyers a higher price than is paid to sellers of the asset, or in some cases by charging a commission. Buyers and sellers willingly pay this "spread" fee or commission because the market maker is able to more quickly and efficiently match buyers with sellers than if they were left to find each other on their own. I refer to this as a textbook example because instances of such riskless market making in our trading markets are rare. In actual markets, buyers and sellers arrive at different times, in staggered numbers and often have demands for similar but not identical assets. Market makers hold inventory and manage exposures to the assets in which they make markets to ensure that they can continuously serve the needs of their customers. Accordingly, in the broad middle that exists between these two clear examples, the distinction between prohibited proprietary trading and permissible market making can be difficult to draw, because these activities share several important characteristics. In both activities, the banking entity generally acts as principal in trading the underlying position, holds that position for only a relatively short period of time, and enjoys profits (and suffers losses) from any price variation in the position over the period the position is held. Thus, the purchase or sale of a specific block of securities is not obviously permissible or forbidden based solely on the features of the transaction itself. The statute instead distinguishes between these activities by looking to the purpose of the trade and the intent of the trader. These subjective characteristics can be difficult to discern in practice, particularly in the context of complex global trading markets in which a firm may engage in thousands or more transactions per day. A similar challenge attaches to efforts to distinguish a hedging trade from a proprietary trade. Implementation frameworkThe agencies have proposed a framework for implementation of the Volcker Rule that combines: 1) an explanation of the factors the agencies expect to use to differentiate prohibited activities from permitted activities, 2) a requirement that banking entities with significant trading activities implement a program to monitor their activities to ensure compliance with the statute, and 3) data collection and reporting requirements, to facilitate both compliance monitoring and the development of more specific guidance over time. In addition, the agencies will use their supervisory and examination processes to monitor compliance with the statute. The third element of the interagency proposal bears some additional comment. In order to help differentiate between permitted market-making activities and prohibited proprietary trading activities, the agencies have proposed to collect data from trading firms on a number of quantitative measurements. These metrics are designed to assist both the agencies and banking entities in identifying the risks and characteristics of prohibited proprietary trading and exempt activities. The proposal makes clear that metrics would be used as a tool, butnotas a dispositive factor for defining permissible activities. The agencies instead propose to use metrics to identify activity that merits special scrutiny by banking entities and examiners in their evaluation of the activities of firms. The proposed rule does not include specific thresholds to trigger further scrutiny for individual metrics, but requests comment on whether thresholds would be useful, and notes that the agencies expect to propose them in the future. The proposal also makes clear that the agencies expect to take a heuristic approach to metrics, revising and refining them over time as greater experience is gained in reviewing, analyzing, and applying these measurements for purposes of identifying prohibited proprietary trading. Additionally, since some banking entities engage in few or no activities covered by the statute, the proposal also includes a number of elements intended to reduce the burden of the proposed rule on smaller, less-complex banking entities. In particular, the agencies have proposed very limited compliance programs and have reduced or eliminated the data collection requirements for these banking entities. Potential effects of the proposalThe proprietary trading prohibition in the Volcker Rule statute itself will undoubtedly affect the trading behavior of banking entities. Indeed, that is what Congress intended in enacting these provisions. Congress has itself made the judgment that this prohibition will enhance financial stability and is socially desirable. The task of the agencies is to implement Congressional intentions, as manifest in the statute itself, as efficiently and effectively as possible. The approach taken in the proposed rulemaking is concededly not a simple one. But, at least to date, it has seemed the most feasible. Two alternative approaches have been suggested, and we considered each prior to issuing the proposed regulation. One considerably simpler approach would be to articulate high-level principles for differentiating prohibited and permitted activities and then leave it to the firms to self-report violations based on internal models or other devices, presumably with compliance and systems monitoring by regulatory agencies. While having the virtue of simplicity at the outset, this approach would provide little clarity about whether an activity is permitted or prohibited. It seems quite likely that, either formally or informally, the regulatory agencies would regularly be asked to offer guidance or approve specific practices. Otherwise, this approach would essentially rely on self-policing by banking entities. A second alternative would be to establish definitive bright lines for determining whether an activity is permitted or prohibited. This approach would be very difficult in practice, at least with current information and data, because of the many asset classes, business models, and transaction types covered by the statutory provisions. Hard-and-fast rules would also run the risk of being either too restrictive, and thus inadvertently classifying legitimate, customer-driven market-making or hedging activity as prohibited, or too narrow, and thus failing adequately to capture the full range of activities that are prohibited under the statute. The more nuanced framework contained in our proposal was designed to realize some of the advantages of both of these approaches while minimizing their potential adverse effects. The Dodd-Frank Act provides a long conformance period for firms that are subject to the Volcker Rule. The agencies have proposed to use that conformance period to study the effects of the statutory prohibitions on the activities of banking entities before the Volcker Rule is fully implemented. To assist in this undertaking, the agencies have proposed to begin collecting and reviewing trading data that should help firms subject to the statutory provisions, as well as the agencies in our efforts, to monitor and understand the contours of the activities that are prohibited, permitted, and affected by the statutory provisions that make up the Volcker Rule. As I mentioned earlier, we are hopeful that the data collection and reporting required in our proposal will eventually facilitate more specific guidance on market-making, hedging, and other exemptions from the general prohibition. After the Volcker Rule becomes fully effective, we would continue to monitor the effects of the rule and look for opportunities to refine it. Having said all this, the Federal Reserve is more than open to alternatives that would be superior to the approach proposed. Indeed, the agencies requested comment on alternative approaches in theFederal Registernotice. Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have.