Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin At the Y's Men and Y's Women of Westport, Westport, Connecticut Good morning. I appreciate this opportunity to meet with you today. I am pleased to see that my parents are in the audience. I credit my parents with a lot, especially with promoting a strong work ethic in our family that taught us the fundamentals of a market economy. From a tender age, my brother and I had a series of unusual jobs. For example, Kenneth gave French horn lessons. He was about 13 years old at the time, so our parents would not permit him to charge more than $1.25 per hour. Kenneth had four students. My mother permitted him to use the living room for lessons, as long as his students took off their muddy shoes at the door, so Kenneth had no overhead expenses and was both grossing and netting about $5.00 per week. Given the scarcity of French horn teachers in our neighborhood, Kenneth had a monopoly in the French horn market. So long as the local high school bands produced a steady stream of French horn players, Kenneth was assured that his services would be in demand. I had an even less lucrative job that involved truly unskilled labor. I numbered pages. My father, who was in the publishing business, would, in the days before word processing, bring home book manuscripts that did not have page numbers on them. These manuscripts needed to be numbered, and that's where I entered the market, so to speak. My father came up with the idea of paying me to number the manuscript pages. The rate he set for me was one cent--and that was not one cent per page, but one cent per two pages. Needless to say, this wage was really too low for me, and I wanted to go on strike, but I was only 10 years old. By the time I became a teenager, and it occurred to me that I couldstrike, I had been displaced by the progress of technology--specifically, word processors with automatic numbering options--which reduced my bargaining power to, well, nothing. I could talk more about this particular job--noting the fact that even at the age of 10 I found this job to qualify as one of the most tedious known to mankind. I knew as a kid, however, that in order to buy a ticket to go to the movies with my friends, I was going to have to number around 400 pages, and if I did more pages than that and invested the money in a savings account at a bank at a compounded annual interest rate of 4-1/2 percent, I could eventually afford to buy some popcorn, too. Or take a brief vacation from numbering. But if I wanted to cut back the number of pages and still accumulate enough to go to the movies sometime, I would need to find an interest rate out there for my earnings of three or more times what the bank was offering--not likely for a very young investor with limited funds. I share these stories to illustrate that I grew up with a keen sense of working and saving, subjects now central to my work at the Federal Reserve; I understood the importance of earning enough interest on my savings to pay for the things I wanted. And this morning, that is what I want to talk about. I'd like to provide some perspective on the implications of the Federal Reserve's current monetary policy stance for savers and, in particular, to explore notions that low interest rates could be hurting savers and hindering, rather than helping, the recovery. In order to explore this idea, we first need to go back in time and review the evolution of the economy in the past several years from the perspective of the Federal Reserve, as well as the monetary policy response to the events that unfolded. Then we can look at the particular effects that the Fed's monetary policy stance can be having in terms of interest rate levels. Of course, while my remarks are intended to help you understand monetary policy, I should note that they reflect my own views and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Recent Economic DevelopmentsAs you know, in late 2007 the financial crisis triggered a severe downturn in the U.S. economy. The recovery from what has been referred to as the "Great Recession" officially began in the third quarter of 2009, but the pace of economic growth since then has been modest relative to the type of cyclical rebound that we had experienced in the prior 60 years. In part, this modest pace of the expansion to date reflects the extent to which the effects of the global financial crisis on financial markets and financial institutions--and hence on the flow of credit to households and businesses--have been slow to unwind. The recession's toll on households and businesses was enormous: Between January 2008 and February 2010, we lost 8-3/4 million nonfarm payroll jobs and saw the unemployment rate double, from roughly 5 percent to around 10 percent. Real gross domestic product (GDP) dropped 5 percent between its pre-recession peak in the fourth quarter of 2007 and the trough in the second quarter of 2009; the drop in real disposable personal income was similar in magnitude. In addition, households lost an estimated $7 trillion in home equity--half of the aggregate home equity that existed in early 2006. The economic recovery is now about 2-1/2 years old, but only in mid-2011 did the level of real GDP return to its level just prior to the recession. Perhaps more troubling is that real disposable personal income at the end of 2011 was still estimated to be lower than its pre-recession level. As of January of this year, we had recovered just over one-third of the payroll jobs we lost, and the unemployment rate was still elevated at 8.3 percent. As you might expect, the slow recovery in the labor market has been mirrored in only a modest recovery in households' wage and salary income. Moreover, the gradual recovery in business activity has depressed households' returns on their financial assets, and the value of many homes is still depressed. This unusual weakness in household income and wealth, coupled with impaired access to credit, has attenuated the normal recovery in consumer demand that typically occurs during an economic upturn. Early last year, consumer price inflation was boosted by sharp run-ups in the prices of food and energy, which also worked to dampen household spending. In addition, the Japanese tsunami last March disrupted supplies of various inputs to the production of motor vehicles and boosted vehicle prices for a time. Indeed, inflation, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, moved up from an annual rate of 1-1/2 percent in 2010 to 3-1/2 percent in the first half of last year. However, as the effects of the price shocks waned, this overall measure of consumer prices retraced the run-up, moving back down to an annual rate of 1-3/4 percent in the second half of the year. The moderation in consumer price inflation continued in January, but gasoline prices have been rising again of late, which will likely push up overall inflation in coming months. Whether the increase in gasoline prices, and energy prices more broadly, turns into a persistent inflation problem depends critically on the evolution of inflation expectations. Last year, as actual inflation accelerated and decelerated, survey measures and financial market indicators of inflation expectations remained relatively stable, which limited the influence of the price shocks we saw a year ago. If, as I expect, inflation expectations remain stable in response to the recent run-up in gasoline prices, their influence on overall inflation should be limited as well. Of late, we have had some relatively encouraging economic news. Now that most of the economic data for late 2011 have arrived, we can see that the pace of economic activity improved over the second half of the year as the drag on spending and production from high energy prices and temporary supply chain disruptions from the disasters in Japan and Thailand waned. Real GDP rose at an annual rate of 2-1/2 percent in the second half of 2011, compared with an annual rate of less than 1 percent in the first half. Consumer spending increased at a moderate rate, exports expanded solidly, and business investment rose further. In the labor market, employment gains picked up beginning in the fall, and in recent months the unemployment rate has declined noticeably. But at the same time, the headwinds that have been restraining the expansion for some time have been easing, at best, only gradually. The housing market is still very depressed--weighed down by the large inventory of vacant homes for sale, the substantial number of properties at some stage in the foreclosure process, and homebuyers' concerns that house prices will continue to fall. In addition, spending at all levels of government continued to contract late last year. Despite some improvement, credit conditions for many consumers and for smaller businesses remain tight. Although households appeared to become a bit more optimistic about the outlook around the turn of the year, they were still extremely pessimistic about their income prospects. In part, those views are likely the result of many having endured extended periods of very high long-term unemployment or having to settle for only part-time work. In addition, the run-up in gasoline prices we are currently experiencing will presumably reduce household purchasing power in coming months. Looking forward, the projections that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) prepared in late Januaryshow real GDP increasing 2.2 to 2.7 percent this year, not much different from its pace in the second half of last year. At that rate, the central tendency of our forecasts for the unemployment rate shows only a small improvement over the course of this year. And inflation is expected to run at or below our 2 percent longer-run goal. A number of factors that I mentioned earlier contribute to our judgment that the pace of expansion is likely to remain modest over coming quarters, including the depressed housing market, small real income gains, and the probability of continued fiscal restraint. In addition, the information on economic activity abroad, particularly in Europe, seemed to be pointing to weaker demand for U.S. exports. Monetary PolicyGiven the magnitude of the global financial crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve acted to provide unprecedented monetary stimulus to promote and then support an economic recovery. In addition to moving the federal funds rate--our traditional policy tool--close to zero, we have engaged in balance sheet operations that are aimed at lowering longer-term yields. Most recently, over the second half of 2011, the FOMC decided to increase the average maturity of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings through a program of purchases and sales and began to reinvest principal payments on agency securities in agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities rather than Treasury securities. Moreover, the FOMC has worked to clarify its forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate, conditional on the outlook for economic activity and inflation. These actions were intended to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and, more broadly, help foster financial conditions that would provide more support to economic growth. At the January FOMC meeting, with our current projections for economic activity and inflation in mind, the Committee decided that more accommodative financial conditions would be appropriate to help bring both inflation and unemployment back, over time, to levels viewed as consistent with the FOMC's longer-run objectives mandated by the Congress. The FOMC judged that economic conditions, including the outlook for low rates of resource utilization and subdued inflation over the medium run, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate at least through late 2014, more than a year later than it had indicated in the postmeeting statements starting last August. Extending the horizon of the forward guidance appeared to shift down investors' expectations regarding the future path of the target federal funds rate. If this expectation for low rates is realized, the federal funds rate will have remained near zero for a total of about six years, a historically unprecedented occurrence in the United States. Moreover, assuming that the FOMC follows the plans that we outlined in June 2011 for winding down the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, any initial sales of our securities holdings presumably would not begin until 2015, sometime after the first increase in the target federal funds rate. The Effects of Monetary Policy on SaversThis extended period of depressed levels of economic activity and low interest rates will continue to have important implications for household income flows. In particular, critics of the Federal Reserve's accommodative monetary policy are correct that the low level of interest rates represents a strain on households who rely on income from interest-bearing assets; indeed, the flow of interest income that households earn on their savings has declined about one-fourth since the recession began. However, I would also emphasize that many households are benefiting from the low level of interest rates, and some critics of the Federal Reserve's accommodative monetary policy seem to minimize this point. Purchases of motor vehicles and other household durables can be financed more cheaply, and in many cases, households have been able to refinance their mortgages into lower-rate loans, freeing up income for other uses. In addition, interest-bearing assets represent only a modest portion of overall household assets. According to the Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances, less than 7 percent of total household assets are directly held in transaction accounts, certificates of deposit, savings bonds, and bonds.1Instead, the bulk of household wealth is held in stocks, retirement accounts, business equity, and real estate. For these other types of assets, rates of return depend primarily on the strength of the economy and how fast the economy is growing. Thus, these returns should be supported, over time, by the accommodative monetary policy that we have in place. Moreover, the Federal Reserve aims to keep inflation low and stable over time, which limits the risk to investors that high inflation will undermine the value of their savings. I also want to specifically address the argument raised by critics that an extended period of low interest rates will discourage households from saving and, as a result, diminish the longer-run economic growth prospects of the U.S. economy. Currently, households have a number of reasons to save in addition to their desire to earn interest. For instance, they need to be prepared for unexpected expenses and to rebuild the retirement nest eggs that were depleted by losses in equity and housing wealth during the recession. In fact, the portion of disposable income that households are saving has risen considerably since the recession began. Moreover, it is important to remember that the way that households' savings get channeled into productive capacity is that businesses have to be willing to use those funds to invest in expanding their plants and starting new businesses. Raising interest rates now would dampen those incentives. Thus, at the moment, channeling households' savings into the productive resources that will support our longer-term economic growth prospects requires low interest rates, not higher ones. ConclusionIn summary, the length of time required for the economy to fully recover given the extraordinary strains of the past few years is difficult to predict. I believe that the policy record in recent years clearly demonstrates the Federal Reserve's commitment to act as appropriate to foster maximum employment and price stability. The highly accommodative monetary policy now in place is intended to provide the support needed to strengthen the economic expansion and, over time, return the economy to sustainable rates of output growth, unemployment, and inflation. While the Federal Reserve recognizes that the accommodative policy we have put in place to support the economic recovery may limit the financial returns to saving for a time, ultimately our goal is an economy that is operating close to its potential and is producing jobs, income, and opportunities for investment that will lead to higher returns across a range of assets for savers and investors. Thank you. 1.Staff calculation based on data from table 5, "Value of Financial Assets of All Families, Distributed by Type of Asset, 1998-2007 Surveys," in Brian K. Bucks, Arthur B. Kennickell, Traci L. Mach, and Kevin B. Moore (2009), "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 95 (February), p. A15.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemCommunity Development Financial Institutions FundFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund will host the 2012 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference in Seattle, Washington, from March 25 to 28. This biennial conference is designed to offer participants from around the country the opportunity to learn about the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and its regulations, as well as the chance to network with colleagues and discuss best practices and emerging challenges in community development. The conference agenda includes keynote presentations by Elizabeth A. Duke, member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Cyrus Amir-Mokri, Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions at the U.S. Department of the Treasury, Donna Gambrell, Director of the U.S. Department of the Treasury Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, Martin J. Gruenberg, Acting Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and John Walsh, Acting Comptroller of the Currency. The conference will feature three tracks: CRA Compliance; the National Community Development Lending School; and Community Development in Practice. The sessions will focus on how loans, investments, and services can have a positive and lasting effect in low- and moderate-income communities and result in strong CRA performance. Winners of the 2012 Community Reinvestment Awards, which this year honor financial institutions for their innovative approaches to strengthening small businesses, will be announced at the conference. For the full agenda and to register for the conference online, please visit:http://www.frbsf.org/community/seattle2012/
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Three federal financial regulatory agencies on Friday issued guidance clarifying that the effective date of section 716, the so-called Swaps Pushout provision, of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act is July 16, 2013. The guidance is being issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency after receiving inquiries seeking clarification about the effective date. Section 716 prohibits certain types of Federal assistance, such as discount window lending and deposit insurance, for certain uses to a swaps entity, subject to specified exceptions, with respect to its swap, security-based swap, or other activity. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Voting Record
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (the agencies) are seeking comment on proposed revisions to the interagency leveraged finance guidance issued in 2001. Transactions that are covered by this guidance are characterized by a borrower with a degree of financial or cash flow leverage that significantly exceeds industry norms as measured by various debt, cash flow, or other ratios. The agencies observed tremendous growth in the volume of leveraged credit leading up to the crisis and in the participation of non-regulated investors. While there was a pull-back in leveraged lending during the crisis, volumes have since increased while prudent underwriting practices have deteriorated. As the market has grown, debt agreements have frequently included features that provide relatively limited lender protection, including the absence of meaningful maintenance covenants and the inclusion of other features that can affect lenders' recourse in the event of weakened borrower performance. In addition, capital structures and repayment prospects for some transactions, whether originated to hold or to distribute, have been aggressive. Management information systems (MIS) at some institutions have proven less than satisfactory in accurately aggregating exposures on a timely basis, and many institutions have found themselves holding large pipelines of higher-risk commitments at a time when buyer demand for risky assets diminished significantly. Leveraged finance is an important type of financing for the economy, and banks play an integral role in making credit available and syndicating that credit to investors. It is important that banks help provide financing to creditworthy borrowers in a safe and sound manner. In light of the market's evolution, the agencies propose replacing the 2001 guidance with revised leveraged finance guidance that refocuses attention to five key areas: Although some sections of the guidance should apply to all leveraged transactions (for example, underwriting), the vast majority of community banks should not be affected as they have no exposure to leveraged loans. Comments on the proposed guidance must be submitted to the agencies no later than June 8, 2012. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Voting Record
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Government Oversight and Reform, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Cummings, and other members of the Committee for inviting me to testify about the economic and financial situation in Europe and the actions taken by the Federal Reserve in response. Developments in Europe and Their Effects on the U.S. EconomyFor almost two years, developments in Europe have had an important influence on the tenor of global financial markets and on the global economy more generally. The combination of high debts, large deficits, and poor growth prospects in several countries using the euro has raised concerns about fiscal sustainability and, consequently, led to sharply higher sovereign borrowing costs--initially for Greece, but subsequently for other euro-area countries as well. Pessimism about these countries' fiscal and economic situations, in turn, has undermined confidence in the strength of European financial institutions, increasing the cost and difficulty those institutions have faced in obtaining funding and reducing their willingness to supply credit. The difficulties in the euro area have affected the U.S. economy. The European Union accounts for roughly one-fifth of U.S. exports of goods and services. Not surprisingly, U.S. exports to Europe over the past two years have underperformed our exports to the rest of the world. In addition, weaker demand from Europe has slowed growth in other economies, which has also lowered foreign demand for our products. Financial strains in Europe have also shown through to our financial markets. During times when financial conditions in Europe were at their most turbulent, investors around the world retreated from riskier assets. In the United States, these pullbacks decreased stock prices, increased the costs of issuing corporate debt, and reduced consumer and business confidence. In addition, U.S. financial institutions that were thought to have substantial exposures to Europe saw their stock prices fall and their credit spreads widen. In the past few months, financial stresses in Europe have lessened, which has contributed to an improved tone of financial markets around the world, including in the United States. The improvement reflects, in part, a number of actions taken by European policymakers. First, measures taken by the European Central Bank (ECB), including implementing two longer-term refinancing operations and easing collateral rules and reserve requirements, have allowed European banks to lock in funding for up to three years, thereby alleviating concerns about their near-term prospects. With the benefit of this support, European banks in turn have increased their holdings of sovereign debt, contributing to lower borrowing costs for some countries. Second, euro-area leaders, the Greek government, and private-sector holders of Greek debt are taking steps to put Greece on a more sustainable fiscal path. Its sovereign debt has been significantly reduced, the Greek authorities are intensifying their efforts to implement fiscal and structural reforms, and the European Union and International Monetary Fund have pledged a considerable amount of new funds as part of a second assistance package. The Greek economy remains in a deep recession, however. Third and finally, leaders of most of the members of the European Union have approved a new fiscal compact treaty that strengthens fiscal rules and their enforcement. This treaty represents a positive step toward resolving the fundamental tension inherent in having a monetary union without a fiscal union, and thus should help bolster the viability of the euro-area economy in the longer term. Although progress has been made, more needs to be done. Full resolution of the crisis will require a further strengthening of the European banking system; a significant expansion of financial backstops, or "firewalls," to guard against contagion in sovereign debt markets; and, critically, continued efforts to increase economic growth and competitiveness and to reduce external imbalances in the troubled countries. Actions Taken by the Federal ReserveThe Federal Reserve has followed developments in Europe closely, and we are in frequent contact with key European policymakers. We are particularly focused on protecting U.S. financial institutions, businesses, and consumers from adverse financial and economic developments in Europe. To help calm dollar funding markets and support the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses, the Federal Reserve acted in concert with major foreign central banks to enhance the U.S. dollar swap facilities that were originally put in place during the global financial crisis and reestablished in May 2010. Use of the reestablished lines was limited until late last year. However, in late November, the Federal Reserve agreed with the ECB and the central banks of Canada, Japan, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom to extend the swap lines through February 2013 and to reduce their pricing, from a spread of 100 basis points over the overnight index swap rate to 50 basis points.1 The lower cost to the ECB and other foreign central banks enabled them, in turn, to reduce the cost of the short-term dollar loans they provide to financial institutions in their jurisdictions. As a result, usage of the swap line increased considerably, peaking at $109 billion in mid-February. The expanded use of the swap lines has helped to ease funding pressures on European and other foreign banks, lower tensions in U.S. money markets (in which foreign banks are major participants), alleviate pressures on foreign banks to reduce their lending in the United States, and boost confidence at a time of considerable strain in international financial markets. In recent weeks, as market conditions have improved, usage of the swap lines has fallen back to about $65 billion. I would add that the swaps are very safe from the perspective of the Federal Reserve and the U.S. taxpayer. They present no exchange rate or interest rate risk; each drawing has a short maturity and must be approved by the Federal Reserve; they are collateralized by the foreign currencies for which dollars are swapped; and our counterparties are the foreign central banks, not the foreign commercial banks that receive the dollar loans.2 In addition to its actions to reduce pressures in global markets for dollar funding, the Federal Reserve has collaborated with other agencies--both bilaterally and through the Financial Stability Oversight Council--to monitor the potential vulnerabilities of U.S. financial institutions and to work to enhance their resilience in the face of possible shocks to the global economy. Notably, U.S. financial institutions have very limited direct net credit exposures to the most vulnerable euro-area countries, and U.S. money market funds also have almost no exposure to those countries. U.S. financial institutions do have some gross exposure to potential losses arising from sales of credit default swap (CDS) protection referencing European sovereign debt. However, for the large U.S. dealer banks, these sales have been more than offset by purchases of protection, which would imply that in the event of a sovereign default, U.S. financial institutions would be net recipients of CDS payouts. These positions still carry some risk in that some U.S. banks' counterparties might conceivably fail to make good on their obligations, but such risk is mitigated by the fact that the counterparties to large U.S. dealer banks for sovereign CDS trades are dispersed, primarily across large financial institutions. And in the vast majority of cases, these institutions post collateral to each other to help minimize possible losses. Although U.S. banks have limited exposure to peripheral European countries, their exposures to European banks and to the larger, "core" countries of Europe are more material. Moreover, European holdings represented 35 percent of the assets of prime U.S. money market funds in February, and these funds remain structurally vulnerable despite some constructive steps, such as improved liquidity requirements, taken since the recent financial crisis. U.S. financial firms and money market funds have had time to adjust their exposures and hedge their risks to some degree as the European situation has evolved, but the risks of contagion remain a concern for both these institutions and their supervisors and regulators. In particular, were the situation in Europe to take a severe turn for the worse, the U.S. financial sector likely would have to contend not only with problems stemming from its direct European exposures, but also with an array of broader market movements, including declines in global equity prices, increased credit costs, and reduced availability of funding. To address these broader risks, we have been working closely with large U.S. financial institutions. Most recently, on March 13, we released results from our Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)--a supervisory assessment by the Federal Reserve of the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of large, complex bank holding companies.3As part of this exercise, bank capital positions were evaluated under a hypothetical stress scenario that involved a deep recession in the United States (with unemployment reaching 13 percent) and a notable decline in activity abroad, combined with sharp decreases in both domestic and global asset prices. This exercise was designed to capture both the direct and indirect exposures and vulnerabilities of U.S. financial institutions to the economic and financial stresses that might arise from a severe crisis in Europe. The results show that a significant majority of the largest U.S. banks would continue to meet supervisory expectations for capital adequacy despite large projected losses in an extremely adverse hypothetical scenario. ConclusionThe recent reduction in financial stresses in Europe is a welcome development for the United States, given the important trade and financial linkages connecting our economies. However, Europe's financial and economic situation remains difficult, and it is critical that the European leaders follow through on their policy commitments to ensure a lasting stabilization. I believe that our European counterparts understand the challenges and risks they face and are committed to take the necessary steps to address those issues. For our part, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor the situation closely, work with our financial institutions and foreign counterparts to enhance the resilience of our financial system, and be ready to use our tools to help stabilize U.S. markets should the situation require such action. Thank you. I would be pleased to respond to your questions. 1.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "Coordinated Central Bank Action to Address Pressures in Global Money Markets," press release, November 30. Similar announcements appeared on the websites of the other participating central banks.Return to text 2.For the outstanding amount of dollar funding through the swap lines as it appears each week in the Federal Reserve balance sheet, seewww.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41. For other relevant information and materials on the Federal Reserve's website, seewww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_liquidityswaps.htm. For weekly information on the Federal Reserve's swap transactions with other central banks, seewww.newyorkfed.org/markets/fxswap/fxswap.cfm. Finally, for copies of the agreements between the Federal Reserve and other central banks, as well as other information, seewww.newyorkfed.org/markets/liquidity_swap.html.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Announces Summary Results of Latest Round of Bank Stress Tests," press release, March 13.Return to text
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me to appear before you today to talk about consumers' use of mobile financial services. The evolution of new technologies that enable consumers to conduct financial transactions using mobile devices has the potential to affect their financial lives in important--but as of yet, not fully known--ways. For this reason, the Federal Reserve has been monitoring trends and developments in mobile financial services. By "mobile financial services," I am really talking about two categories of activities. The first we call "mobile banking," which is using your mobile device to interact with your financial institution, mostly doing things you could also do through more traditional means, like check your account balance or transfer money between accounts. The second we call "mobile payments," which we define as making purchases, bill payments, charitable donations, or payments to other persons using your mobile device with the payment applied to your phone bill, charged to your credit card, or withdrawn directly from your bank account. Beyond banking and payments, mobile devices have the potential to be useful tools in helping consumers track their spending, saving, investing, and borrowing, and in making financial decisions. Such technologies also hold the potential to expand access to mainstream financial services to segments of the population that are currently unbanked or underbanked. That said, the technologies are still new, and important concerns, such as consumers' expressions of unease about the security of these technologies, must also be addressed for consumers to feel confident adopting these new services. To further our understanding of consumers' use of, and opinions about, such services, the Federal Reserve commissioned a survey late last year. Nearly 2,300 respondents completed the survey. This survey is among the first to integrate questions about using mobile devices for shopping and comparing products along with questions about using mobile devices for banking and payments. On March 14, 2012, the Federal Reserve released a report, based on these responses, titled "Consumers and Mobile Financial Services."1My testimony today will draw from this report, which is attached to my written testimony. Nearly nine out of ten adults in the United States have a mobile phone, and two-fifths of those phones are so-called "smartphones" with Internet connectivity. Among all mobile phone users, one out of five has used their phones to conduct some banking activity in the last 12 months. Those users with more traditional mobile phones, or so-called "feature phones," access bank information via text messages, while smartphone users access their bank information by downloading their bank's application or via the bank's Internet site. Younger consumers, those below age 29, have readily adopted mobile banking, and make up almost 44 percent of all consumers surveyed who use such services. Adoption rates of mobile banking also differ by racial and ethnic background, with Hispanics and non-Hispanic blacks making up a disproportionate share of those who use mobile banking services. The most common transactions performed by users of mobile banking were checking account balances or checking recent transactions. Transferring money between accounts was another common transaction. Of those consumers who had not adopted mobile banking, the primary reason given was that they felt their banking needs were being met through more traditional means. Security concerns were the second most-cited reason for not using mobile banking. Specifically, consumers expressed concerns about hackers gaining access to their phones and exposing their personal financial information. A little more than one-third of all mobile phone users reported that they do not know how secure mobile banking technology is for protecting their personal information, while an additional one-third rated the technology as unsafe. Nevertheless, among those consumers with any type of mobile phone, but who are not currently using mobile banking, one out of ten expects to be using it within the next year. In addition to mobile banking, we asked about mobile payments, which I described earlier. Mobile payments are not yet as prevalent as mobile banking; one out of eight respondents reported making a mobile payment in the previous 12 months, and usually this involved paying a bill online via their mobile phone. Mobile payments are disproportionately used by consumers under age 45 and by Hispanics. Consumers who are not currently using mobile payments responded that they were concerned about the security of the technology, did not see any benefit from mobile payments, or found it easier to pay in other ways--for example, with cash or with a credit card. Consumers who are "underbanked"--that is, those who have a bank account but who also use an alternative financial service provider such as a check casher, payday lender, auto-title lender, or payroll card--make significant use of mobile banking and mobile payments. Among this group, nearly three out of ten have used mobile banking, primarily to check their account balances. The underbanked are more likely than the general population to use mobile payments, with one out of six using payment services on their mobile devices. Those consumers who are unbanked also report using mobile financial services, generally in conjunction with a general purpose prepaid card or payroll card. Let me give you a few examples from the report of how consumers reported using mobile financial services to make financial decisions. I stated earlier that the most frequent use of mobile banking was to check account balances. Of those consumers who use mobile banking, more than two-thirds reported that they checked their account balance or available credit before making a large purchase. Moreover, among the consumers that reported doing this, nearly six out of ten reported that they had decided not to buy an item because of the amount of money available in their account. As another example, some consumers reported setting up a text alert from their bank if their account balance was getting low; among those using this service, five out of six reported taking some action--transferring money into the account with the low balance, reducing spending, or making a deposit into the account--in response to receiving an alert. Consumers also reported using their mobile devices to browse product reviews or get pricing information while shopping. More details on consumers' use of mobile financial services are available in the report. Staff members in the Division of Consumer and Community Affairs expect to conduct additional analysis of the data in the months ahead. This should round out our understanding of these initial findings. For instance, some of the differences that we see based on ethnic or socioeconomic factors may be better understood when we examine how such factors interact with other characteristics of the respondents. We also anticipate that we may conduct periodic updates of the survey to monitor consumers' experiences as the technology and business practices evolve. Thank you again for inviting me to appear before you today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 1. The report is available atwww.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/mobile-device-report-201203.pdf.Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the 2012 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference, Seattle, Washington (via videoconference) I am pleased to participate in the ninth biennial National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference. Since its inception in 1996, this conference has fulfilled its mission to train bankers and community development professionals on the requirements of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) by providing cutting-edge information about regulations, policies, and best practices in community development. In addition, it has become a source of inspiration for CRA-related community development activities. As this year's agenda demonstrates, this interagency conference has grown to encompass all aspects of community development, including discussions of community amenities that provide both quality of life and economic resilience for low- and moderate-income residents. Before I begin, I would like to thank the thousands of community development professionals I have met in the course of my work with the Federal Reserve for helping me to understand the breadth of the work that they do. In fact, many of you are here today. You have shown me your projects, shared your triumphs and frustrations, testified at hearings on the future of CRA, served on our Consumer Advisory Council, and actively participated in Federal Reserve conferences. Your counsel has given me a deeper appreciation of the complexities involved in creating and maintaining strong communities, particularly in times of economic stress. In my remarks today, I would like to share some of these insights. BackgroundWith the enactment of CRA in 1977, Congress directed financial regulators to assess each depository institution's record of meeting the credit needs of its entire community, including its community's low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. In the early years, even though CRA evaluations considered an institution's provision of all types of credit in lower-income communities, most were primarily focused on mortgage credit. This was in part due to the availability of Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data which made robust analysis of mortgage lending possible. In addition, the focus of community development advocates on housing issues, including the redlining practices that prompted CRA's passage, eclipsed the law's broad scope in public perception. Only over time have community stakeholders come to appreciate the broader context of CRA. Today, financial institutions have become partners in community development, bringing with them an important source of capital and financial expertise. By working together, bankers, community development practitioners, state and local governments, and other community stakeholders have learned a great deal, and the community development field has matured significantly. Places and PeopleAt one time, policy discussions revolved around whether community development was about people or places. I would argue that the debate is over and both sides won. Successful community development is based on attention to both the physical infrastructure, whether housing or commercial spaces, and the health and welfare of the residents therein. CRA supports community development by requiring financial institutions to identify and address the financial needs of the communities they serve. Safe and affordable housing will always be an important concern for lower-income Americans, but the recent recession and resulting damage to communities across the country make it clear that communities are more than physical structures. Sustainable communities--those that can weather economic downturns--not only provide decent housing, but also have the resources to support individuals and families and to create a dynamic business environment. For this reason, community development today is a multidisciplinary exercise that challenges us to think holistically about how housing relates to jobs, educational opportunities, transportation, healthcare, and other services and amenities. Neighborhood StabilizationTaking a well-rounded approach is essential now, as weak national economic conditions have caused particular hardships in lower-income communities, and have stretched the federal, state, and local resources available to address neighborhood stabilization and revitalization. In some areas, high rates of vacant and abandoned properties resulting from foreclosures have depressed housing values, drained the coffers of local governments, and created breeding grounds for crime and other social ills in what were otherwise stable, albeit low-income, communities. The result has been a shift in focus in community development, from building new housing to preserving or disposing of existing housing. In recent years, local governments and community-based organizations have struggled to counter the effects of foreclosures on neighborhoods. Some communities have found success by establishing land banks to manage low-value properties that might otherwise sit vacant if left to the private market.1Land banks are typically public or nonprofit entities, often with a limited lifespan and sunset provisions. The notion of a landbank, as opposed to a landtrust, is that properties are brought in and moved out of a land bank's portfolio rather than permanently preserved. While part of the land bank's portfolio, foreclosed properties can be physically rehabilitated, rented, sold to new owner-occupants or responsible investors, or, in some cases, demolished. Using this kind of mechanism, a community can gain control of vacant properties and keep them from causing problems for the surrounding neighborhood until market conditions are more conducive to redevelopment or sale. Land banks are just one example of the new approaches to housing issues that are being pursued across the country, many with the assistance of the Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP) administered by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The NSP program offers some funding to tackle these issues, but it also provides a structure to bring community stakeholders together to identify the best strategies for addressing foreclosures given the particular circumstances of each community. Whether a community decides to purchase and rehabilitate homes for resale, demolish vacant homes, or create land banks to help control the destiny of these properties, the collaborative problem-solving approach used by NSP is one that can make the most of limited resources. Neighborhood stabilization is doubtless the precursor to community development in some communities and, in recognition of this, the federal banking agencies amended CRA regulations to specifically recognize neighborhood stabilization activities in designated NSP areas as appropriate for CRA consideration.2In addition, the Federal Reserve has identified and shared a number of promising practices for dealing with foreclosed and vacant homes.3While some cities are pioneering with land banks, others, such as Cleveland, Detroit, and Baltimore, are using data to plan for the future in ways that city governments wouldn't have imagined just a few years ago. Partnering with local foundations, universities, and community organizations, these cities are collecting extensive property data to identify neighborhood assets and build on those strengths.4In Phoenix, local officials and non-profits are partnering with local realtors to match families with affordable homes for sale. UnemploymentThe foreclosure crisis that resulted from unsustainable subprime lending has persisted largely because of high unemployment rates. Thus, in order to be successful, any effort to stabilize and revitalize lower-income neighborhoods will need to consider housing through the lens of access to jobs and educational opportunities. The Federal Reserve System currently has an initiative underway to better understand the relationship between community development activities and successful workforce development strategies. We anticipate that this research will provide valuable information for bankers and their community partners as they address the needs of their communities. Of course, having a job is one thing. Getting to it is another. With good reason, transportation considerations have become more common in community development plans in recent years. More communities are taking public transportation into account when planning residential projects. Given the high cost of owning and operating a car, transportation options are a significant factor in a neighborhood's overall affordability. Demographic shifts over the last decade have resulted in the suburbanization of poverty, and now dictate that communities work together to create transportation options, including buses, light rail, and even car-sharing arrangements. Even so, as the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond has discovered in its work on car ownership for low-income workers, public transportation is not always sufficient to solve the transportation problems of the poor. Some jobs, such as construction work, require that workers report to different locations. Shift workers, whether security guards, airport baggage handlers, or hospital workers, may not have easy access to public transportation at night. Supporting nonprofit organizations, such as Vehicles for Change, which takes donated cars and refurbishes them for sale to low-income workers for a very small fee, may be the most effective means for some communities to overcome the barriers to car ownership.5 One of the more innovative solutions to this issue that I have seen was developed by an organization in Dallas that aims to move the jobs to the workers, rather than vice versa. Lone Star Investment Advisors LLC is a private equity fund that invests in Texas companies located in, or willing to move to, low-income census tracts. The fund's managers have focused on manufacturing and distribution companies that can create jobs in the state's lower-income communities. One of the businesses in the fund's portfolio, PrimeSource Food Service Equipment, moved from an affluent northern Dallas suburb to South Dallas, where the poverty rate was higher than 40 percent, relocating more than 100 employees and hiring new employees from South Dallas. I raise this example because it demonstrates what a little imagination can do to solve the problem of connecting people with jobs. Moreover, this double bottom-line approach to investments--making a profit while benefitting the community--makes this kind of activity attractive to bankers with CRA obligations and other socially-minded investors. Community Development: An Entrepreneurial EnterpriseThis innovative example serves as a reminder that successful community development is an entrepreneurial enterprise. Thinking about community development this way reminds me of a presentation made at a recent Federal Reserve research conference on small business and entrepreneurship.6Amy Wilkinson, Senior Fellow at Harvard's Kennedy School Center for Business and Government, has conducted research to identify the skill sets of high-impact entrepreneurs and small business leaders. The skills she identified are, not surprisingly, applicable to community development. They include being able to spot opportunities that others don't see, managing complexity, reiterating ideas and revamping plans repeatedly, experimenting and failing wisely, networking to create solutions, and, as Amy put it, "unleashing generosity" in ways that create reciprocity within the network. No doubt these sound familiar. Community development is an ongoing process of identifying and understanding the complicated interaction of people and places. Solutions are found through the cycle of experimentation and adjustment. Successes look easy but they mask hard work and, often, failed attempts. Transformational changes in communities rarely happen without the involvement and support of a network that includes residents, business owners, community organizations, financial institutions, and local government. Sustained interaction among these stakeholders is what makes the opportunity known and the solution successful. The city of Rochester, New York, put these principles to work and managed to weather the bankruptcy of the city's largest employer. Eastman Kodak once employed some 61,000 Rochester residents and invested significantly in the city's educational and cultural institutions; three decades later, it employs fewer than 7,000 people and recently filed for bankruptcy protection.7This is not an uncommon story, except for the fact that Rochester managed to gain a net of 90,000 jobs during the three decades of employment decline at Kodak. How did Rochester manage this transition so successfully? The city recognized early on the need to diversify its economic base and, some 20 years ago, created a network of private and nonprofit partnerships to leverage the city's assets, the same universities and cultural institutions Kodak had supported. Together with local government, this network trained entrepreneurs and supported new business ventures, many of which are in optics and photonics. Through foresight and the collaboration of government, private and nonprofit partners, and committed citizens, Rochester was able to build on the Kodak legacy, effectively turning lost jobs at Kodak into new local opportunities. Healthy CommunitiesIn addition to housing and employment, residents need communities that support their health and well-being in a variety of ways. Community developers play a critical role in supporting healthy lifestyles by planning for sidewalks, parks, and other open spaces connecting housing and commercial areas in ways that also provide places for people to meet and children to play. Renovation and new construction plans increasingly adhere to standards that incorporate "green" materials and technologies not only because they lower utility costs, which is important, but also because they improve health results, such as asthma rates, among residents. One of the most obvious ways to support healthy lifestyles in lower-income neighborhoods is by making healthy food accessible. In the face of increasing rates of obesity, low-income neighborhoods are notably underserved by grocery stores. This is beginning to change because of programs like The Pennsylvania Fresh Food Financing Initiative, which is supported by a partnership between The Reinvestment Fund, a nonprofit developer, and two community organizations, The Food Trust and the Greater Philadelphia Urban Affairs Coalition.This partnership stepped in to fill a financing need where infrastructure costs were not met by conventional financial institutions. Their original objective was to make fresh food available in low-income neighborhoods. But they have achieved much more. The grocery stores the partnership helped to establish create an anchor for other retail needs in the area. Moreover, the stores hire local workers and train them in both the required job skills and in the workplace etiquette necessary to succeed in any job. One of the original groceries financed under the program has also added in-store financial services and a health clinic. As this grocery operator discovered, access to healthcare is another critical need in many low-income communities. In Chicago, residents have taken it upon themselves to fill the need for primary and specialty healthcare by establishing the Lawndale Christian Health Center. Ownership in the Center is retained by residents to ensure that it continues to meet the needs of its neighborhood. In another example of a community facility meeting more than one need, the Center has expanded over time to provide leadership development and organizational capacity building services to its members in addition to health services. ConclusionI could go on to recite more examples of programs that respond to community needs, but I think you get my point: Taking an entrepreneurial approach to community development results in innovative and effective programs, making communities more desirable places to live and more resilient in hard times. The CRA regulations encourage banks and thrifts to invest in activities that provide affordable housing or financial services for individuals, promote economic development, or revitalize or stabilize low- or moderate-income areas. At a time when the needs of these communities are so great and the resources available to meet those needs are so scarce, it behooves financial institutions to think broadly about their CRA obligations. By partnering with other community stakeholders, these institutions can help address existing community needs and lay the groundwork for stronger credit demand in the future. I don't want to underestimate the difficulty of the task. The recession damaged communities of all types, but particularly lower-income neighborhoods, and economic recovery has been stubbornly slow. Nonetheless, the commitment and innovation demonstrated in communities all across the country is encouraging. Taking an entrepreneurial approach to community development and thinking about the needs of both people and places will, I believe, make for stronger, more resilient communities in the future. 1.See Thomas J. Fitzpatrick IV (2010), "How Modern Land Banking Can Be Used to Solve REO Acquisition Problems," inREO and Vacant Properties: Strategies for Neighborhood Stabilization (PDF), proceedings of the conference, REO and Vacant Properties: Strategies for Neighborhood Stabilization, cosponsored by the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland and the Federal Reserve Board (Washington: Federal Reserve Board of Governors), pp. 145-50.Return to text 2.See, 75 FR 79278 (Dec 15, 2010) amending the CRA regulations by revising the term "community development" to include loans, investments, and services that support, enable, or facilitate projects or activities that meet the "eligible uses" criteria in the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 and are conducted in designated target areas identified in NSP plans approved by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.Return to text 3.See Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland and the Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2010),REO and Vacant Properties: Strategies for Neighborhood Stabilization (PDF),proceedings of the conference, REO and Vacant Properties: Strategies for Neighborhood Stabilization (Washington: Federal Reserve Board of Governors).Return to text In addition, the Federal Reserve System created a series of video reports that highlight promising stabilization work being done in Cleveland, Detroit, and Phoenix. These videos and related data tools can be found atwww.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/neighborhoodrevitalization/stablecommunities.htm. 4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011),Putting Data to Work: Data-Driven Approaches to Strengthening Neighborhoods (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December).Return to text 5.More information about Vehicles for Change is available atwww.vehiclesforchange.org.Return to text 6.Wilkinson, Amy (2011).Keynote address (PDF), delivered at the Small Business and Entrepreneurship during an Economic Recovery Conference, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, November 10.Return to text 7.Applebome, Peter (2012). "Despite Long Slide by Kodak, Company Town Avoids Decay,"New York Times, January 16, www.nytimes.com/2012/01/17/nyregion/despite-long-slide-by-kodak-rochester-avoids-decay.html.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Independent Community Bankers of America National Convention and Techworld, Nashville, Tennessee (via prerecorded video) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. I'm glad to have the chance to speak again to the Independent Community Bankers of America, even if it's by way of prerecorded remarks. This will be the first time in quite a few years that I haven't been with you in person, but, as you may know, the Federal Open Market Committee met just yesterday in Washington, so I am unable to join you in Nashville. I have very much enjoyed attending these annual ICBA get-togethers, especially since I get the chance to hear directly from you about what's happening in your local economies and in community banking more generally. It's a tradition I hope to reestablish in the future. The Role of Community Banks in a Challenging EconomyCommunity banks remain a critical component of our financial system and our economy. They help keep their local economies vibrant and growing by taking on and managing the risks of local lending, which larger banks may be unwilling or unable to do. They often respond with greater agility to lending requests than their national competitors because of their detailed knowledge of the needs of their customers and their close ties to the communities they serve. As you well know, however, community banks are also facing difficult challenges. Their close ties to local economies are, on balance, a source of strength, but a drawback of those ties is that the fortunes of communities and their banks tend to rise and fall together. Another concern for community banks is the narrowing of the range of their profitable lending activities: Because larger banks have used their scale to gain a pricing advantage in volume-driven businesses such as consumer lending, community banks have tended to specialize in other areas, such as loans secured by commercial real estate. That said, I know that community banks are continuing to look for ways to prudently diversify their revenue sources. Like larger banks, community banks are also being affected by the state of the national economy. Despite some recent signs of improvement, the recovery has been frustratingly slow, constraining opportunities for profitable lending. And, as I will discuss momentarily, actual and prospective changes in the regulatory landscape have also raised concerns among community bankers. The good news is that, for the most part, community banks appear to be meeting their challenges. Profits of smaller banks were considerably higher in 2011 than in the previous year, nonperforming assets were lower, provisions for loan losses fell appreciably, and capital ratios improved. Outreach and Communication with Community BanksAs I noted, together with economic conditions, regulation and supervision are among the top concerns for community banks. In that regard, I think we would all agree that two-way communication between regulators and community banks is critical. Banks need to understand supervisors' policies and expectations, but supervisors must also listen to and understand banks' concerns. At the Federal Reserve, we pursue our dialogue with community bankers through many channels. One important channel is the recently established Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC).1The council's membership is drawn from smaller banks, credit unions, and savings associations. Each of the 12 Reserve Banks around the country has a local advisory council, and one representative from each local council serves on the national council that meets with the Board in Washington twice a year. At a recent meeting, for example, one of our CDIAC members asked us to be clearer about whether particular rules and guidance apply to community banks. Having heard from this banker as well as others, we are now working to more explicitly indicate which banks will be affected when we issue new regulatory proposals, final rules, or regulatory guidance. Although this change seems relatively simple, we hope it will help banks avoid allocating precious resources to poring over supervisory guidance that does not apply to them. In addition to the advisory council, the Board last year established a supervision subcommittee on smaller regional and community banking. Because of their professional backgrounds in community banking and bank supervision, I asked Governors Elizabeth Duke and Sarah Bloom Raskin to serve on this subcommittee. Its primary role is to improve our understanding of community and regional banking conditions and to review policy proposals for their potential effect on the safety and soundness of, and the regulatory costs imposed on, community and regional institutions.2Governors Duke and Raskin are also keenly interested in how our policies could affect the availability of credit to sound borrowers. We have other contacts with community banks that have proved valuable. For quite a few years, the Reserve Banks have maintained local training and outreach programs for banks. More recently, several of these programs have been expanded nationally. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis organizes national "Ask the Fed" calls to provide bankers with an opportunity to hear Federal Reserve staff discuss recent policy initiatives and issues that examiners are encountering in the field. In addition, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco hosts consumer compliance webinars, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia publishes a quarterly overview of consumer compliance issues that allows Federal Reserve staff to address questions from banks.3We are exploring options for building on these initiatives. It is critical to keep the communications channels open if supervisors and banks are to work together constructively. The Regulation and Supervision of Community BanksBank supervision requires a delicate balance--particularly now. The weak economy, together with loose lending standards in the past, has put pressure on the entire banking industry, including community banks. To protect banks from new problems down the road, and to safeguard the Deposit Insurance Fund, supervisors must insist on high standards for lending, risk management, and governance. At the same time, it is important for banks, for their communities, and for the national economy that banks lend to creditworthy borrowers. Lending to creditworthy borrowers, after all, is how banks earn profits. We also know that supervision imposes costs on institutions, and we recognize that new regulations and supervisory requirements may impose disproportionate costs on community banks. Thus, we take quite seriously the importance of evaluating the costs and benefits of new rules. Supervision is conducted through the Federal Reserve's decentralized structure of 12 regional Reserve Banks, which helps us tailor our examinations and supervision to the size, complexity, risk profile, and business model of each institution. Community bankers tell us repeatedly that they are concerned about the changing regulatory environment. One particular worry is the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). It is important to emphasize that the Congress enacted the Dodd-Frank Act largely in response to the "too big to fail" problem, and that most of its provisions--regarding, for example, capital, liquidity, and risk management--apply only, or principally, to the largest, most complex, and internationally active banks. These new standards are not meant to apply to, and clearly would not be appropriate for, community banks. We will work to maintain a clear distinction between community banks and larger institutions in the application of new regulations. ConclusionTo conclude, I would like to reemphasize the importance that my colleagues on the Board and I place on the Federal Reserve's relationship with community banks. The Fed is committed to fair, consistent, and informed examinations that take into account the size, complexity, and individual circumstances of each bank we oversee. We will do all we can to support the banks' safety and soundness and eliminate unnecessary costs. Despite economic uncertainties, the condition of community banks is improving. That's good news not only for banks, but for their communities and the national economy as well. Thanks, and enjoy the rest of your meetings. 1.For more information, see the Federal Reserve Board's webpage "Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council."Return to text 2.For the purposes of the Federal Reserve's supervisory programs, regional banking organizations generally are considered to be those banks and bank holding companies (including savings and loan holding companies) with total consolidated assets between $10 billion and $50 billion.Return to text 3.For archived webinars and publications as well as announcements about future events, see the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's webpage "Consumer Compliance Outlook."Return to text
On March 19, 2012, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $3 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were pro-rated at 90.14 percent. Resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 except that all awards below $10,000 were rounded up to $10,000. The awarded deposits will settle on March 22, 2012, and will mature on April 19, 2012. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded deposits.
The Federal Reserve on Tuesday announced summary results of the latest round of bank stress tests, which show that the majority of the largest U.S. banks would continue to meet supervisory expectations for capital adequacy despite large projected losses in an extremely adverse hypothetical economic scenario. The Federal Reserve in the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest bank holding companies. This exercise includes a supervisory stress test to evaluate whether firms would have sufficient capital in times of severe economic and financial stress to continue to lend to households and businesses. Reflecting the severity of the stress scenario--which includes a peak unemployment rate of 13 percent, a 50 percent drop in equity prices, and a 21 percent decline in housing prices--losses at the 19 bank holding companies are estimated to total $534 billion during the nine quarters of the hypothetical stress scenario. The aggregate tier 1 common capital ratio, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, falls from 10.1 percent in the third quarter of 2011 to 6.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2013 in the hypothetical stress scenario. That number incorporates the firms' proposals for planned capital actions such as dividends, share buybacks, and share issuance. Despite the large hypothetical declines, the post-stress capital level in the test exceeds the actual aggregate tier 1 common ratio for the 19 firms prior to the government stress tests conducted in the midst of the financial crisis in early 2009, and reflects a significant increase in capital during the past three years. In fact, despite the significant projected capital declines, 15 of the 19 bank holding companies were estimated to maintain capital ratios above all four of the regulatory minimum levels under the hypothetical stress scenario, even after considering the proposed capital actions, such as dividend increases or share buybacks.1 It's important to note that the Federal Reserve's stress scenario estimates are the outcome of deliberately stringent and conservative assessments under hypothetical, adverse economic conditions and the results are not forecasts or expected outcomes. Strong capital levels are critical to ensuring that banking organizations have the ability to lend and to continue to meet their financial obligations, even in times of economic difficulty. U.S. firms have built up their capital levels under the Federal Reserve's leadership since the government stress tests in 2009. The 19 bank holding companies that participated in those tests and in the 2011 and 2012 CCAR have increased their tier 1 common capital levels to $759 billion in the fourth quarter of 2011 from $420 billion in the first quarter of 2009. The tier 1 common ratio for these firms, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, has increased to a weighted average of 10.4 percent from 5.4 percent. The stronger capital position reflects in part substantially lower capital distributions by bank holding companies, a result of the Federal Reserve's move to ensure the firms reduced or eliminated dividends to maintain safety and soundness. Following the first CCAR in 2011, the Federal Reserve allowed those financial institutions with well-developed capital plans and capital positions that would remain strong even under adverse conditions to increase distributions, but at a prudent pace that would ensure continued increases in capital. The 19 institutions paid out 15 percent of net income in common dividends in 2011 compared with a payout of 38 percent of net income in 2006. They also raised more in common equity than they repurchased in 2011. The stress test is just one component of the Federal Reserve's evaluation of a bank holding company's proposal to make capital distributions. Other considerations include the strength of the firm's capital planning processes and plans to meet international capital agreements as new requirements are phased in beginning in 2013. Methodology and Results for Stress Scenario Projections (PDF)March 16, 2012:Comparison of revisions (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 1. The capital plans rule stipulates that the firms must demonstrate their ability to maintain tier 1 common ratios above 5 percent. Further, the minimum levels for firms to be considered adequately capitalized are 4 percent for the tier 1 ratio, 8 percent for the total capital ratio, and 3 or 4 percent for the tier 1 leverage ratio, depending on whether the institution is subject to the market risk capital charge. Ratios can be found on table 2 of the attached paper.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application by Adam Bank Group, Inc., Tampa, Florida, to acquire Brazos Valley Bank, National Association, College Station, Texas. Attached is the Boards Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Mid America Bank and Trust Company, Dixon, MissouriWritten Agreement dated June 8, 2007Terminated March 14, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Citizens Bancshares, Inc. and The Citizens Bank of Edmond, both of Edmond, OklahomaWritten Agreement dated January 27, 2010Terminated March 13, 2012 Credit Suisse AG, Zurich, SwitzerlandCease and Desist Order dated December 16, 2009Terminated March 14, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday extended the comment period until April 30, 2012, on a proposed rule to implement the enhanced prudential standards and early remediation requirements in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The proposal includes a wide range of measures addressing issues such as capital, liquidity, single counterparty credit limits, stress testing, risk management, and early remediation requirements. The Board extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Originally, comments were due by March 31, 2012. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Orrstown Financial Services, Inc, and Orrstown Bank (PDF), both of Shippensburg, PennsylvaniaWritten Agreement dated March 22, 2012 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Cadence Financial Corporation, Starkville, MississippiWritten Agreement dated November 17, 2010Terminated March 20, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Central Bancorp, Inc. (PDF), Garland, TexasWritten Agreement dated March 8, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Remer Bancorporation, Inc. (PDF), Remer, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated March 19, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued guidance to ensure that supervisors apply consistent standards as they evaluate whether banking organizations with $10 billion or less in assets are eligible for upgrades of supervisory ratings. The guidance is being issued to ensure that upgrades occur in a timely manner when the banking organizations have made the requisite progress in addressing any supervisory concerns that had prompted lower ratings. To be eligible for an upgrade, banks are expected to demonstrate, among other things, improvement in financial condition and risk management, as well as show that such improvement is likely to continue. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday launched its official Twitter channel--@federalreserve--with the aim of increasing the accessibility and availability of Federal Reserve Board news. The Boards website,www.federalreserve.gov, will remain its primary channel of communication. Selected announcements will be tweeted after they are first posted on the website. To start, tweets will include items such as press releases, speeches, testimony, reports to the Congress, the Monthly Report on Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet, and the Federal Reserves weekly balance sheet (H.4.1). Additionally, the Board will tweet about educational frequently asked questions (FAQs) and Board video links. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released action plans for three supervised financial institutions to correct deficiencies in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. The three institutions are HSBC North America Holdings, Inc., Ally Financial Inc., and IMB HoldCo. LLC. The Federal Reserve also released the engagement letter between HSBC and the independent consultant HSBC retained to review foreclosures that were in process in 2009 and 2010. The action plans and engagement letters are required by formal enforcement actions issued by the Federal Reserve last year. The Federal Reserve first released a group of action plans and engagement letters onFebruary 27. Release of the action plans and engagement letters follows reviews conducted from November 2010 to January 2011, in which examiners found unsafe and unsound processes and practices in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing at a number of supervised institutions. The Federal Reserve anticipates that more engagement letters and action plans will be released soon. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Action plans and engagement letter
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately. Labor market conditions have improved further; the unemployment rate has declined notably in recent months but remains elevated. Household spending and business fixed investment have continued to advance. The housing sector remains depressed. Inflation has been subdued in recent months, although prices of crude oil and gasoline have increased lately. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects moderate economic growth over coming quarters and consequently anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Strains in global financial markets have eased, though they continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The recent increase in oil and gasoline prices will push up inflation temporarily, but the Committee anticipates that subsequently inflation will run at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions--including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run--are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014. The Committee also decided to continue its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in September. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Dennis P. Lockhart; Sandra Pianalto; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Daniel K. Tarullo; John C. Williams; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the action was Jeffrey M. Lacker, who does not anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate through late 2014.
On Monday, March 19, 2012, the Federal Reserve will offer $3 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's September 8, 2010 release, this offering is part of ongoing small-value operations designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to become familiar with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Offering and Competitive Auction Parameters Competitive bids submitted at the stop-out rate will be pro-rated and will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. Non-Competitive bids are allowed in this auction. All non-competitive bids will be automatically awarded in full at the stop-out rate of the competitive auction. The minimum amount for a non-competitive bid is $10,000; the maximum amount is $5,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. Non-Competitive bids must be submitted between 10:00 a.m. ET and 2:00 p.m. ET on the auction date. Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the auction date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, results will be posted on the Term Deposit Facility Resource Center page of the Central Bank Central website (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Participant awards will be posted to the Term Deposit Facility application at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date, and participants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application.
The Federal Reserve on Monday released a paper describing the methodology used in the stress test in the 2012 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) as well as the templates for disclosure of the summary results, which will be issued at 4:30 p.m. EDT on Thursday, March 15. The CCAR is a rigorous exercise to evaluate the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest bank holding companies. This exercise includes a supervisory stress test to evaluate whether firms would have sufficient capital in times of severe economic and financial stress to continue to lend to households and businesses. The Federal Reserve estimated revenue and losses under the stress scenario based on detailed data provided by the firms and verified by supervisors. The CCAR draws on the expertise of hundreds of staff throughout the Federal Reserve System, including supervisors, economists, markets analysts, and others. The supervisory stress scenario for CCAR 2012, which was designed in November 2011, depicts a severe recession in the United States, including a peak unemployment rate of 13 percent, a 50 percent drop in equity prices, and a 21 percent decline in housing prices. The supervisory stress scenario is not the Federal Reserve's forecast for the economy, but was designed to represent an outcome that, while unlikely, may occur if the U.S economy were to experience a deep recession at the same time that economic activity in other major economies contracted significantly. The Federal Reserve evaluates institutions' capital plans across a range of criteria, including a stress test that examines whether a firm could make all the capital distributions included in its plan--such as dividends and stock repurchases--while still maintaining capital above the Federal Reserve's standards in a hypothetical supervisory stress scenario. Other considerations for capital distributions include an evaluation of the firms' capital planning processes and plans to meet international capital agreements as new requirements are phased in beginning in 2013. The stress-test results, including projected capital ratios, revenues, and losses in the supervisory stress scenario, will be disclosed for the 19 large bank holding companies that participated. To illustrate the impact of the stress scenario alone, the Federal Reserve also calculated stressed capital ratios including planned capital actions through March 31, 2012, but excluding proposed actions for the remainder of the stress scenario horizon and assuming no material capital issuances from March 16 through March 31, 2012. Those results will also be disclosed. Strong capital levels are critical to ensuring that banking organizations have the ability to lend and to continue to meet their financial obligations, even in times of economic difficulty. U.S. firms have built up their capital levels under the Federal Reserve's leadership since government stress tests were conducted in early 2009. The 19 bank holding companies that participated in those tests and in the 2011 and 2012 CCAR have increased their tier 1 common capital levels to $759 billion in the fourth quarter of 2011 from $420 billion in the first quarter of 2009. The tier 1 common ratio for these firms, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, has increased to a weighted average of 10.4 percent from 5.4 percent. The increase reflects in part substantially lower capital distributions by bank holding companies, a result of the Federal Reserve's move to ensure the firms reduced or eliminated dividends to maintain safety and soundness. Following the CCAR in 2011, the Federal Reserve allowed those financial institutions with well-developed capital plans and capital positions that would remain strong even under adverse conditions to increase distributions, but at a prudent pace that would ensure continued increases in capital. The 19 institutions paid out 15 percent of net income in common dividends in 2011 after paying out 38 percent of net income in 2006. They also raised more in common equity than they repurchased in 2011. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Methodology for Stress Scenario Projections (PDF)Template of Estimates of Minimum Tier 1 Common Ratios (PDF)Template of Supervisory Stress Scenario Tables (PDF)
One out of five American consumers used their mobile phone to access their bank account, credit card, or other financial account in the 12 months ending in January 2012 and an additional one out of five indicated they would likely use mobile banking at some point in the future, according to aFederal Reserve Board survey (2.5 MB PDF)|HTML. The survey's findings suggest that the use of mobile banking is poised to expand further over the next year, with usage possibly increasing to one out of three mobile phone users by 2013. However, the survey indicates that many consumers remain skeptical of the benefit of mobile banking and the level of security associated with the technology. The use of mobile banking is highly correlated with age, according to the survey results. People between 18 and 29 account for approximately 44 percent of mobile banking users, relative to 22 percent of all mobile phone users. Conversely, people age 60 and over account for only 6 percent of all mobile banking users, but 24 percent of mobile phone users. The survey showed a significantly higher level of mobile banking uptake among African Americans (16 percent) and Hispanics (17 percent), relative to 11 percent and 13 percent of mobile phone users, respectively. The widespread use of mobile technology has the potential to expand access to financial services for previously underserved populations. Underbanked individuals (people with bank accounts but who use check cashers, payday lenders, or payroll cards) make relatively heavy use of mobile banking, according to the survey. Of this group, 29 percent used mobile banking in the year ending in January 2012. The survey found that the most common mobile banking activities are consumers checking their account balances or monitoring recent transactions. Less frequently used mobile banking functions include making online bill payments from a bank account, locating an in-network automated teller machine, and depositing a check by phone. The majority of consumers who have a mobile phone but do not use mobile banking said they either had no need for these services or expressed security concerns. When asked to rate the security of mobile banking, non-users were more likely to report that they believed it was unsecure or that they simply didn't know how secure the technology was. The survey was conducted on behalf of the Board by Knowledge Networks, an online consumer research firm. Data collection began December 22, 2011, and was concluded on January 9, 2012. Nearly 2,300 respondents completed the survey. A report summarizing the survey's mobile financial services findings may be found at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/mobile-device-report-201203.pdf(2.5 MB PDF) |HTML. Appendix tables provide responses to all of the survey questions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve System on Tuesday released the 2011 combined annual comparative financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks, the limited liability companies (LLCs) that were created to respond to strains in financial markets, and the Board of Governors. These financial statements are audited annually by an independent auditing firm. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2011 net income of $77.4 billion was derived primarily from $83.6 billion in interest income on securities acquired through open market operations (Treasury securities, federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and GSE debt securities). The Reserve Banks provided for payments of $75.4 billion of their 2011 net income to the U.S. Treasury. Total Reserve Bank assets as of December 31, 2011, were $2.919 trillion, which represents an increase of $491 billion from the previous year. Holdings of U.S. Treasury securities increased by $683 billion, GSE debt securities holdings decreased by $45 billion, and federal agency and GSE MBS holdings decreased by $156 billion. The balances held under central bank liquidity swap arrangements increased by $99.7 billion. Federal Reserve Bank assets related to credit and liquidity programs decreased by $95.8 billion. The closing of the American International Group, Inc. (AIG) recapitalization plan in January 2011 resulted in asset reductions of $47 billion, inclusive of the full repayment of the revolving line of credit with AIG in the amount of $20.6 billion and the redemption or sale of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's (FRBNY) preferred interests in two AIG-related LLCs in the amount of $26.4 billion. Investments held by the LLCs consolidated by the FRBNY decreased by $33 billion, primarily as a result of asset sales and maturities, and these proceeds were used to repay $32.3 billion of the loans extended by the FRBNY to the LLCs. In addition, loans outstanding under the Term Asset-Backed Securities Lending Facility decreased by $15.8 billion, as a result of principal payments and loan prepayments. The combined annual financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks and the consolidated annual financial statements for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York include information about the assets and income of each of the consolidated LLCs, such as overall financial results, portfolio composition, asset quality, and asset value information. The statements also contain summaries of the associated credit and market risks for each significant holding. The Federal Reserve System financial statements may be accessed via the Federal Reserve Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Steven B. Kamin, Director, Division of International Finance Before the Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy and Technology, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Thank you, Chairman Paul, Ranking Member Clay, and members of the Subcommittee for inviting me today to talk about the economic situation in Europe and actions taken by the Federal Reserve in response to this situation. For two years now, developments in Europe have played a critical role in shaping the tenor of global financial markets. The combination of high debts, large deficits, and poor growth prospects in several European countries using the euro has raised concerns about their fiscal sustainability. Such concerns were initially focused on Greece but have since spread to a number of other euro-area countries, leading to substantial increases in their sovereign borrowing costs. Pessimism about these countries' fiscal situation, in turn, has helped to undermine confidence in the strength of European financial institutions, increasing the institutions' borrowing costs and threatening to curtail their supply of credit. These developments have strained global financial markets and weighed on global economic activity. In the past several months, European leaders have taken a number of policy actions that have helped reduce financial market stresses. In early December, the European Central Bank (ECB) reduced its policy interest rate, cut its reserve requirement, eased collateral rules for its lending, and, perhaps most important, began providing three-year secured loans to banks. Second, euro-area leaders, the Greek government, and private-sector holders of Greek debt are taking steps to put that country on a more sustainable fiscal path. Additionally, European leaders announced and have started to implement proposals to strengthen fiscal rules and European fiscal coordination. Discussions to expand the euro-area financial backstop are on-going. These steps are positive developments and signify the commitment of European leaders to alleviate the crisis. Since early December, borrowing costs for several vulnerable European governments have declined, funding pressures for European banks have eased, and the tone of investor sentiment has improved. However, financial markets remain under strain. Europe's authorities continue to face difficult challenges as they seek to stabilize their fiscal and financial situation, and it will be critical for them to follow through on their policy commitments in the months ahead. Here at home, the financial stresses in Europe have undoubtedly spilled over to the United States by restraining our exports, weighing on business and consumer confidence, and adding to pressures on U.S. financial markets and institutions. Of note, as concerns about the financial system in Europe mounted, many foreign banks, especially those in Europe, faced a rise in the cost of dollar funding and a decline in its availability. A great deal of trade and investment the world over is financed in dollars, so many foreign financial institutions have heavy borrowing needs in our currency. These institutions also borrow heavily in dollars because they are active in U.S. markets, purchasing government and corporate securities and lending to households and firms. While strains have eased somewhat of late, difficulty acquiring dollar funding by European and other financial institutions could ultimately make it harder and more costly for U.S. households and businesses to get loans. Moreover, disruptions to European access to dollar funding could spill over into the market for borrowing and lending in U.S. dollars more generally, raising the cost of funding for U.S. financial institutions. Although the breadth and size of all of these effects on the U.S. economy are difficult to gauge, it is clear that the situation in Europe poses a significant risk to U.S. economic activity and bears close watching. Swap Lines with Other Central BanksTo address these potential risks to the United States, as described in an announcement on November 30, the Federal Reserve agreed with the ECB and the central banks of Canada, Japan, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom to revise, extend, and expand its swap lines with these institutions.1The measures were taken to ease strains in global financial markets, which, if left unchecked, could significantly impair the supply of credit to households and businesses in the United States and impede our economic recovery. Such strains were particularly evident in Europe, and these actions were designed to help prevent them from spilling over to the U.S. economy. Three steps were described in the November 30 announcement. First, we reduced the pricing of drawings on the dollar liquidity swap lines. The previous pricing had been at a spread of 100 basis points over the overnight index swap rate.2We reduced that spread to 50 basis points. The lower cost to the ECB and other foreign central banks enabled them to reduce the cost of the dollar loans they provide to financial institutions in their jurisdictions. Reducing these costs has helped alleviate pressures in U.S. money markets generated by foreign financial institutions, strengthen the liquidity positions of European and other foreign institutions, and boost confidence at a time of considerable strain in international financial markets. Through all of these channels, the action should help support the continued supply of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Second, we extended the authorization for these lines through February 1, 2013. The previous authorization had been through August 1, 2012. This extension demonstrated that central banks are prepared to work together for a sustained period, if needed, to support global liquidity conditions. Third, we agreed to establish, as a precautionary measure, swap lines in the currencies of the other central banks participating in the announcement. (The Federal Reserve had established similar lines in April 2009, but they were not drawn upon and were allowed to expire in February 2010.) These lines would permit the Federal Reserve, if needed, to provide euros, Canadian dollars, Japanese yen, Swiss francs, or British pounds to U.S. financial institutions on a secured basis, much as the foreign central banks provide dollars to institutions in their jurisdictions now. U.S. financial institutions are not experiencing any foreign currency liquidity pressures at present, but we judged it prudent to make arrangements to offer such liquidity should the need arise in the future. I would like to emphasize that information on the swap lines is fully disclosed on the Federal Reserve's website--through our weekly balance sheet release and other materials--and information on swap transactions each week is provided on the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.3 I also want to underscore that these swap agreements are safe from the perspective of the Federal Reserve and the U.S. taxpayer, for five main reasons: The Federal Reserve has not lost a penny on any of the swap line transactions since these lines were established in 2007, even during the most intense period of activity at the end of 2008. Moreover, at the maturity of each swap transaction, the Federal Reserve receives the dollars it provided plus a fee. These fees add to overall earnings on Federal Reserve operations, thereby increasing the amount the Federal Reserve remits to taxpayers. ConclusionThe changes in swap arrangements that I have discussed have had some positive effects on dollar funding markets. After the announcement of the changes at the end of November, draws on the swap lines increased considerably, peaking at $109 billion in mid-February, and measures of the cost of dollar funding declined. In recent weeks, reflecting the improvement in market conditions, usage of the swap lines has fallen back to about $65 billion. That being said, many financial institutions, especially those from Europe, continue to find it difficult and costly to acquire dollar funding, in large part because investors remain uncertain about Europe's economic and financial prospects. Ultimately, the easing of strains in U.S. and global financial markets will require concerted action on the part of European authorities as they follow through on their announced plans to address their fiscal and financial difficulties. The situation in Europe is continuously evolving. Thus, we are closely monitoring events in the region and their spillovers to the U.S. economy and financial system. Thank you again for inviting me to appear before you today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 1. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "Coordinated Central Bank Action to Address Pressures in Global Money Markets," press release, November 30. Similar announcements appeared on the web sites of the other participating central banks.Return to text 2. The dollar overnight index swap rate is the fixed rate that one party agrees to pay in exchange for the average of the overnight federal funds rates over the life of the swap. As such, it is a measure of the average federal funds rate expected over the term of the swap.Return to text 3. For the outstanding amount of dollar funding through the swap lines as it appears each week in the Federal Reserve balance sheet, seewww.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41. For other relevant information and materials on the Federal Reserve's website, seewww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_liquidityswaps.htm. For weekly information on the Federal Reserve's swap transactions with other central banks, seewww.newyorkfed.org/markets/fxswap/fxswap.cfm. Finally, for copies of the agreements between the Federal Reserve and other central banks, as well as other information, seewww.newyorkfed.org/markets/liquidity_swap.html.Return to text
Suzanne G. Killian, Senior Associate Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, U.S. House of Representatives, Field Hearing, Brooklyn, New York Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Cummings, Congressman Towns, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to update the Committee on the Federal Reserve's progress in implementing both the foreclosure review process as well as its progress in implementing the requirements of the enforcement actions that the Board issued in April 2011 against 10 banking organizations. Those actions were taken in response to patterns of misconduct and negligence related to deficient practices in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing.1The deficiencies were identified by examiners during reviews conducted from November 2010 to January 2011 and represented significant and pervasive failures as well as unsafe and unsound practices at those 10 institutions. Corrective actions and other measures were required by the formal enforcement actions. My testimony focuses on the most significant requirements of these orders and on the implementation and execution of the requirements. More specifically, the testimony addresses the implementation of the requirements in the Federal Reserve's enforcement actions that each banking organization with servicing operations supervised by the Federal Reserve (a) retain one or more independent consultants acceptable to the Federal Reserve to conduct an independent review of residential mortgage foreclosure actions (the "Foreclosure Review") to determine whether borrowers suffered financial injury as a result of errors, misrepresentations, or other deficiencies in the foreclosure process; (b) submit an engagement letter acceptable to the Federal Reserve that describes how each independent consultant retained by the institution and approved by the Federal Reserve will conduct the Foreclosure Review; (c) establish, in connection with the Foreclosure Review, a process for the receipt and review of borrower claims and complaints (the "Borrower Outreach Program"); and (d) submit specific plans acceptable to the Federal Reserve designed to correct practices that resulted in servicer errors and to prevent future abuses in the loan modification and foreclosure processes. This testimony also addresses the requirements in the Federal Reserve's enforcement actions that parent holding companies submit plans acceptable to the Federal Reserve to improve holding company oversight of residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing conducted by bank and nonbank subsidiaries. The Foreclosure Review and Independent ConsultantsThe Federal Reserve's enforcement actions require the servicers to retain one or more independent consultants acceptable to the Federal Reserve to conduct the Foreclosure Review to determine whether borrowers suffered financial injury as a result of errors, misrepresentations, or other deficiencies in the foreclosure process. Where financial injury is found, the servicers must compensate the injured borrowers pursuant to a remediation plan that is acceptable to the Federal Reserve. In determining the acceptability of consultants, the Federal Reserve closely scrutinized their independence. Importantly, the Federal Reserve reviewed whether the consultant currently provides or had previously provided advice to the banking organization regarding its foreclosure practices, opinions, or actions that may have contributed to the deficiencies identified by examiners during their reviews conducted from November 2010 to January 2011. This determination was made to ensure that the consultant would not review any action or opinion previously recommended by the consultant to the banking organization. We will continue to monitor the Foreclosure Review process to make sure that the consultants who were accepted act independently. The Federal Reserve orders require the servicers to review the files of borrowers whose primary residence was in the foreclosure process of the servicer in 2009 or 2010, whether or not the foreclosure was completed. At this time, we are requiring the independent consultants to include in the review all files for particular categories of borrowers who we have determined present a significant risk of being financially injured in the foreclosure process. Any borrower who falls into any one of those categories must receive an independent foreclosure review. The categories for mandatory review include all mortgages in the mortgage foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010 involving members of the military who were covered by the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act. It also includes all borrowers who had previously filed complaints with the servicers about foreclosure actions that were pending during 2009 or 2010. High-risk files involving borrowers in bankruptcy will also be reviewed. We are also requiring review of all files where a foreclosure went forward when the borrower was current on a trial or permanent modification and when the borrower's completed application for a modification had not been acted on. Other files outside of these categories must be reviewed on a sampling basis to detect if errors, misrepresentations, or deficiencies occurred. Going forward, we may determine that additional file reviews are appropriate. The Borrower Outreach ProgramThe Federal Reserve's enforcement actions require that each banking organization with servicing operations supervised by the Federal Reserve implement, in connection with the Foreclosure Review, a process for the receipt and review of borrower claims and complaints. We view this Borrower Outreach Program and the submission by borrowers of requests for review as critical to ensuring that borrowers who suffered financial injury are identified and compensated for financial injury they suffered as a result of errors, misrepresentations, or other deficiencies in the foreclosure process. The Borrower Outreach Program was first announced on November 1, 2011, and is intended to make eligible borrowers aware of the opportunity they have to have their foreclosures independently reviewed as part of the Foreclosure Review. Borrowers are eligible to request that their files be reviewed if their primary residence was in the foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010, whether or not the foreclosure was completed. Borrowers are eligible to request a review even if they previously filed a complaint with their servicer about their foreclosure. Information about the review process, including how to request a review as part of the Foreclosure Review, has been provided in mailings to borrowers who may be eligible for a review. The servicers have completed mailings to all 4.3 million borrowers eligible to request a review. By using required measures, such as skip tracing (collecting information about an individual from various sources to determine the individual's location), to identify borrowers who may have moved, these mailings have reached an estimated 95 percent of eligible borrowers. The servicers also have established a tollfree number that borrowers can call to get more information about the review as well as a website that borrowers can access for information and use to submit a request for review of their foreclosure.2 Additionally, servicers have conducted an advertising campaign to make borrowers aware of the opportunity to request reviews of their foreclosures as part of the Foreclosure Review. The Federal Reserve is monitoring the servicers it supervises to make sure they are effectively doing everything they can to find borrowers who are potentially eligible for the Foreclosure Review. The Federal Reserve is working with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) in overseeing the development and operation of the Borrower Outreach Program. The regulators have also considered input from the independent consultants, servicers, and consumer advocacy groups on ways to increase borrowers' awareness of and participation in the Foreclosure Review process. To help ensure that borrowers who have experienced financial injury have an adequate period to submit claims for review and redress, on February 15, 2012, the Board and the OCC extended the April 30 deadline for requesting a foreclosure review to July 31, 2012.3In addition, on February 29 and March 6 of this year, the Federal Reserve, working with the OCC, sponsored webinars for housing counselors to explain the process for submitting a request for review under the Borrower Outreach Program, so that the counselors can more effectively assist borrowers who want to request a review. Other efforts aimed at improving participation by injured borrowers are also being considered. We emphasize thatany borrower whose primary residence was in the foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010 can have his or her file included in the Foreclosure Review simply by submitting a claim or complaint pursuant to that program. Guidance for Providing RemediationThe Board and the OCC will soon release joint guidance on how the servicers subject to the foreclosure enforcement actions should provide remediation to borrowers for any financial injury caused by the servicers' deficiencies in their servicing and foreclosure processes. Under these enforcement actions, servicers are required to prepare and implement an acceptable plan to remediate or otherwise correct any financial injuries identified in the course of the Foreclosure Review. The guidance to be released by the Board and the OCC will illustrate the kinds of payments and other corrective measures a servicer must undertake to address specific types of financial injuries suffered by borrowers as a result of errors by the servicer. The Engagement LettersThe Federal Reserve's enforcement actions require the servicers to each submit an engagement letter to the Federal Reserve for approval that describes how the independent consultants retained by the servicer and approved by the Federal Reserve will conduct the Foreclosure Review. The Federal Reserve has approved all but one of those engagement letters. Because our review of the letters contemplates more extensive criteria for conducting the Foreclosure Review than those that apply to the national bank servicers, finalization of the engagement letters has required more time to complete. The engagement letter of the remaining servicer is expected to be approved shortly. The Action PlansThe Federal Reserve's enforcement actions require that each banking organization with servicing operations supervised by the Federal Reserve submit specific plans acceptable to the Federal Reserve designed to correct practices that resulted in servicer errors and prevent future abuses in the loan modification and foreclosure process. Each servicer regulated by the Federal Reserve must, among other things, submit specific plans that: In addition, the enforcement actions issued in April 2011 require the parent holding companies to submit plans acceptable to the Federal Reserve to improve holding company oversight of residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing conducted by bank and nonbank subsidiaries. The action plans required by the April 2011 enforcement actions have been approved. Public Release of Approved Engagement Letters and Action Plans On February 27 and March 8, 2012, the Board publicly released the approved engagement letters and action plans.4We believe that release of the action plans and engagement letters is appropriate because of the compelling interest in assuring the public that the pervasive and serious deficiencies found in the servicing and foreclosure processes of these institutions are being vigorously and fully remedied. Release of this information will increase accountability and public confidence in the actions being taken by the institutions to correct the deficiencies in past practices.5 The Federal Reserve will continue to monitor, on an ongoing basis, the corrective measures that are being taken by the servicers and bank holding companies it supervises, as required by the orders. Additionally, each institution is required to submit quarterly reports to the Federal Reserve detailing the measures it has taken to comply with the enforcement action and the results and progress toward meeting those measures. The Federal Reserve will closely review the servicers' and bank holding companies' progress reports and will also conduct examinations to ensure that the plans are implemented as approved and that the changes are effective. The Federal Reserve will take appropriate supervisory action including a possible cease and desist order or monetary penalties to address any inadequacies or violations of the enforcement actions. Monetary SanctionsOn February 9, 2012, the Board announced monetary sanctions against five banking organizations totaling $766.5 million for engaging in unsafe and unsound practices in their mortgage loan servicing and processing.6These monetary sanctions are based on the same deficiencies that the servicers were required to correct through the action plans under the April 2011 enforcement actions. The amount of the sanctions takes into account the maximum amount prescribed for unsafe and unsound practices under applicable statutory limits, the comparative severity of each institution's misconduct, and the comparative size of each institution's foreclosure activities.7 In an effort to facilitate a broad settlement of related state and federal claims, and to obtain an agreement that will maximize the effectiveness of assistance provided through an integrated set of remedial programs, the Board decided to act in conjunction with the comprehensive settlement between those five firms, the U.S. Department of Justice, and the state attorneys general announced on February 9. The total settlement amount includes the Board's monetary sanctions. Under the terms of the Board's monetary sanctions against these firms, each firm must pay to the Board, for remittance to the U.S. Treasury, the amount imposed by the Board on the firm that the firm has not expended within the next two years in providing borrower assistance or remediation in compliance with the federal-state settlement agreement or on a program acceptable to the Federal Reserve. This approach also accomplishes the purpose of civil money penalties--by ensuring that each firm will pay a fine to the Board, for remittance to Treasury, in the event that the firm does not fully satisfy the fine through a program acceptable to the Board or under the federal-state settlement agreement. The Federal Reserve will closely monitor these firms' expenditures on assistance and remediation as well as their compliance with the requirements of the monetary sanctions issued by the Board. Although the Federal Reserve has not issued monetary sanctions at this time against the other eight institutions that it supervises and that are also subject to enforcement actions for unsafe and unsound practices in their loan servicing and foreclosure processing, the Federal Reserve believes that monetary sanctions in those cases are appropriate and plans to announce monetary penalties against them. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve takes seriously its responsibility to oversee the implementation and execution of the requirements of its April 2011 enforcement actions, including the Foreclosure Review and other requirements described above. We understand that implementing and executing those requirements effectively is critical to ensuring that the deficiencies identified by examiners during reviews conducted from November 2010 to January 2011 are corrected; that future abuses in the loan modification and foreclosure process are prevented; and that borrowers are compensated for financial injury they suffered as a result of errors, misrepresentations, or other deficiencies in the foreclosure process. Thank you for inviting me to appear before you today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 1. The 10 banking organizations included four organizations with residential mortgage servicing operations supervised by the Federal Reserve, as well as the parent holding companies of banks with servicing operations supervised by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.Return to text 2. To apply for a review, individuals may call 888-952-9105, Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. (ET) and Saturday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. The servicers' website iswww.IndependentForeclosureReview.com.Return to text 3. The extension of the deadline for requesting a foreclosure review does not change the timing of the review and remediation of requests for review that have already been received, which is occurring on an ongoing basis.Return to text 4. These action plans and engagement letters are available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/enforcement/20120227aletters.htmandwww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/enforcement/20120308b.htm, respectively.Return to text 5. A small amount of information in the action plans and engagement letters has not been disclosed to protect confidential proprietary information of the institutions involved, the personal privacy of their personnel, and limited information about previous examinations and reviews.Return to text 6. The Board assessed monetary sanctions against the parent holding companies of the five largest mortgage servicers supervised by federal banking regulators for failure to appropriately oversee their subsidiaries' mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing operations. Those parent holding companies are Ally Financial, Inc.; Bank of America Corp.; Citigroup Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; and Wells Fargo & Co. The Board also assessed monetary sanctions against the two mortgage servicers owned by Ally Financial and JPMorgan Chase that are subject to the Board's jurisdiction for the servicers' failures. Those servicers are GMAC Mortgage, LLC, a subsidiary of Ally Financial, Inc., and EMC Mortgage Corporation, a subsidiary of JPMorgan Chase & Co.Return to text 7. The amounts of the monetary sanctions assessed by the Board against these institutions are as follows:Return to text Institution BHC Penalty Servicer Penalty Total Bank of America $175.5 million $175.5 million Wells Fargo $87 million $87 million JPMorgan Chase $106.5 million $168.5 million $275 million Citigroup $22 million $22 million Ally Financial $17 million $190 million $207 million
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Conference on Central Banking: Before, During, and After the Crisis, Washington, D.C. Distinguished guests, colleagues, and friends: It is my privilege to welcome you to this conference on "Central Banking: Before, During, and After the Crisis," which is jointly sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board and theInternational Journal of Central Banking.1We hope that the conference will foster discussion among policymakers and researchers about the evolving challenges facing central banks around the world. To help get that discussion started, the conference will feature original research on monetary policy, macroprudential regulation, and the provision of liquidity, topics that are obviously highly relevant to the public policy missions of the Federal Reserve and other central banks. The proceedings from this conference will be published in a special issue of the journal and disseminated to researchers in central banks and academic institutions worldwide. Needless to say, the events of the past few years pose serious challenges to the conventional, pre-crisis views and approaches of central banks and other financial supervisors. The crisis, the recession it sparked, and the subsequent slow recovery, especially in the advanced economies, have demonstrated that we have much to learn about the workings and vulnerabilities of our modern, globalized financial system and its interactions with the broader economy. In responding to these stressful financial and economic developments, the Federal Reserve and other central banks have had to deploy a variety of new tools and approaches to carry out their responsibilities regarding monetary policy and the provision of liquidity, tools about which we still have more to learn. Finally, in the wake of the crisis, the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies have been charged with challenging new responsibilities in the area of macroprudential supervision, with the objective of promoting financial stability and reducing the likelihood and the costs of a future financial crisis. Although much progress has been made, we are still at an early stage in understanding how best to meet these new macroprudential responsibilities. All of these developments have spurred a great deal of research within central banks, in academia, and elsewhere. This outpouring of research will help shape future central bank doctrine and policy approaches and, most importantly, should help central banks better carry out their mission to promote the public welfare. The papers at this conference make a variety of welcome contributions to this endeavor. Two contributions consider the implications of recent events for the conduct of monetary policy, both conventional and unconventional.2Another paper addresses the relationship between monetary aggregates and financial stability.3And several papers investigate issues in the field of regulation and macroprudential supervision, including the design of an integrated framework for regulation, a proposal for dealing with systemically important resolution issues in the repurchase agreement markets, and a review of the progress to date in reengineering the financial system.4 The discussants' remarks, the general discussions, and the policy panel will surely be very helpful in identifying fruitful directions for further research. I thank our guests for coming and participating. I once again welcome you to Washington and wish you a stimulating and productive conference. 1.More information about the conference, held at the Madison Hotel, Washington, D.C., March 23-24, 2012, is available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/conferences/central-banking-conference-before-during-after-crisis-about.htm.Return to text 2.See Mark Gertler and Peter Karadi (2012), "QE 1 vs. 2 vs. 3 . . . A Framework for Analyzing Large-Scale Asset Purchases as a Monetary Policy Tool (PDF)," March; and Athanasios Orphanides and Volker Wieland (2012), "Complexity and Monetary Policy," forthcoming.Return to text 3.See Hyun Jeong Kim, Hyun Song Shin, and Jaeho Yun (2012), "Monetary Aggregates and the Central Bank's Financial Stability Mandate (PDF)," March 6.Return to text 4.See Charles A. E. Goodhart, Anil K. Kashyap, Dimitrious P. Tsomocos, and Alex P. Vardoulakis (2012), "An Integrated Framework for Multiple Financial Regulations (PDF)," March; Viral V. Acharya and Sabri Oncu (2012), "A Proposal for the Resolution of Systemically Important Assets and Liabilities: The Case of the Repo Market (PDF)," March 23; and Darrell Duffie (2012), "Replumbing Our Financial System: Uneven Progress (PDF)," March 17.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the National Association for Business Economics Annual Conference, Arlington, Virginia My remarks today will focus on recent and prospective developments in the labor market. We have seen some positive signs on the jobs front recently, including a pickup in monthly payroll gains and a notable decline in the unemployment rate. That is good news. At the same time, some key questions are unresolved. For example, the better jobs numbers seem somewhat out of sync with the overall pace of economic expansion. What explains this apparent discrepancy and what implications does it have for the future course of the labor market and the economy? Importantly, despite the recent improvement, the job market remains far from normal; for example, the number of people working and total hours worked are still significantly below pre-crisis peaks, while the unemployment rate remains well above what most economists judge to be its long-run sustainable level. Of particular concern is the large number of people who have been unemployed for more than six months. Long-term unemployment is particularly costly to those directly affected, of course. But in addition, because of its negative effects on workers' skills and attachment to the labor force, long-term unemployment may ultimately reduce the productive capacity of our economy. The debate about how best to address long-term unemployment raises another important question: Is the current high level of long-term unemployment primarily the result of cyclical factors, such as insufficient aggregate demand, or of structural changes, such as a worsening mismatch between workers' skills and employers' requirements? If cyclical factors predominate, then policies that support a broader economic recovery should be effective in addressing long-term unemployment as well; if the causes are structural, then other policy tools will be needed. I will argue today that, while both cyclical and structural forces have doubtless contributed to the increase in long-term unemployment, the continued weakness in aggregate demand is likely the predominant factor. Consequently, the Federal Reserve's accommodative monetary policies, by providing support for demand and for the recovery, should help, over time, to reduce long-term unemployment as well. Recent Labor Market DevelopmentsAs background for my discussion, let me provide a brief review of recent job market indicators. As this audience is well aware, job creation has picked up recently. Private payroll employment (figure 1) increased by nearly 250,000 jobs per month, on average, in the three months ending in February, and by about 190,000 jobs per month, on average, over the past 12 months. At the same time, layoffs in the public sector appear to be moderating. Together with a lengthening of the average workweek, these employment gains have contributed to a significant increase in aggregate hours worked (figure 2). The increase in hours worked is encouraging, because the decline in hours during the recent recession was extraordinary. From the peak of this series in December 2007 to its trough in February 2010, aggregate hours on the job by production workers fell by a remarkable 9-1/2 percent; by comparison, production-worker hours declined by "only" 5-3/4 percent during the severe 1981-82 recession. Currently, hours worked are still about 4 percent below the pre-recession peak--a clear improvement from where we were two years ago, but still far from where we would like to be. The government estimates payroll employment--the number of jobs--from a survey of businesses--the establishment survey. A monthly survey of about 60,000 households, which provides the data needed to construct the national unemployment rate, offers an alternative estimate of the number of jobs. Employment as estimated from the household survey, adjusted to correspond as closely as possible to the concept of employment measured in the establishment survey (figure 3), also shows an improvement in the labor market--indeed, by somewhat more than in the establishment survey. I should note, however, that month-to-month changes in this measure are much more volatile than the employment measure from the establishment survey, which is why the Federal Reserve puts more weight on the establishment survey for the purposes of short-term forecasting. The positive signs from the labor market have shown through to measures of labor utilization: After hovering around 9 percent for much of last year, the unemployment rate (figure 4) has moved down since September to 8.3 percent in February, and the share of employment represented by people working part time for economic reasons, an indicator of underutilization, has declined modestly. Surveys of households and firms about their attitudes and expectations offer yet another window on job market developments. Since the summer, household expectations for labor market conditions over the next year have gotten brighter (figure 5), unwinding a deterioration registered earlier last year. Business hiring plans have also shown modest gains (figure 6). Other indicators, such as new claims for unemployment insurance and measures of the breadth of hiring across industries, also point to better labor market conditions. Notwithstanding these welcome recent signs, the job market remains quite weak relative to historical norms, as I've already noted. After nearly two years of job gains, private payroll employment remains more than 5 million jobs below its previous peak; the jobs shortfall is even larger, of course, when increases in the size of the labor force are taken into account. And the unemployment rate in February was still roughly 3 percentage points above its average over the 20 years preceding the recession. Moreover, a significant portion of the improvement in the labor market has reflected a decline in layoffs rather than an increase in hiring. This last observation is illustrated by the data on gross job flows (figure 7). The monthly increase in payroll employment, which commands so much public attention, is a net change. It equals the number of hires during the month less the number of separations (including layoffs, quits, and other separations). In any given month, a large number of workers are being hired or are leaving their current jobs, illustrating the dynamism of the U.S. labor market. For example, between 2001 and 2007, private employers hired nearly 5 million people, on average, each month. Total separations, on average, were only slightly smaller. Taking the difference between gross hires and separations, the net monthly change in payrolls during this period was, on average, less than 100,000 jobs per month--a small figure compared to the gross flows. The recent history of these flows suggests that further improvement in the labor market will likely need to come from a shift to a more robust pace of hiring. As figure 7 shows, the declines in aggregate payrolls during the recession stemmed from both a reduction in hiring and a large increase in layoffs. In contrast, the increase in employment since the end of 2009 has been due to a significant decline in layoffs but only a moderate improvement in hiring. To achieve a more rapid recovery in the job market, hiring rates will need to return to more normal levels. The Change in Unemployment and Economic Growth: A Puzzle?What will lead to more hiring and, consequently, further declines in unemployment? The short answer is more-rapid economic growth. Indeed, the improvement in the labor market over the past year--especially the decline in the unemployment ratehas been faster than might have been expected, given that the economy during that time appears to have grown at a relatively modest pace. About 50 years ago, the economist and presidential adviser Arthur Okun identified a rule of thumb that has come to be known as Okun's law. That rule of thumb describes the observed relationship between changes in the unemployment rate and the growth rate of real gross domestic product (GDP). Okun noted that, because of ongoing increases in the size of the labor force and in the level of productivity, real GDP growth close to the rate of growth of its potential is normally required just to hold the unemployment rate steady. Toreducethe unemployment rate, therefore, the economy must grow at a pace above its potential. More specifically, according to currently accepted versions of Okun's law, to achieve a 1 percentage point decline in the unemployment rate in the course of a year, real GDP must grow approximately 2 percentage points faster than the rate of growth of potential GDP over that period. So, for illustration, if the potential rate of GDP growth is 2 percent, Okun's law says that GDP must grow at about a 4 percent rate for one year to achieve a 1 percentage point reduction in the rate of unemployment. In light of this historical regularity, the combination of relatively modest GDP growth with the more substantial improvement in the labor market over the past year is something of a puzzle. Resolving this puzzle could give us important insight into how the economy is likely to evolve. To illustrate the tension, consider the relationship between the recent changes in the unemployment rate and in real GDP relative to the predictions of Okun's law (figure 8). As illustrated by the position of the square labeled "2011" relative to the Okun's law relationship, represented by the line, the decline in the unemployment rate over the course of 2011 was greater than would seem consistent with GDP growth over that period. Indeed, with last year's real GDP growth below 2 percent, less than what most economists would estimate to be the U.S. economy's potential rate of growth, one might have expected little change in the unemployment rate last year or even a slight increase. What is this confluence of the significant decline in the unemployment rate and the modest recent increase in real GDP telling us about the state of the economy, and how will the Okun's law puzzle be resolved? The apparent failure of Okun's law could reflect, in part, statistical noise. For example, it may be that future data revisions will show that real GDP grew more quickly over the past year than currently estimated. However, although it is certainly possible that revised data will ultimately explain part of the puzzle, at this point we have no specific evidence suggesting that such a revision might be in the offing. For example, gross domestic income, an alternative measure of economic activity constructed using source data that are mostly different from the data used in estimating GDP, provides some check on the information provided by the better-known GDP measure. However, gross domestic income is currently estimated to have increasedlessquickly than GDP in recent quarters and so does not point to an explanation of the drop in the unemployment rate. Another logical possibility is that the decline in the unemployment rate could be overstating the improvement in the job market. For example, potential workers could be giving up on looking for work to an unusual extent. Because a person has to be either working or looking for work to be counted as part of the labor force, an increase in the number of people too discouraged to continue their search for work would reduce the unemployment rate, all else being equal--but not for a positive reason. A story centered on potential workers dropping out of the labor force might seem in line with the low level of the labor force participation rate (figure 9). But other data cast doubt on that idea. For example, a broad measure of labor underutilization that includes people only marginally attached to the labor force has declined about in line with the unemployment rate since late 2010 (figure 10).1On balance, an assessment of a broad range of indicators suggests that a substantial portion of the decline in the unemployment rate does reflect genuine improvement in labor market conditions. Yet another interpretation of the recent improvement is that it represents a catch-up from outsized job losses during and just after the recession. In 2008 and 2009, the decline in payrolls and the associated jump in unemployment were extraordinary. In particular, using the Okun's law metric, the run-up in the unemployment rate in 2009 appears "too large" relative even to the substantial decline in real GDP that occurred. This point can be seen by returning to figure 8, which shows the Okun's law relationship. The open triangle labeled "2009" in the upper left of the figure shows an increase in the unemployment rate in that year well above the one implied by the contraction in real GDP and Okun's law. In other words, employers reduced their workforces at an unusually rapid rate near the business cycle trough--perhaps because they feared an even more severe contraction to come or, with credit availability sharply curtailed, they were trying to conserve available cash. The diagram suggests that what we may be seeing now is the flip side of the fear-driven layoffs that occurred during the worst part of the recession, as firms have become sufficiently confident to move their workforces into closer alignment with the expected demand for their products. Such a dynamic would explain the position of the square labeled "2011" in that figure being far below the line representing Okun's law. Of course, Okun's law is a noisy relationship, and we don't really know if the better-than-expected labor market performance of 2011 has largely offset the worse-than-expected performance in 2009. However, to the extent that the decline in the unemployment rate since last summer has brought unemployment back more into line with the level of aggregate demand, then further significant improvements in unemployment will likely require faster economic growth than we experienced during the past year. It will be especially important to evaluate incoming information to assess whether the recovery is picking up as improvements in the labor market feed through to consumer and business confidence; or, conversely, whether the headwinds that have impeded the recovery to date continue to restrain the pace at which the labor market and economic activity normalize. The Challenge of Long-term UnemploymentDiscussions of the labor market at this juncture necessarily have a "glass half-empty or half-full" tone. Recent improvements are encouraging, but, as I have noted, in an absolute sense, the job market is still far from normal by many measures, and millions of families continue to suffer the day-to-day hardships associated with not being able to find suitable employment. Although most spells of unemployment are disruptive or costly, the persistently high rate of long-term unemployment we have seen over the past three years or so is especially concerning. In this episode, both the median and average durations of unemployment have reached levels far outside the range of experience since World War II (figure 11). And the share of unemployment that represents spells lasting more than six months has been higher than 40 percent since December 2009 (figure 12). By way of comparison, the share of unemployment that was long term in nature never exceeded 25 percent or so in the severe 1981-82 recession. Those who have experienced unemployment know the burdens that it creates, and a growing academic literature documents some dimensions of those burdens. For example, research has shown that workers who lose previously stable jobs experience sharp declines in earnings that may last for many years, even after they find new work.2Surveys indicate that more than one-half of the households experiencing long unemployment spells since the onset of the recent recession withdrew money from savings and retirement accounts to cover expenses, one-half borrowed money from family and friends, and one-third struggled to meet housing expenses.3Unemployment also takes a toll on people's health and may have long-term consequences for the families of the unemployed as well. For example, studies suggest that unemployed people suffer from a higher incidence of stressrelated health problems such as depression, stroke, and heart disease, and they may have a lower life expectancy.4The children of the unemployed achieve less in school and appear to have reduced long-term earnings prospects.5 In addition, unemployment--especially long-term unemployment--imposes important economic costs on everyone, not just the unemployed themselves. Elevated unemployment strains public finances because of both lost tax revenue and the payment of increased unemployment benefits and other income support to affected families. People unemployed for a long time have historically found jobs less easily than those experiencing shorter spells of unemployment, perhaps because their skills erode, they lose relationships within the workforce, or they acquire a stigma that deters firms from hiring them. Loss of skills and lower rates of employment reduce the economy's overall productive capacity over the longer term. In the shorter term, because the process of matching the long-term unemployed to jobs typically takes more time, the currently high level of long-term unemployment might in itself be a reason that further progress in reducing the unemployment rate, and thus in achieving a more complete recovery, could be slow.6 A pessimistic view is that a large share of the unemployment we are seeing, particularly the longer-term unemployment, is structural in nature, reflecting factors such as inadequate skills or mismatches between the types of skills that workers have and the skills that employers demand. If this view is correct, then high levels of long-term unemployment could persist for quite a while, even after the economy has more fully recovered. And it appears true that over the past two decades or so, structural factors have been responsible for some increase in long-term unemployment. For example, because an older worker who loses a job typically takes longer to find a new job than does a younger worker in the same situation, the aging of the baby boom generation has probably contributed to a gradual rise in long-term unemployment. Factors such as globalization, technological change, and the loss of lower-skill manufacturing jobs have likely reduced the employability and earnings potential of some groups of workers. To the extent that higher rates of unemployment, especially long-term unemployment, result from structural factors, the scope for countercyclical policies to reduce unemployment would be impaired, and the benefits of a more complete economic recovery for many workers who are unemployed or discouraged would be more limited. However, although structural shifts are no doubt important in the longer term, my reading of the research is that, at most, a modest portion of the recent sharp increase in long-term unemployment is due to persistent structural factors.7Consider, for example, rates of job finding by those unemployed for varying amounts of time (figure 13). Unsurprisingly, the rate at which the long-term unemployed find work is lower than that of those who have been unemployed for only a short time; on average over the period from 1994 to 2007, a bit more than one-third of those already unemployed for one to four weeks found employment within the next month. In contrast, over that same period, only about one-sixth of those already unemployed for more than 27 weeks managed to find a job within a month. If the recent increase in long-term unemployment were being driven by structural factors rather than, say, the severity of the recession, then the job-finding rates of the long-term unemployed should have fallen sharply relative to those out of work for only a few weeks. But that's not what we're seeing. Rather, as figure 13 shows, the job finding rates of the more recently unemployed and the long-term unemployed all fell over the recession in roughly the same proportion, and they remain low.8This pattern is consistent with cyclical factors accounting for the bulk of the recent increase in long-term unemployment. Similarly, the fact that labor demand appears weak in most industries and locations is suggestive of a general shortfall of aggregate demand rather a worsening mismatch of skills and jobs. Counterexamples like the energy boom in the upper Midwest, where there may be some mismatch in the geographic location of suitably skilled workers or an overall shortage of potential workers with relevant skills, might best be interpreted as the exceptions that prove the rule; a mismatch story would suggest that strong labor demand would be appearing in more sectors or geographical areas by now. An empirical relationship that economists have long used to interpret developments in the labor market is known as the Beveridge curve (figure 14). That curve--named after the British economist William Beveridge--compares unemployment (the number of workers looking for employers) to job vacancies (the number of workers that employers are seeking). In good times, when the unemployment rate is low, businesses are growing and workers are harder to find, so job vacancies tend to be high. Similarly, in bad times, unemployment is high and few jobs are available (vacancies are low). Thus, the Beveridge curve, the relationship between unemployment and vacancies, is downward sloping. On the usual interpretation, a recession is a period in which the economy is moving down along the Beveridge curve; as output and the demand for labor fall, job vacancies decline and unemployment rises. In contrast, changes in the structural determinants of unemployment are thought to be reflected in shifts of the Beveridge curve to the left or right. For example, suppose that, because of changes in technology or in the mix of industries and jobs, the mismatch between the skills of the unemployed and the needs of employers worsens. Then, for a given number of job openings, the number of the unemployed who are qualified for those jobs is smaller and the unemployment rate is higher than it would have been before the mismatch problem worsened. Graphically, an increase in a skills mismatch would be reflected in a shift of the Beveridge curve up and to the right. From figure 14, we can see some outward shift in the relationship between job vacancies and unemployment, consistent with some increase in structural unemployment since the onset of the recession. However, a more in-depth analysis of the evidence suggests that the apparent shift in the relationship between vacancies and unemployment is neither unusual for a recession nor likely to be persistent. Research has found that during and immediately after the serious recessions of 1973 to 1975 and 1981 to 1982, the Beveridge curve also shifted outward, but in both cases it shifted back inward during the recovery. This temporary outward shift during a deep recession may be the result of a particularly sharp increase in layoffs, which raises unemployment quickly, even as vacancies adjust more slowly. Another possible explanation for a temporary shift in the Beveridge curve is extended and emergency unemployment insurance, which induces unemployed workers who might otherwise consider leaving the labor force to continue searching for work. Or employers may be more selective in hiring when their need for workers is not pressing and take more time to fill vacancies in an effort to find especially qualified hires. In any case, the data appear consistent with the shift in the vacancy-unemployment relationship in recent years having been relatively modest and likely to reverse, at least in part, as the economy recovers further. When historical experience is taken into account, these patterns do not support the view that structural factors are a major cause of the increase in unemployment during the most recent recession.9 ConclusionTo sum up: A wide range of indicators suggests that the job market has been improving, which is a welcome development indeed. Still, conditions remain far from normal, as shown, for example, by the high level of long-term unemployment and the fact that jobs and hours worked remain well below pre-crisis peaks, even without adjusting for growth in the labor force. Moreover, we cannot yet be sure that the recent pace of improvement in the labor market will be sustained. Notably, an examination of recent deviations from Okun's law suggests that the recent decline in the unemployment rate may reflect, at least in part, a reversal of the unusually large layoffs that occurred during late 2008 and over 2009. To the extent that this reversal has been completed, further significant improvements in the unemployment rate will likely require a more-rapid expansion of production and demand from consumers and businesses, a process that can be supported by continued accommodative policies. I also discussed long-term unemployment today, arguing that cyclical rather than structural factors are likely the primary source of its substantial increase during the recession. If this assessment is correct, then accommodative policies to support the economic recovery will help address this problem as well. We must watch long-term unemployment especially carefully, however. Even if the primary cause of high long-term unemployment is insufficient aggregate demand, if progress in reducing unemployment is too slow, the long-term unemployed will see their skills and labor force attachment atrophy further, possibly converting a cyclical problem into a structural one. If this hypothesis is wrong and structural factors are in fact explaining much of the increase in long-term unemployment, then the scope for countercyclical policies to address this problem will be more limited. Even if that proves to be the case, however, we should not conclude that nothing can be done. If structural factors are the predominant explanation for the increase in long-term unemployment, it will become even more important to take the steps needed to ensure that workers are able to obtain the skills needed to meet the demands of our rapidly changing economy. 1.The broader measure of labor underutilization referenced here is the U-5 measure of unemployment, constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 2.For example, see Till von Wachter, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester (2009), "Long-Term Earnings Losses Due to Mass Layoffs during the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using U.S. Administrative Data from 1974 to 2004," unpublished paper, Columbia University, April.Return to text 3.See Paul Taylor, Rich Morin, Rakesh Kochhar, Kim Parker, Wendy Wang, Daniel Dockterman, Rebecca Hinze-Pifer, and Soledad Espinoza (2010), "The Impact of Long-Term Unemployment: Lost Income, Lost Friends--and Loss of Self-Respect" (Washington: Pew Research Center, July 22).Return to text 4.For example, see Frances McKee-Ryan, Zhaoli Song, Connie R. Wanberg, and Angelo J. Kinicki (2005), "Psychological and Physical Well-Being during Unemployment: A Meta-Analytic Study,"Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 90 (January), pp. 53-76; and Sarah A. Burgard, Jennie E. Brand, and James S. House (2007), "Toward a Better Estimation of the Effect of Job Loss on Health,"Journal of Health and Social Behavior, vol. 48 (4), pp. 369-84. On life expectancy, see David J. Roelfs, Eran Shor, Karina W. Dawson, and Joseph E. Schwartz (2011), "Losing Life and Livelihood: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Unemployment and All-Cause Mortality,"Social Science and Medicine, vol. 72 (March), pp. 840-54.Return to text 5.See Ann Huff Stevens and Jessamyn Schaller (2011), "Short-Run Effects of Parental Job Loss on Children's Academic Achievement,"Economics of Education Review, vol. 30 (April), pp. 289-99; Ariel Kalil and Patrick Wightman (2011), "Parental Job Loss and Children's Educational Attainment in Black and White Middle-Class Families,"Social Science Quarterly, vol. 92 (March), pp. 57-78; and Philip Oreopoulos, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens (2008), "The Intergenerational Effects of Worker Displacement,"Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 26 (July), pp. 455-83.Return to text 6.For a discussion of this effect, see Daniel Aaronson, Bhashkar Mazumder, and Shani Schechter (2010), "What Is behind the Rise in Long-Term Unemployment?" Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,Economic Perspectives,vol. 34 (2), pp. 28-51.Return to text 7.For some discussion of this effect, see Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2011),OECD Employment Outlook 2011; and Aaronson and others, "What Is behind the Rise in Long-Term Unemployment?" (see note 6).Return to text 8.For an earlier analysis along these lines, see Michael W. L. Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Aysegl Sahin (2010), "The Labor Market in the Great Recession,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Spring), pp. 1-69.Return to text 9.For a discussion of shifts in the Beveridge curve during previous recessions, see John Lindner and Murat Tasci (2010), "Has the Beveridge Curve Shifted?" Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,Economic Trends, August; and Robert Valletta and Katherine Kuang (2010), "Is Structural Unemployment on the Rise?" Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,FRBSF Economic Letter,2010-34, November 8. For research examining the specific role of mismatch, see Regis Barnichon and Andrew Figura (2010), "What Drives Movements in the Unemployment Rate? A Decomposition of the Beveridge Curve (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-48 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August); and Aysegl Sahin, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante (2011), "Measuring Mismatch in the U.S. Labor Market," unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July. Other factors affecting the Beveridge curve include the role of extended unemployment benefits and potential effects of lags between vacancies and hiring; on the effects of unemployment benefits, see Robert Valletta and Katherine Kuang (2010), "Extended Unemployment and UI Benefits," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,FRBSF Economic Letter,2010-12, April 19; on the lag between job vacancies and hiring, see Steven J. Davis, R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger (2010), "The Establishment-Level Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring," NBER Working Paper Series 16265 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August), www.nber.org/papers/w16265.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on implementation of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act) and its international implications. Although banking regulation has long included an important international dimension, the recent financial crisis has brought renewed attention, both in the United States and abroad, to the interconnectedness among national financial markets and, consequently, the importance of international cooperation in safeguarding those markets. In recognition of the fact that financial distress can quickly and dramatically cross national borders, we seek to protect our own financial system by promoting the global adoption of strong, common regulatory standards and effective supervisory practices. Such common standards and practices should also help prevent major competitive disadvantages for U.S. firms. Today I will touch on several aspects of the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act that have significant international implications: regulation of systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), reform of the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives market, and a number of discrete issues that are arising as we work to implement the Dodd-Frank Act. Regulation of SIFIsThe Dodd-Frank Act and post-crisis international regulatory reform efforts both place great emphasis on containing the systemic risk potentially posed by major financial institutions. The most important points of intersection include efforts to strengthen capital requirements, to develop international quantitative liquidity standards, and to put in place mechanisms for the orderly resolution of these firms. Capital Regulation Strong capital requirements remain the cornerstone of prudential regulation because capital can provide a buffer against losses at financial firms from any source or activity. The best way to safeguard against taxpayer-funded bailouts in the future is for our large financial institutions to have adequate capital buffers, sized to reflect their own risk profiles and the damage that would be done to the financial system were such institutions to fail. Achievement of this aim requires both improvement of the traditional, firm-based approach to capital regulation and creation of a more systemic, or macroprudential, component of capital regulation. With respect to improving the traditional approach to capital regulation, international work on common, global standards was already quite advanced by the time the Dodd-Frank Act was enacted in July 2010. The so-called Basel 2.5 agreement, which strengthened the market risk capital requirements of Basel II, had already been finished. Just a few months after the Dodd-Frank Act was enacted, agreement was reached on the BaselIII reforms, which require improvement of the quality of regulatory capital, an increase in the quantity of minimum required capital, maintenance of a capital conservation buffer, and--for the first time internationally--compliance with a minimum leverage ratio. In the coming months, the banking agencies will be finalizing regulations to implement Basel2.5 in the United States and will be proposing regulations to implement BaselIII in the United States. With respect to macroprudential capital regulation, section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act mandated that the Board establish enhanced risk-based capital standards for large bank holding companies that would be graduated based on the relative systemic importance of those companies. Consistent with this requirement, we espoused proposals in the Basel Committee for capital surcharges on the world's largest, most interconnected banking organizations based on their global systemic importance. Last year, agreement was reached on a framework for such surcharges, to be implemented during the same transition period applicable to Basel III. The Board's aim has been to fashion the enhanced capital requirements of section 165 and the associated international framework in a simultaneous and congruent manner. Both the Dodd-Frank Act provision and the Basel systemic surcharge framework are motivated by the fact that the failure of a systemically important firm would have dramatically greater negative consequences on the financial system and the economy than the failure of other firms. Stricter capital requirements on systemically important firms should also have the benefit of helping offset any funding advantage these firms derive from their perceived status as too-big-to-fail and providing an incentive for such firms to reduce their systemic footprint. If the benefits of all these improvements to existing capital requirements are to be realized, it is crucial that capital standards be not only agreed upon globally, but also implemented consistently across jurisdictional boundaries. We have strongly supported efforts within the Basel Committee to monitor implementation--not only in the laws and regulations of member countries, but also at the level of individual large banking organizations, including an assessment of the consistency of risk-weighting practices by banks. We look forward to the evolution of the Basel Committee's new plans for conducting this monitoring exercise, which are considerably more ambitious than any pursued in the past. Liquidity Standards In recognition of the fact that liquidity squeezes at some financial institutions played a key role in the financial crisis, the Basel III agreements also introduced, for the first time, quantitative liquidity requirements for application to internationally active banks. One standard, the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), is designed to ensure a firm's ability to withstand short-term liquidity shocks through adequate holdings of highly liquid assets. The other standard, the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), is intended to avoid significant maturity mismatches over longer-term horizons. Again, there is a parallel to this international initiative in section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which calls for enhanced, graduated liquidity standards for large bank holding companies. Precisely because this was the first effort on quantitative liquidity regulation by the Basel Committee, there were some questions about potential unintended consequences, as well as a desire to ensure that the new standards reflected actual experience with the stability of various funding sources and the relative liquidity of different financial instruments during the financial crisis. For these reasons, the Federal Reserve, with support from a number of other central banks and supervisors, suggested at the time of adoption of Basel III in 2010 a multiyear study period before the rules take effect. Since then, the U.S. banking agencies and a Basel Committee working group have been collecting data, analyzing the potential effects of the LCR on financial markets and the broader economy, and considering what amendments might be warranted. The Basel Committee will likely suggest a set of changes to the LCR later this year, with a goal of introducing the LCR in 2015. Work on the NSFR is on a considerably slower track; the current plan is for implementation in 2018. Resolution of SIFIs A third core regulatory reform goal of both the Dodd-Frank Act and international policymakers is to enhance the ability of regulators to resolve failing SIFIs. The Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) have set forth standards for national resolution regimes that will allow resolution of SIFIs in an orderly fashion, without taxpayer exposure to losses through solvency support. Here in the United States, the Dodd-Frank Act provides for an orderly resolution process to be administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and resolution planning by SIFIs to be overseen by the FDIC and the Federal Reserve. Together these provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act are fully consistent with the Basel Committee and FSB standards. In developing the orderly liquidation authority established by Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act, the FDIC has recently expressed a preference for resolving a failed SIFI under a single receivership and internal recapitalization model. Under this model, the parent company of the failed SIFI is placed into receivership; all, or substantially all, of the assets of the parent company are transferred to a bridge entity; the parent company and its residual assets are liquidated; and the bridge entity is capitalized, in part, by converting the holders of long-term unsecured debt of the parent company into equity holders in the bridge. Under the single receivership model, the major subsidiaries of the SIFI continue to operate as going concerns. This approach holds great promise, but ensuring its viability as a resolution option requires, among other things, that each SIFI maintain an amount of long-term unsecured debt that is sufficient to absorb very significant losses at the firm. Some other jurisdictions have, or are planning to, put in place special resolution mechanisms that conform to the emerging international standards. But even continued progress along this path may not solve all the possible problems associated with failure of a SIFI. The coexistence of internationally active firms with nationally based insolvency regimes means that there could be important cross-border legal complications when a home jurisdiction places into receivership a firm with significant assets, subsidiaries, and contractual arrangements in other countries. A comprehensive, treaty-like instrument for a global bank resolution regime to address these issues is surely an unrealistic prospect for the foreseeable future. The Federal Reserve and the FDIC are working together with counterparts from other countries to identify opportunities for more limited cooperation agreements, coordinated supervisory work on resolution plans, and other devices to make the orderly resolution of a large, internationally active firm more feasible. OTC Derivatives Regulatory ReformsAnother key part of the Dodd-Frank Act that involves significant international considerations is OTC derivatives reform. In the United States, administrative agencies are implementing the requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act to strengthen the infrastructure and regulation of the OTC derivatives market. This task includes enhancing the role of central counterparties, which can be an important tool for managing counterparty credit risk in the derivatives market; improving regulation and supervision of dealers and key market participants; introducing minimum margin requirements for certain derivatives transactions that are not cleared with a central counterparty; and increasing transparency. A roughly parallel international initiative got under way in 2009, when the Group of Twenty (G-20) leaders set out commitments related to reform of the OTC derivatives markets. Since work on the G-20 commitments is being pursued in a number of international groups and foreign jurisdictions, continued attention will be required to ensure that the global convergence process continues in a timely fashion. Such attention will be particularly important in areas where international convergence is desirable to avoid a significant fracturing or regionalization of the existing global structure of the swaps market, or to prevent undue constraints on the ability of U.S. firms to compete in foreign markets. A good example of this is the introduction of margin requirements for uncleared derivatives. U.S. and foreign regulators have formed a joint working group of the Basel Committee and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) to develop internationally consistent margin standards that appropriately address the risks of uncleared derivatives while ensuring that U.S. and foreign firms compete on a level playing field. Other key areas of OTC derivatives reform present similar international challenges and will demand similar levels of international collaboration. These areas include the creation and regulation of central counterparties, swap execution facilities, and swap data repositories, including mutual recognition by U.S. and foreign regulators where appropriate. Issues also arise around the treatment of governmental entities in derivatives reforms in the United States and abroad. For example, title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act generally exempts from swaps regulation any transaction to which the Federal Reserve is a party, but does not contain a similar exemption for transactions to which a foreign central bank is party. Foreign central banks have expressed concerns that the application of certain parts of title VII may interfere with the manner in which they conduct their national monetary policies. In addition to its involvement in specific derivatives reforms related to the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve also participates in a variety of international groups that serve as broader forums for coordinating policies related to the participants and the infrastructure of derivatives markets. These forums include the Basel Committee, which has recently enhanced international capital, leverage, and liquidity standards for derivatives, as well as the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, which is working with IOSCO to update international standards for systemically important clearing systems, including central counterparties that clear derivatives instruments, and trade repositories. These collaborative exercises are intended to support the development of a consistent international approach to the regulation and supervision of derivatives products, dealers, and market infrastructures. Here, as in other international contexts, our aims are to promote the financial stability of the United States and fair competitive conditions for U.S. financial institutions. Other Implementation IssuesAs noted in the preceding discussion, even where there is broad international consensus to adopt a particular regulatory approach, there can be discrete issues raised as countries implement that approach in the context of their own legal, financial, and political systems. This circumstance is hardly unique to the area of financial regulation; it is familiar to anyone who has worked on virtually any regulatory issues that affect international trade and investment. There are also some elements of the Dodd-Frank Act that are unlikely to be pursued internationally in any comparable form. These areas of U.S.-only regulatory reform can present particular challenges in implementation, both in terms of the potential impact that they may have on the ability of U.S. financial institutions to compete abroad and the extent to which they may affect the activities of foreign financial institutions in U.S. markets and with U.S. counterparties. In these instances of regulatory reforms being pursued only in the United States, there are not likely to be obvious answers to the resulting international complexities. For example, there has been considerable recent attention paid to the international aspects of section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Act, more commonly known as the "Volcker Rule." Concerns have been expressed about the Volcker Rule's potential international implications in three principal areas. First, because the Volcker Rule applies to the worldwide operations of U.S. banking entities, but only to the U.S.-connected operations of foreign banks, concerns have been raised regarding the relative competitiveness of U.S. firms that have significant operations in overseas markets. Second, and conversely, because the Volcker Rule also applies to the activities of foreign banks unless such activities are "solely outside the United States," several foreign banks and their supervisors have expressed concern regarding the potential extraterritorial impact that those restrictions may have on trading or fund activity of foreign banks that has both U.S. and non-U.S. characteristics. Third, because the Volcker Rule includes a statutory exemption for proprietary trading in U.S. government debt securities, but not in foreign sovereign debt securities, several constituencies have raised concerns regarding this asymmetry. In each of these areas, U.S. regulators will need to carefully consider the concerns that have been raised and the broader international implications of the Volcker Rule as we work to finalize our implementing rules. Similarly, the swaps "push-out" requirement in section 716 of the Dodd-Frank Act also appears unlikely to be pursued internationally. Under section 716, U.S. insured depository institutions and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks will be required to "push out" certain types of derivatives dealing activities to affiliated entities. The global effects of the swaps push-out provision are multifaceted. On the one hand, the provision will require U.S. banking firms to restructure their global derivatives dealing activities in ways that will not be required of foreign banks abroad. At the same time, the provision may require U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks to restructure their derivatives dealing activities in ways that will not be required of U.S. banks. Thank you very much for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Sterling Financial Corporation, Spokane, WashingtonWritten Agreement dated December 24, 2009Terminated March 5, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.