Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal banking regulatory agencies on Monday announced the availability of a regulatory capital estimation tool to help community banking organizations and other interested parties evaluate recently published regulatory capital proposals. The tool will assist these organizations in estimating the potential effects on their capital ratios of the agencies' Basel III Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPR) and Standardized Approach NPR. In June 2012, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency approved joint proposals for comment that would revise their current regulatory capital standards. The public comment period for these proposals ends on October 22, 2012. The Basel III NPR focuses primarily on strengthening the level of regulatory capital requirements and improving the quality of capital. The Standardized Approach NPR proposes a number of enhancements to the risk-sensitivity of the agencies' capital standards. The tool is intended to help institutions estimate the potential effect the proposals could have on their capital ratios. It should not be relied on as an indicator of an institution's actual regulatory capital ratios and is not part of the NPRs nor of any final rule(s) that the agencies may adopt. The estimation tool is available for banks and savings associationshere. The estimation tool is available for bank and savings and loan holding companieshere. The proposals are available in theFederal Registerat:Basel III NPR (PDF)Standardized Approach NPR (PDF)
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Housing Finance AgencyOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Five federal agencies on Wednesday reopened the comment period on a proposed rule to establish margin and capital requirements for swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers, and major security-based swap participants for which one of the agencies is the prudential regulator, as required by sections 731 and 764 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The comment period--which originally ended July 11, 2011--was reopened to November 26, 2012, to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments in light of the consultative document on margin requirements for noncentrally-cleared derivatives recently published for comment by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the International Organization of Securities Commissions. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Comments on this proposal:Submit|View
On September 10, 2012, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $3 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were pro-rated at 84.74 percent. Resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 except that all awards below $10,000 were rounded up to $10,000. The awarded deposits will settle on September 13, 2012, and will mature on October 11, 2012. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded deposits.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday released the attached table and charts summarizing the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents for the September 12-13 meeting of the Committee. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the September 12-13 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released on a quarterly schedule. Projections materials (PDF)|Accessible Figures
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below:Rosholt Bancorporation, Inc., Rosholt, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated March 1, 2011Terminated September 4, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First Financial Holding Co., Ltd. and First Commercial Bank, Ltd., both of Taipei, Taiwan, and First Commercial Bank Los Angeles Branch, Los Angeles, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated March 28, 2011Terminated September 11, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: America's Community Bank, Blue Springs, MissouriWritten Agreement dated November 17, 2010Terminated September 21, 2012 First Capital West Bankshares, Inc., Laramie, WyomingWritten Agreement dated June 7, 2010Terminated September 20, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Capital Community Bancorporation, Inc., Provo, UtahWritten Agreement dated September 10, 2009Terminated September 13, 2012 Coconut Grove Bank, Miami, FloridaWritten Agreement dated March 17, 2010Terminated September 12, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: VFSC, Inc. (PDF), Eden Prairie, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated September 20, 2012 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Ames Community Bank, Ames, IowaWritten Agreement dated October 23, 2009Terminated September 20, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Doral Financial Corporation (PDF), San Juan, Puerto RicoWritten Agreement dated September 11, 2012 The State Bank of Geneva (PDF), Geneva, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated September 10, 2012 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Doral Financial Corporation, San Juan, Puerto RicoCease and Desist Order dated March 16, 2006Terminated September 11, 2012 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace in recent months. Growth in employment has been slow, and the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending has continued to advance, but growth in business fixed investment appears to have slowed. The housing sector has shown some further signs of improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation has been subdued, although the prices of some key commodities have increased recently. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee is concerned that, without further policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions. Furthermore, strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely would run at or below its 2 percent objective. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee agreed today to increase policy accommodation by purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per month. The Committee also will continue through the end of the year its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in June, and it is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. These actions, which together will increase the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities by about $85 billion each month through the end of the year, should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and currently anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-2015. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Dennis P. Lockhart; Sandra Pianalto; Jerome H. Powell; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Jeremy C. Stein; Daniel K. Tarullo; John C. Williams; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the action was Jeffrey M. Lacker, who opposed additional asset purchases and preferred to omit the description of the time period over which exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted. Statement Regarding Transactions in Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities and Treasury Securities
On Monday, September 10, 2012, the Federal Reserve will offer $3 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's September 8, 2010 release, this offering is part of ongoing small-value operations designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to become familiar with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Offering and Competitive Auction Parameters Competitive bids submitted at the stop-out rate will be pro-rated and will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. Non-Competitive bids are allowed in this auction. All non-competitive bids will be automatically awarded in full at the stop-out rate of the competitive auction. The minimum amount for a non-competitive bid is $10,000; the maximum amount is $5,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. Non-Competitive bids must be submitted between 10:00 a.m. ET and 2:00 p.m. ET on the auction date. Submission of Bids Participants must submit bids by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the auction date. Notification Summary auction results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, results will be posted on the Term Deposit Facility Resource Center page of the Central Bank Central website (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Participant awards will be posted to the Term Deposit Facility application at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date, and participants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application.
The Federal Reserve on Friday began the quarterly publication of transaction-level information related to discount window lending to depository institutions and open market transactions. The data in the initial release cover transactions between July 22, 2010 and September 30, 2010. The transaction-level detail supplements the extensive aggregate information the Federal Reserve has previously provided in weekly, monthly, and quarterly reports. Data on discount window loans include the name of the borrowing institution, the amount borrowed, the interest rate charged, and information about collateral pledged. Data on open market transactions include temporary and permanent purchases and sales of Treasury and agency securities, securities lending activities, and foreign exchange transactions and foreign currency reserve investments. Information on each transaction includes the identity of the counterparty, the security or currency purchased or sold, and the date, amount, and price of the transaction. In December 2010, the Federal Reserve released detailed information about individual credit and other transactions conducted during the financial crisis. In accordance with the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, transaction-level details for discount window loans and open market transactions will be made available on a quarterly basis and with an approximately two-year lag. Information is available through theFederal Reserve Board's websiteand theFederal Reserve Bank of New York's website. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.