Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Annual Conference of the Union of Arab Banks, Beirut, Lebanon (via prerecorded video) Good morning. I am pleased to address the Annual Conference of the Union of Arab Banks (UAB) as it celebrates 40 years of success representing the interests of the Arab banking and financial communities. The UAB may justifiably take great pride in its many accomplishments during the past four decades. Among other achievements, the UAB has emerged as a key international and regional participant in developing policies that promote financial stability, economic integration, and sustainable development and prosperity. The UAB has also been a champion of sharing best practices and training among regulators and bankers. The partnership that has developed between the Federal Reserve and the UAB may be counted among these successes. Ten years ago, the Federal Reserve helped establish--with the support of many of the countries represented at this conference--the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Financial Regulators' Initiative. Sarkis Yoghourtdjian of the Federal Reserve Board, who is attending with you today, was asked to lead this initiative, whose aim has been to provide technical assistance and bank supervision training to central banks and bank supervisory authorities. Now in its 10th and final year, the Financial Regulators' Initiative has sponsored more than 40 training programs and conferences throughout the MENA region, and it has provided many short-term, on-the-job training opportunities for MENA regulators with U.S. banking agencies. We are grateful to the UAB for its many contributions to the success of this initiative. In addition to celebrating accomplishments, anniversaries also provide a time for reflection and self-assessment. Governments, central bankers, financial regulators, and the banking industry still labor today in the long shadow cast by the global financial crisis. Against that backdrop, financial regulators around the world are engaged in a historic and sweeping renovation of the global financial structure. One of the most important goals is to ensure that banks hold more and higher-quality capital, and have sufficient liquid assets on hand, to be able to survive a market shock or severe economic downturn. In addition, we must push banking organizations of all sizes to ensure their compensation practices link pay to performance and do not encourage excessive risk-taking. Past and current crises underscore an additional lesson. Then as now, international or regional financial crises require a coordinated response to safeguard the stability of the world's financial system. To that end, the UAB can play an important regional role by facilitating efforts to address potential cross-border issues, and by providing a local platform for strong cooperation between home and host supervisors during normal and crisis periods. At your conference this week, I anticipate you will discuss the opportunities and challenges that lay ahead for your members. Among the topics, no doubt, will be the prospects for partnership between the public and private sectors, the importance of establishing institutions capable of managing crises, the effects of new regulatory and supervisory structures on the banking industry, and the role of the banking sector in promoting economic growth. We at the Federal Reserve face similar challenges and opportunities, and we look forward to working with you to find common approaches and solutions. I wish you a successful and productive conference. Warm congratulations on your 40th anniversary, and best wishes for another 40 years of success.
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2013 Asia Economic Policy Conference, San Francisco, California I appreciate this opportunity to offer a few thoughts on the effects of advanced economy monetary policies on emerging market economies (EMEs)--an issue of great importance for Asia and the global economy.1Since the global financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has sought to strengthen the U.S. economic recovery through highly accommodative monetary policy. But my colleagues and I are keenly aware that the U.S. economy operates in a global environment. We understand that America's prosperity is bound up with the prosperity of other nations, including emerging market nations. Emerging market economies have long grappled with the challenges posed by large and volatile cross-border capital flows. The past several decades are replete with episodes of strong capital inflows being followed by abrupt reversals, all too often resulting in financial crisis and economic distress.2Some of this volatility no doubt reflects the evolution of strengths and vulnerabilities within the EMEs themselves. In recent years, renewed attention has been placed on the role of advanced economies and of common or global factors in driving capital movements.3In particular, many observers have singled out monetary policy in the United States and other advanced economies as a key driver. As advanced economies pursued highly accommodative monetary policies and EMEs subsequently received strong capital inflows, reflecting investors' pursuit of higher returns, concerns were expressed that a flood of liquidity would overwhelm emerging markets, drive up asset prices to unsustainable levels, set off credit booms, and thus sow the seeds of future crises. More recently, there have been concerns about potential financial and economic dislocations associated with the advanced economies' eventual exit from highly accommodative policies. In my remarks today, I will discuss the extent to which monetary policy in the advanced economies--and in the United States in particular--has contributed to changes in emerging market capital flows and asset prices, and I will place this discussion in a broader context of economic and financial linkages among economies. I will also address the risks that EMEs may face from the eventual normalization of monetary policy in the advanced economies. The heightened attention to advanced economies' monetary policies and the potential spillovers to EMEs is understandable in light of the unprecedented policy steps taken in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. The severity of the crisis and the challenge of a slow recovery required central banks in the advanced economies and elsewhere to take aggressive action in order to fulfill their mandates. In the United States, the Federal Reserve is bound by its dual mandate to pursue price stability and maximum employment. In following that mandate, the Fed cut the federal funds rate to its effective lower bound in late 2008 and then turned to two less conventional policy tools to provide additional monetary accommodation. The first is forward guidance on the federal funds rate.By lowering private-sector expectations for the future path of short-term rates, forward guidance has reduced longer-term interest rates and raised asset prices, thereby leading to more accommodative financial conditions. The second tool is large scale asset purchases, which likewise increase policy accommodation by reducing longer-term interest rates and raising asset prices. The Federal Reserve has not been alone in implementing unconventional monetary policies. The Bank of England has also engaged in substantial asset purchases and recently introduced explicit forward guidance for its policy rate. The Bank of Japan, a pioneer in the use of unconventional policy, has recently embarked on an ambitious asset purchase program to combat deflation. And the European Central Bank (ECB) substantially extended its liquidity provision by offering unlimited longer-term refinancing operations. The ECB also purchased some securities in distressed markets, and recently indicated that it expects interest rates to remain low for an extended period. Thus, since the end of the crisis, central banks in the advanced economies have adopted similar policies to promote recovery and price stability. While a great deal of attention has focused on unconventional policy actions, especially asset purchases, these policies appear to affect financial conditions and the real economy in much the same way as conventional interest rate policy. Indeed, recent research suggests that adjustments in policy rates and unconventional policies have similar cross-border effects on asset prices and economic outcomes.4; If that is so, then the overall stance of policy accommodation matters more here than the particular form of easing Moreover, neither conventional nor unconventional monetary policy actions are shocks that come out of the blue. Instead, they are the policies undertaken by central banks to offset the adverse shocks that have restrained our economies. Thus, any spillovers from monetary policy actions must be evaluated against the consequences of failing to respond to these adverse shocks. In a world of global trade and integrated capital markets, it is natural for economic and financial shocks and policy actions to be transmitted across borders. Spillovers from advanced-economy monetary policies are to be expected.5In theory, when advanced economies ease monetary policy in response to a contractionary shock, their interest rates will decline, prompting investors to rebalance their portfolios toward higher-yielding assets. Some of this rebalancing will occur domestically, but some investment will also move abroad, resulting in capital flows to EMEs. In response, EME currencies should tend to appreciate against those of the advanced economies, and EME asset prices should rise. Conversely, a tightening of advanced economy monetary policy in response to a stronger economy should lead these movements to reverse; that is, tightening should reduce capital flows to EMEs and diminish upward pressure on EME currencies and asset prices. Are these basic relationships apparent in the data? The left side ofchart 1shows an index of EME local-currency sovereign bond yields along with a roughly similar maturity U.S. Treasury yield. The line on the right is the differential between the two, plotted against net inflows of private capital to a selection of EMEs, shown by the bars. If interest rates were the main driver of capital flows, these two series ought to move in a similar fashion. At times, this is indeed the case: From mid-2009 to early 2011, the interest rate differential and EME capital inflows rose together. But the overall relationship is not particularly tight. In early 2007, capital flows to EMEs were quite strong even with a low interest rate differential. And in mid-2011, capital inflows stepped down even as the interest rate differential remained elevated. As I will discuss in a moment, the lack of a tight relationship between capital flows and interest rates suggests that other factors also have been important. Even though interest-rate differentials and capital inflows do not always move in the same direction, numerous empirical studies have shown that interest rates do in fact help explain capital flows once other determinants of these flows are also taken into account.6In particular, when U.S. rates decline relative to those in EMEs, private capital flows to EMEs tend to rise, consistent with investors rebalancing toward higher-yielding assets. In a similar vein, event studies have shown that the Federal Reserve's policy announcements, including those related to asset purchases, have been associated with capital flows to EMEs as well as upward movements in EME currencies and asset prices.7But the role of monetary policy in driving capital flows and the effects of those flows on EMEs should not be overstated. In this regard, I will offer two considerations. First, many factors affect capital flows to EMEs, not just the stance of advanced economy monetary policy. Differences in growth prospects across countries and the associated differences in expected investment returns are important factors.8Chart 2shows the growth rate of real GDP for EMEs and advanced economies. Given their stage of development and demographic profile, EMEs should grow faster than advanced economies on a trend basis. As shown by the line in the right panel, EME growth has, in fact, consistently outpaced that of the advanced economies. In addition, the bounceback of the EMEs from the global financial crisis widened this differential even more, although the gap has diminished more recently as growth in the EMEs has slowed. Moreover, investing in EMEs has become more attractive as many EMEs have improved their macroeconomic policies and institutional frameworks over recent decades; growth differentials may partly be reflecting these improvements. As is evident in the right-hand chart, the relationship between the growth differential and capital inflows to EMEs seems to be quite strong. In particular, the rise in capital flows following the global financial crisis coincided with stronger relative growth performance in EMEs. And in 2011, capital inflows diminished along with the growth differential. Another key driver of EME capital flows is global attitude toward risk. Swings in sentiment between "risk-on" and "risk-off" have led investors to reposition across asset classes, resulting in corresponding movements in capital flows.9Indeed, as shown inchart 3, the most common measure of uncertainty and the market price of volatility--the VIX--is strongly correlated with net inflows into EMEs. Although the causes of movements in global risk sentiment are uncertain, the ebb and flow of potential crises and policy responses, such as we experienced during the European crisis, are clearly important. Of course, movements in risk sentiment may not be fully independent of monetary policy. An interesting line of research has begun to consider how changes in monetary policy itself may affect risk sentiment. For example, some studies indicate that an easing of U.S. monetary policy tends to lower volatility (as measured by the VIX), increase leverage of financial intermediaries, and boost EME capital inflows and currencies.10 A second point to bear in mind when assessing monetary policy spillovers is that expansionary policies in the advanced economies are not beggar-thy-neighbor; in other words, they do not undermine exports from EMEs. In recent decades, some EMEs have successfully pursued an export-led growth strategy, and policymakers in those economies have sometimes expressed concern that their exports will be unduly restrained as accommodative policies in the advanced economies lead their currencies to appreciate. However, as shown inchart 4, although EME currencies bounced back from their lows during the global financial crisis--when global investors fled from assets they perceived to be risky--for many EMEs real exchange rates have moved sideways or have even declined over the past two years. Some of this weakness may reflect the foreign exchange market intervention and capital controls that policymakers used to staunch the rise in their currencies. But even if advanced economy monetary policies were to put upward pressure on EME currencies, the consequent drag on their exports must be weighed against the positive effects of stronger demand in the advanced economies. According to simulations of the Federal Reserve Board's econometric models of the global economy, these two effects roughly offset each other, suggesting that accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies have not reduced output and exports in the EMEs.11Indeed, this view seems to be supported by recent experience, as the U.S. current account balance has remained fairly stable since the end of the global financial crisis. Over the longer run, advanced economy policy actions that strengthen global growth and global trade will benefit the EMEs as well. A particularly important consideration regarding spillovers from accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies is the extent to which such policies contribute to financial stability risks in the EMEs. Because many EMEs have financial sectors that are relatively small, large capital inflows may foster asset price bubbles and a too-rapid expansion of credit. These are serious concerns, irrespective of the relative importance of monetary policies in the advanced economies in driving these flows. While the picture is a mixed one and some markets show signs of froth, indicators of financial stability do not seem to show widespread imbalances.12 For example, EME equity prices, shown inchart 5, plunged during the global financial crisis, rebounded thereafter, but then generally flattened out or even declined. There are exceptions, of course, such as Indonesia, whose stock market soared until earlier this year. But in aggregate, EME stock prices remain below their pre-crisis peak, whereas the S&P 500 is well above its own pre-crisis peak. Chart 6portrays the rise in credit to the domestic nonfinancial private sector as a share of GDP from its pre-crisis level. For some EMEs, the rise in credit does not seem out of line with historical trends, but some economies have experienced potentially worrisome increases. Credit growth in China is particularly noteworthy, but this does not seem to be the result of accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies. Much of the rise took place in the aftermath of the crisis, in large part reflecting policy-driven stimulus to support economic recovery. In addition, China's relatively closed capital account limits the extent to which domestic credit conditions are influenced by developments abroad, including changes in advanced economy monetary policy. Increases in credit in some other economies, notably Brazil, have also been driven to a significant degree by policy actions to support aggregate demand. And, of course, EMEs have policy tools to limit the expansion of credit. Another area of potential concern is excessive valuations in property markets.Chart 7displays inflation-adjusted house prices for several Asian economies. The most striking increases have occurred in Hong Kong, which, through its open capital account and essentially fixed exchange rate, is tied most directly to U.S. financial conditions. Of course, the degree of Hong Kong's exposure to U.S. financial conditions is a policy choice, and other factors have also contributed to the run-up in its property prices. House prices have also resumed their rise in China. But, as with credit growth, this rise seems to reflect domestic developments as opposed to spillovers from global financial conditions. In light of these potential financial stability concerns, it is encouraging that EME policymakers have devoted substantial effort since the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s to bolster the resilience of their banking systems. Banks in many EMEs have robust earnings and solid capital buffers.13Compared with past experience, emerging market banking systems also generally enjoy improved management and a proactive approach by authorities to mitigate risks. Nevertheless, in an environment of volatile global markets, regulators should guard against the buildup of vulnerabilities, such as excessive dependence on wholesale and external funding, declining asset quality, and foreign currency mismatches. To summarize my discussion so far, EMEs clearly face challenges from volatile capital flows and the attendant moves in asset prices. Accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies have likely contributed to some of these flow and price pressures, and may also have contributed to the buildup of some financial vulnerabilities in certain emerging markets. That said, other factors appear to have been even more important. Moreover, expansionary monetary policies in the advanced economies have supported global growth to the benefit of advanced and emerging economies alike. Turning to the risks and policy challenges going forward, much attention has focused on potential effects in EMEs when recovery prompts the United States and other advanced economies to begin the gradual process of returning policy to a normal stance. As events over the summer demonstrated, even the discussion of such a policy shift may be accompanied by considerable volatility. As shown inchart 8, from May through August, U.S. Treasury yields rose substantially as market participants reassessed the future course of U.S. monetary policy. In response, EME bond and equity funds experienced very large outflows, as shown by the bars. EME yields rose as well, in some cases by more than those on Treasury securities, and many EME currencies depreciated. The magnitude of these market responses may have been amplified by the carry-trade strategies that many investors had in place; these strategies were designed to take advantage of interest rate differentials and appeared profitable as long as EME interest rate differentials remained wide and EME exchange rates remained stable or were expected to appreciate. When anticipations of Fed tapering led to higher U.S. interest rates and higher market volatility, these trades may have been quickly unwound, engendering particularly sharp declines in EME exchange rates and asset prices. These developments, however, do not appear to have been driven solely by perceptions of U.S. monetary policy. As I noted earlier, GDP growth in many EMEs has fallen from the pace of previous years, which may have led investors to rethink their investment choices. Additionally, it appears that the retreat from emerging markets reflected a change in global risk sentiment, as investors focused on vulnerabilities in EMEs following a period of complacency. Asset prices have fallen considerably more in economies with large current account deficits, high inflation, and fiscal problems than in countries with stronger fundamentals. For example, as shown inchart 9, changes in EME exchange rates and interest rates since April have been correlated with current account deficits. In general, economies with larger current account deficits experienced greater depreciations of their currencies and larger increases in their bond yields. Thus, while a reassessment of U.S. monetary policy may have triggered the recent retrenchment from EMEs, investor concerns about underlying vulnerabilities appear to have amplified the reaction. Whatever their source, large capital outflows from EMEs can pose challenges for EME policymakers by simultaneously producing significant currency depreciation, asset price deflation, and inflationary pressures. In such cases, EME central banks are in the difficult position of judging whether to tighten policy at the same time that demand is weakening. It is notable that some central banks with stronger records on price stability have been able to avoid tightening whereas others have been forced to raise rates to defend price stability in the face of domestic weakness. Monetary policy in the United States is likely to remain highly accommodative for some time, as our economy fights to overcome the remaining headwinds from the global financial crisis. As our economic recovery continues, however, the time will come to gradually reduce the pace of asset purchases and eventually bring those purchases to a stop. The timing of this moderation in the pace of purchases is necessarily uncertain, as it depends on the evolution of the economy. While moderating the pace of purchases and the eventual increase in the federal funds rate may well affect capital flows, interest rates and asset prices in EMEs, the overall macroeconomic effects need not be disruptive. First, tightening will in all likelihood occur in the context of a more firmly established economic recovery in the United States so that any adverse effects on EME financial conditions should be buffered by the beneficial effects of higher external demand. Second, although conditions vary from country to country, on the whole, EMEs exhibit greater resilience than they did in prior decades, reflecting, among other factors, more flexible exchange rates, greater stocks of international reserves, stronger fiscal positions, and better regulated and more conservatively managed banking systems. EMEs have policy tools to help manage any negative externalities that may arise, and recent developments provide additional rationale for them to redouble their efforts to bolster their resiliency.14Reducing vulnerabilities, improving policy frameworks, and safeguarding the financial sector will go a long way toward making EMEs more robust to a wide range of shocks, not just those that may arise from changes in monetary policy in the advanced economies. Global investors should also learn from the experience of this summer, when it became clear that unwinding leveraged carry trades can be difficult in an environment of lower liquidity. As for advanced economies, policymakers should move gradually to restore normal policies only as their economic recoveries are more firmly established, consistent with their mandates. In addition, policymakers should communicate as clearly as possible about their policy aims and intentions in order to limit the odds of policy surprises and a consequent sharp adjustment in financial markets in response. Indeed, my colleagues on the FOMC and I are committed to just such an approach. In closing, the Federal Reserve's mandate, like those of other central banks, is focused on the pursuit of domestic policy objectives. This focus is entirely appropriate. Yet, experience has shown that the fortunes of the U.S. economy are deeply intertwined with those of the rest of the world. Economic prospects for the United States are importantly influenced by the course of the world economy, and, by the same token, prosperity around the globe depends to a significant extent on a strong U.S. economy. In order for the Federal Reserve to fulfill its dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment, we must take account of these international linkages. Indeed, the Federal Reserve has a long and varied history of doing so, including our actions during the global financial crisis. There is every reason to expect that to continue.15 Thank you. I'll be happy to take a few questions or comments. References Ahmed, Shaghil, and Andrei Zlate (2013). "Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World? (PDF)" International Finance Discussion Papers 1081. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Bernanke, Ben S. (2013). "Monetary Policy and the Global Economy," speech delivered at the Department of Economics and STICERD (Suntory and Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines) Public Discussion in Association with the Bank of England, London School of Economics, London, March 25. Bluedorn, John, Rupa Duttagupta, Jaime Guajardo, and Petia Topalova (2013). "Capital Flows are Fickle: Anytime, Anywhere (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/13/183. Washington: International Monetary Fund, August. Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erce, and Sergio L. Schmukler (2013). "Gross Capital Flows: Dynamics and Crises,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 60 (January), pp. 113-33. Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin (2013). "Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of Monetary Policy (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 18942. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. Calvo, Guillermo A., Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen M. Reinhart (1993). "Capital Inflows and Real Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America,"IMF Staff Papers, vol. 40 (1), pp. 108-51.------ (1996). "Inflows of Capital to Developing Countries in the 1990s,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 10 (Spring), pp. 123-39.Chen, Qianying, Andrew Filardo, Dong He, and Feng Zhu (2012). "International Spillovers of Central Bank Balance Sheet Policies (PDF)," BIS Papers No. 66. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, October. Chuhan, Punam, Stijn Claessens, and Nlandu Mamingi (1998). "Equity and Bond Flows to Latin America and Asia: The Role of Global and Country Factors,"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 55 (April), pp. 439-63.Eichengreen, Barry (2013). "Does the Federal Reserve Care about the Rest of the World? (PDF)" NBER Working Paper No. 19405. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September.Fernandez-Arias, Eduardo (1996). "The New Wave of Private Capital Inflows: Push or Pull?"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 48 (March), pp. 389-418.Forbes, Kristin J., and Francis E. Warnock, (2012). "Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and Retrenchment,"Journal of International Economics, vol. 88 (November), pp. 235-51. Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013). "On the International Spillovers of U.S. Quantitative Easing," ECB Working Paper No. 1557. Frankfurt, Germany: European Central Bank, June. Ghosh, Atish R., Jun Kim, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Juan Zalduendo (2012). "Surges (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/12/22. Washington: International Monetary Fund, January. Glick, Reuven, and Sylvain Leduc (2013). "The Effects of Unconventional and Conventional U.S. Monetary Policy on the Dollar (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2013-11. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May. Hausman, Joshua, and Jon Wongswan (2011). "Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements, (PDF)"Journal of International Money and Finance , vol. 30 (April), pp. 547-71. IMF (2011). "Recent Experiences in Managing Capital Inflows--Cross-Cutting Themes and Possible Policy Framework (PDF)," staff paper. Washington: International Monetary Fund, February. ------ (2013a).Global Financial Stability Report: Transition Challenges to Stability. Washington: International Monetary Fund, October. ------ (2013b). "Global Impact and Challenges of Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," policy paper. Washington: International Monetary Fund, September. Moore, Jeffrey, Sunwoo Nam, Myeongguk Suh, and Alexander Tepper (2013). "Estimating the Impacts of U.S. LSAPs on Emerging Market Economies' Local Currency Bond Markets," Staff Report No. 595. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January. Reinhart, Carmen M., and Vincent R. Reinhart (2009). "Capital Flow Bonanzas: An Encompassing View of the Past and Present," in, Jeffrey A. Frankel and Christopher Pissarides, eds.,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 9-62. Rey, Helene (2013). "Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence," paper presented at "Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 22-24. Rosa, Carlo (2012). "How ‘Unconventional' Are Large-Scale Asset Purchases? The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices," Staff Report No. 560. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May. Sanchez, Manuel (2013). "The Impact of Monetary Policies of Advanced Countries on Emerging Markets (PDF)," speech delivered at the 55thAnnual Meeting of the National Association of Business Economists, San Francisco, California, September 9. Wu, Jing Cynthia, and Fan Dora Xia (2013). "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," paper presented at the Term Structure Modeling at the Zero Lower Bound conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October11. 1.I would like to thank Trevor Reeve for his assistance in the preparation of these remarks.Return to text 2.Notable examples of such crises include Latin America in the early 1980s, Mexico in 1994, the Asian financial crises beginning in 1997, Russia in 1998, Argentina in 2001, and Brazil in 2002. See Broner and others (2013), Forbes and Warnock (2012), Ghosh and others (2012), and Reinhart and Reinhart (2009) for discussions of large capital flow movements.Return to text 3.An earlier literature also examined the role of "push" and "pull" factors in explaining international capital flows. Examples include Calvo and others (1993, 1996), Fernandez-Arias (1996), and Chuhan and others (1998).Return to text 4.See Glick and Leduc (2013), IMF (2013a), Moore and others (2013), Rosa (2012), and Wu and Xia (2013). Recent research by Federal Reserve Board staff finds that reductions in U.S. interest rates for any reason--whether caused by monetary policy or other factors--have typically been associated with declines in EME interest rates and appreciation of EME currencies. Moore and others (2013) document a similar historical relationship.Return to text 5.The U.S. economy is affected by spillovers from abroad as well, and these are very much a part of our policymaking environment.Return to text 6.See, for example, Ahmed and Zlate (2013), Bluedorn and others (2013), Fratzcher and others (2013), Ghosh and others (2012), and IMF (2011).Return to text 7.See Chen and others (2012), Fratzscher and others (2013), Hausman and Wongswan (2011), IMF (2013b), and Moore and others (2013).Return to text 8.See Ahmed and Zlate (2013), Forbes and Warnock (2012), Fratzcher and others (2013), and Ghosh and others (2012).Return to text 9.See Ahmed and Zlate (2013), Bluedorn and others (2013), Forbes and Warnock (2012), and IMF (2011).Return to text 10.See Bruno and Shin (2013) and Rey (2013).Return to text 11.See Bernanke (2013).Return to text 12.See IMF (2013a, 2013b).Return to text 13.See IMF (2013a).Return to text 14.See Sanchez (2013).Return to text 15.See Eichengreen (2013).Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemConsumer Financial Protection Bureau The Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) today announced they are increasing the dollar thresholds in Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) for exempt consumer credit and lease transactions. Transactions at or below the thresholds are subject to the protections of the regulations. The adjustments to the thresholds reflect the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers as of June 1, 2013 and will take effect on January 1, 2014. These increases are consistent with amendments to the Truth in Lending and Consumer Leasing laws made by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Based on the adjustments announced today, the protections of the Truth in Lending and Consumer Leasing acts generally will apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases of $53,500 or less in 2014--an increase of $500 from 2013. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property (such as mortgages) are subject to the Truth in Lending Act regardless of the amount of the loan. Although the Dodd-Frank Act generally transferred rulemaking authority under the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to the CFPB, the Federal Reserve Board retains authority to issue rules for certain motor vehicle dealers. Therefore, the agencies are issuing these adjustments jointly. The attached notices will be published shortly in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice for Regulation M:HTML|PDF Federal Registernotice for Regulation Z:HTML|PDF Board Votes
Federal Deposit Insurance CorporationBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies with responsibility for Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) rulemaking today published final revisions to"Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment." TheQuestions and Answersdocument provides additional guidance to financial institutions and the public on the agencies' CRA regulations. The revisions focus primarily on community development. Community development activities are considered as part of the CRA performance tests for large institutions, intermediate small institutions, and wholesale and limited purpose institutions. Small institutions may use community development activity to receive consideration toward an outstanding CRA rating. Among other things, the amendments: The final revisions are being issued by the Federal Reserve Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The attached notice will be published shortly in theFederal Register. The agencies also are revising the relevant interagency CRA examination procedures, which will be released soon. For more information on the CRA, including theseQuestions and Answersand the agencies' CRA regulations, visit the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council website at:http://www.ffiec.gov/cra. Federal Register notice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today released an estimation tool to help community banks understand the potential effects of the recently revised regulatory capital framework on their capital ratios. The revised framework implements the Basel III regulatory capital reforms and certain changes required by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010. In July 2013, the Federal Reserve Board and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency approved the revised framework as final rules, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation approved the revised framework as an interim final rule. The final rules and interim final rule are substantively identical. The estimation tool is not part of the revised capital framework and not a component of regulatory reporting. Results from the tool are simplified estimates that may not precisely reflect banks' actual capital ratios under the framework. Additionally, banks should be aware that the estimation tool requires certain manual inputs that could have meaningful effects on results and should reference the revised capital framework when using the estimation tool. The estimation tool is available at:www.fdic.gov/regulations/capital/Bank_Estimation_Tool.xlsm The revised capital frameworks are available in theFederal Registerat:www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-10-11/pdf/2013-21653.pdfandwww.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-09-10/pdf/2013-20536.pdf Media Contacts:
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the National Economists Club Annual Dinner, Herbert Stein Memorial Lecture, Washington, D.C. Nearly eight years ago, when I began my time as Chairman, one of my priorities was to make the Federal Reserve more transparent--and, in particular, to make monetary policy as transparent and open as reasonably possible. I believed then, as I do today, that transparency in monetary policy enhances public understanding and confidence, promotes informed discussion of policy options, increases the accountability of monetary policymakers for reaching their mandated objectives, and ultimately makes policy more effective by tightening the linkage between monetary policy, financial conditions, and the real economy. Of course, responding to the financial crisis and its aftermath soon became the Federal Reserve's main focus. As it has turned out, however, following the stabilization of the financial system, supporting our economy's recovery from the deepest recession since the Great Depression has required a more prominent role for communication and transparency in monetary policy than ever before. In my remarks, I will discuss how the Federal Reserve's communications have evolved in recent years and how enhanced transparency is increasing the effectiveness of monetary policy. Despite the challenges inherent in communicating in an unprecedented economic and policy environment about a future that can be only imperfectly foreseen, I will explain why I believe that policy transparency remains an essential element of the Federal Reserve's strategy for meeting its economic objectives. Policy Frameworks and CommunicationTo understand the critical role that the Federal Reserve's communications about monetary policy has played in recent years, it is useful to start by discussing the role of monetary policy communication more generally, including the relationship between policy communication and the broader policy framework. Making monetary policy is sometimes compared to driving a car, with policymakers pressing on the accelerator or the brakes, depending on whether the economy needs to be sped up or slowed down at that moment. That analogy is imperfect, however, for at least two reasons. First, the main effects of monetary policy actions on the economy are not felt immediately but instead play out over quarters or even years. Hence, unlike the driver of a car, monetary policymakers cannot simply respond to what lies immediately in front of them but must try to look well ahead--admittedly, a difficult task. Second, the effects of monetary policy on the economytodaydepend importantly not only on current policy actions, but also on the public's expectations of how policy will evolve. The automotive analogy clearly breaks down here, for it is as if the current speed of the car depended on what the car itself expects the driver to do in the future. The public's expectations about future monetary policy actions matter today because those expectations have important effects on current financial conditions, which in turn affect output, employment, and inflation over time. For example, because investors can choose freely between holding a longer-term security or rolling over a sequence of short-term securities, longer-term interest rates today are closely linked to market participants' expectations of how short-term rates will evolve. If monetary policymakers are expected to keep short-term interest rates low, then current longer-term interest rates are likely to be low as well, all else being equal. In short, for monetary policy, expectations matter. Indeed, expectations matter so much that a central bank may be able to help make policy more effective by working to shape those expectations. Experience demonstrates that a useful approach to managing expectations--one that dovetails well with basic principles of transparency--involves policymakers stating clear objectives as well as their plans for attaining those objectives. For example, over the past two decades, many central banks have introduced explicit numerical targets for inflation. Supplemented by regular publication of the central bank's economic forecasts and provisional plans for achieving its objective in the medium term, numerical inflation goals have helped increase the transparency and predictability of policy in a number of economies. In this spirit, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has clarified the Federal Reserve's objectives and policy strategy. Because of its dual mandate from the Congress, which specifies both maximum employment and price stability as policy objectives, the Federal Reserve could not adopt a numerical inflation target as its exclusive goal. Nor would it have been appropriate for the FOMC simply to provide a fixed objective for some measure of employment or unemployment, in parallel with an inflation objective. In contrast to inflation, which is determined by monetary policy in the longer run, the maximum level of employment that can be sustained over the longer run is determined primarily by nonmonetary factors, such as demographics, the mix of workforce skills, labor market institutions, and advances in technology. Moreover, as these factors evolve, the maximum employment level may change over time. Consequently, it is beyond the power of the central bank to set a longer-run target for employment that is immutable or independent of the underlying structure of the economy.1 The approach on which the FOMC agreed is described in its statement of longer-run goals and policy strategy, issued in January 2012 and reaffirmed in January of this year.2The statement begins by affirming the FOMC's commitment to meeting both of its statutory objectives. It then indicates that, in the context of the FOMC's dual mandate, the Committee sees price stability as corresponding to a 2 percent longer-term inflation goal. On the employment side of the mandate, the Committee makes its best assessment of the maximum level of employment at any given time, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. In practice, the Committee often expresses its employment objective in terms of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. Currently, FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run normal unemployment rate, as publicly reported in the quarterly Summary of Economic Projections, range from 5.2 to 6 percent.3 As I noted, explicit objectives are most useful when accompanied by provisional plans for achieving them. Many central banks supplement their announced objectives with published forecasts that, implicitly or explicitly, lay out plans for achieving their goals. Although the size and diversity of the Federal Reserve's policymaking committee has made achieving a single consensus forecast difficult, the quarterly Summary of Economic Projections reports each FOMC participant's view of the most likely future paths of inflation, unemployment, and output growth, conditional on that individual's view of appropriate monetary policy. In recent years, this survey has also included participants' projections of the path of future short-term interest rates they see as most likely to achieve the Committee's goals. In general, the Committee's two objectives of maximum employment and price stability are complementary. When they are not, the FOMC has stated that it will pursue a balanced approach in the pursuit of its dual mandate, working to ensure that both inflation and employment are close to their desired values in the longer term. In short, the Federal Reserve, like many central banks around the world, has made significant progress in recent years in clarifying its goals and policy approach, and in providing regular information about the future path of policy that it views as most likely to attain its objectives. This increased transparency about the framework of policy has aided the public in forming policy expectations, reduced uncertainty, and made policy more effective. The financial crisis and its aftermath, however, have raised even greater challenges for, and demands on, the Federal Reserve's communication. We have had to contend with the persistent effects of the seizing-up of the financial system, the collapse of housing prices and construction, new financial shocks in Europe and elsewhere, restrictive fiscal policies at all levels of government, and, of course, the enormous blows to output and employment associated with the worst U.S. recession since the Great Depression. Moreover, for the first time since the FOMC began using the federal funds rate as its policy interest rate, that rate is effectively at zero and thus cannot be lowered meaningfully further. Consequently, to provide needed support to the economic recovery and minimize the risk of deflation, the Federal Reserve has had to adopt new policy tools, which bring their own communication challenges. In the remainder of my talk, I will discuss how the Federal Reserve has used communication to try to further inform the public's expectations about how the FOMC will employ what are currently its two principal policy tools: its plans regarding its short-term policy interest rate and its large-scale purchases of securities. Forward Guidance about Policy Interest RatesAs the economy weakened over 2008, the FOMC repeatedly cut its target for the federal funds rate, its short-term policy rate. In December of that year, the target for the funds rate was reduced to a range of zero to 1/4 percent, and money market rates declined nearly to zero. Thus, using the standard means of further easing monetary policy--cutting the target interest rate--was no longer possible. The so-called zero lower bound on the FOMC's policy interest rate was not the only challenge the Committee faced. First, the depth of the recession, combined with ongoing concerns about the functioning of the financial system, raised significant uncertainties about both the likely pace of recovery and the effectiveness of monetary policy in supporting growth. The recoveries from most post-World War II U.S. recessions had been relatively rapid, with production, unemployment, and other key variables returning to close to normal levels within six to eight quarters. In such cases, the policy horizon most relevant to financial markets might be the next several quarters. In the aftermath of the recent crisis, however, the Committee had to consider the possibility that a highly accommodative policy might be required for a number of years. Second, a federal funds rate effectively at zero created an important asymmetry for policy planning. On the one hand, if the economy were to recover rapidly and inflation were to increase, monetary policymakers would be able to respond in the normal way, by raising the federal funds rate. But, on the other hand, if the economy were to remain weak or recover only gradually--the case we actually faced--the FOMC would not be able to cut the funds rate further. Moreover, in the latter case, the economy could face an increased risk of deflation--falling prices. As the case of Japan illustrates, deflation may impede economic growth while being very difficult to escape. To try to preempt such outcomes, a strong case existed for monetary policy to be more accommodative than suggested by standard policy rules calibrated to normal times.4 So the Committee faced a situation in which more monetary policy accommodation was needed, and possibly for quite a long time--yet its basic policy tool, the federal funds rate target, had been pushed to its limit. To put the Committee's problem another way, standard policy rules and a range of other analyses implied that, to achieve the FOMC's objectives, the target for the federal funds rate should be set well below zero, which, of course, was not feasible. Fortunately, as I discussed earlier, the degree of accommodation provided by monetary policy depends not just on the current value of the policy rate, but on public expectations of future settings of that rate. The Committee accordingly realized that it could ease policy further--and reduce uncertainty about future policy--by assuring the public and markets that it intended to keep the policy rate low for some time, and for a longer period than the public initially expected. At first, the Committee employed purely qualitative language to send this message: After the FOMC stated in December 2008 that it would likely be appropriate for the federal funds rate to remain near zero for "some time," it changed the formulation in March 2009 to "an extended period."5However, such language did not convey very precisely the Committee's intentions. In August 2011, the Committee introduced a specific date into its guidance, stating that conditions would likely warrant keeping the federal funds rate target near zero at least through mid-2013.6This date-based guidance was more precise than the qualitative language the Committee had been using, and it appears to have been effective in communicating the FOMC's commitment to a highly accommodative policy. In particular, following the introduction of dates into the FOMC statement, interest rates and survey measures of policy expectations moved in ways broadly consistent with the guidance.7 Although the date-based forward guidance appears to have affected the public's expectations as desired, it did not explain how future policy would be affected by changes in the economic outlook--an important limitation. Indeed, the date in the guidance was pushed out twice in 2012--first to late 2014 and then to mid-2015--leaving the public unsure about whether and under what circumstances further changes to the guidance might occur.8In December of last year, the FOMC addressed this issue by tying its forward guidance about its policy rate more directly to its economic objectives.9Introducing so-called state-contingent guidance, the Committee announced for the first time that no increase in the federal funds rate target should be anticipated so long as unemployment remained above 6-1/2 percent and inflation and inflation expectations remained stable and near target.10This formulation provided greater clarity about the factors influencing the Committee's thinking about future policy and how that thinking might change as the outlook changed.11 As my colleagues and I have frequently emphasized, the conditions stated in this guidance are thresholds, not triggers. Crossing one of the thresholds will not automatically give rise to an increase in the federal funds rate target; instead, it will signal only that it is appropriate for the Committee to begin considering whether an increase in the target is warranted. This threshold formulation helps explain why the Committee was willing to express the guidance bearing on the labor market in terms of the unemployment rate alone, instead of following its usual practice of considering a broad range of labor market indicators. In the judgment of the Committee, the unemployment rate--which, despite some drawbacks in this regard, is probably the best single summary indicator of the state of the labor market--is sufficient for defining the threshold given by the guidance. However, after the unemployment threshold is crossed, many other indicators become relevant to a comprehensive judgment of the health of the labor market, including such measures as payroll employment, labor force participation, and the rates of hiring and separation. In particular, even after unemployment drops below 6-1/2 percent, and so long as inflation remains well behaved, the Committee can be patient in seeking assurance that the labor market is sufficiently strong before considering any increase in its target for the federal funds rate. Large-Scale Asset Purchases and Related CommunicationBecause of the severity of the recession and the disruptions in financial markets, and because short-term interest rates were near the zero lower bound, it became clear early on that more monetary accommodation would be needed than could be provided through the management of short-term rates alone, even with guidance that those rates would be kept low well into the future. Accordingly, at about the same time that the FOMC reduced its target for the federal funds rate close to zero, it began supplementing its rate policies and forward rate guidance with large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs)--specifically, open market purchases of longer-term U.S. Treasury securities and securities issued by the government-sponsored enterprises, primarily mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Both LSAPs and forward guidance for the federal funds rate support the economy by putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, but they affect longer-term rates through somewhat different channels. To understand the difference, it is useful to decompose longer-term interest rates into two components: One reflects the expected path of short-term interest rates, and the other is called a term premium. The term premium is the extra return that investors require to be willing to hold a longer-term security to maturity compared with the expected yield from rolling over short-term securities for the same period. As I have noted, forward rate guidance affects longer-term interest rates primarily by influencing investors' expectations of future short-term interest rates. LSAPs, in contrast, most directly affect term premiums. As the Federal Reserve buys a larger share of the outstanding stock of longer-term securities, the quantity of these securities available for private-sector portfolios declines. As the securities purchased by the Fed become scarcer, they should become more valuable. Consequently, their yields should fall as investors demand a smaller term premium for holding them. This argument depends importantly on the assumption that the longer-term Treasury and MBS securities that the Fed buys are not perfectly substitutable with other types of assets, an assumption that seems well supported in practice.12 As both forward rate guidance and LSAPs affect longer-term interest rates, the use of these tools allows monetary policy to be effective even when short-term interest rates are close to zero. However, the Committee does not view these two tools as entirely equivalent. One reason is that we have much less experience with policies designed to operate on term premiums, as LSAPs do. As a result, though a strong majority of FOMC members believes that both the forward rate guidance and the LSAPs are helping to support the recovery, we are somewhat less certain about the magnitudes of the effects on financial conditions and the economy of changes in the pace of purchases or in the accumulated stock of assets on the Fed's balance sheet. Moreover, economists do not have as good an understanding as we would like of the factors determining term premiums; indeed, as we saw earlier this year, hard-to-predict shifts in term premiums can be a source of significant volatility in interest rates and financial conditions. LSAPs have other drawbacks not associated with forward rate guidance, including the risk of impairing the functioning of securities markets and the extra complexities for the Fed of operating with a much larger balance sheet, although I see both of these issues as manageable.13In deciding to employ LSAPs, the FOMC has accordingly remained attentive to the possible costs and risks as well as to the efficacy of this less familiar tool, a point the Committee has regularly noted in its post-meeting statements. Of course, elevated unemployment, below-target inflation, lingering economic fragility, and the harmful effects of long-term unemployment on our society and economic potential also pose significant costs and risks, and the Committee has, thus far, judged that the balance favors the use of LSAPs. Between November 2008 and June 2012, the FOMC announced or extended a series of asset purchase programs, in each case specifying the expected quantities of assets to be acquired under the program. Like the use of date-based forward guidance, announcing a program of predetermined size and duration has advantages and disadvantages. On the one hand, a fixed program size is straightforward to communicate; on the other hand, a program of fixed size cannot so easily adapt to changes in the economic outlook and the consequent changes in the need for policy accommodation. In announcing its fixed-size programs, the FOMC did state a general willingness to do more if needed--and, indeed, it has followed through on that promise‑‑but such statements left considerable uncertainty regarding the conditions that might warrant changes in an existing program or the introduction of a new one. In a step roughly analogous to the shift from date-based guidance to the contingent, thresholds-based guidance now in use for the federal funds rate target, in September 2012 the FOMC announced a program of asset purchases in which the total size of the purchase program would not be fixed in advance but instead would be linked to the Committee's economic objectives. In particular, the Committee initiated purchases of agency MBS at the rate of $40 billion per month and stated its intention to continue purchases until the outlook for the labor market improved substantially in a context of price stability.14In December 2012, when a program to extend the maturity of the Fed's portfolio of Treasury securities came to an end, the FOMC added purchases of $45 billion per month in longer-term Treasury securities to the new program, bringing the monthly purchase rate to $85 billion, where it remains today. As I noted, the Committee set a criterion of substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market as the condition for ending the new purchase program. The Committee also signaled its expectation that it would end the purchases and return to an emphasis on rates policy and forward guidance before it had fully attained its dual mandate objectives, stating that "the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens."15The reason for this sequencing choice, again, was the greater uncertainty about the costs and efficacy of LSAPs, relative to the more familiar tool of managing the current short-term interest rate and, through forward guidance, expectations of future short-term interest rates. Moreover, to the extent that the use of LSAPs engenders additional costs and risks, one might expect the tradeoff between the efficacy and costs of this tool to become less favorable as the Federal Reserve's balance sheet expands. Having seen progress in the labor market since the beginning of the latest asset purchase program in September 2012, the Committee agreed in June of this year to provide more-comprehensive guidance about the criteria that would inform future decisions about the program. Consequently, in my press conference following the June FOMC meeting, I presented a framework linking the program more explicitly to the evolution of the FOMC's economic outlook. In particular, I noted the Committee's expectation at the time that improvements in the job market would continue, supported by a moderate pickup in growth that would support those gains. The Committee additionally expected that inflation would be moving back toward its 2 percent objective over time. If the incoming data were broadly consistent with that outlook, the Committee would likely begin measured reductions in the pace of asset purchases later in 2013. If the economy evolved as anticipated, the end of purchases would occur around midyear 2014. I also emphasized that the path of purchases would depend on incoming data and could be slower or faster than envisioned in the modal scenario--indeed, I noted that the pace of purchases could be increased for a time, if warranted. The framework I discussed in June implied that substantial additional asset purchases over the subsequent quarters were likely, with even more purchases possible if economic developments proved disappointing. However, following the June meeting and press conference, market yields moved sharply higher. For example, between the FOMC meetings of June and September, the 10-year Treasury yield rose about 3/4 percentage point and rates on MBS increased by a similar amount. Financial market movements are often difficult to account for, even after the fact, but three main reasons seem to explain the rise in interest rates over the summer. First, improvements in the economic outlook warranted somewhat higher yields--a natural and healthy development. Second, some of the rise in rates reportedly reflected an unwinding of levered positions--positions that appear to have been premised on an essentially indefinite continuation of asset purchases--together with some knock-on liquidations of other positions in response to investor losses and the rise in volatility. Although it brought with it some tightening of financial conditions, this unwinding and the associated rise in term premiums may have had the benefit of reducing future risks to financial stability and, in particular, of lowering the probability of an even sharper market correction at some later point. Third, market participants may have taken the communication in June as indicating a general lessening of the Committee's commitment to maintain a highly accommodative stance of policy in pursuit of its objectives. In particular, it appeared that the FOMC's forward guidance for the federal funds rate had become less effective after June, with market participants pulling forward the time at which they expected the Committee to start raising rates, in a manner inconsistent with the guidance.16 To the extent that this third factor--a perceived reduction in the Fed's commitment to meeting its objectives--contributed to the increase in yields, it was neither welcome nor warranted, in the judgment of the FOMC. This change in expectations did not correspond to any actual lessening in the FOMC's commitment or intention to provide the high degree of monetary accommodation needed to meet its objectives, as Committee participants emphasized in subsequent communications. At its September 2013 meeting, the FOMC applied the framework communicated in June. The Committee's decision at that meeting to maintain the pace of asset purchases was appropriate and fully consistent with the earlier guidance. The Committee was looking for evidence that job market gains would continue, supported by a pickup in growth. As it happened, the implications for the outlook of the evidence reviewed at the September meeting were mixed at best, while the ongoing fiscal debates posed additional risks. The Committee accordingly elected to await further evidence supporting its expectation of continued improvement in the labor market.17Although the FOMC's decision came as a surprise to some market participants, it appears to have strengthened the credibility of the Committee's forward rate guidance; in particular, following the decision, longer-term rates fell and expectations of short-term rates derived from financial market prices showed, and continue to show, a pattern more consistent with the guidance. In coming meetings, in evaluating the outlook for the labor market, we will continue to consider both the cumulative progress since September 2012 and the prospect for continued gains. We have seen meaningful improvement in the labor market since the latest asset purchase program was announced in September 2012. At the time, the latest reading on the unemployment rate was 8.1 percent, and both we and most private-sector economists were projecting only slow reductions in unemployment in the coming quarters. Recent reports on payroll employment had also been somewhat disappointing. However, since the program was announced, the unemployment rate has fallen 0.8 percentage point, and about 2.6 million payroll jobs have been added. Looking forward, we will of course continue to monitor the incoming data. As reflected in the latest Summary of Economic Projections and the October FOMC statement, the FOMC still expects that labor market conditions will continue to improve and that inflation will move toward the 2 percent objective over the medium term. If these views are supported by incoming information, the FOMC will likely begin to moderate the pace of purchases. However, asset purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee's decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the Committee's economic outlook. As before, the Committee will also continue to take into account its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of the program. When, ultimately, asset purchases do slow, it will likely be because the economy has progressed sufficiently for the Committee to rely more heavily on its rate policies, the associated forward guidance, and its substantial continued holdings of securities to maintain progress toward maximum employment and to achieve price stability.18In particular, the target for the federal funds rate is likely to remain near zero for a considerable time after the asset purchases end, perhaps well after the unemployment threshold is crossed and at least until the preponderance of the data supports the beginning of the removal of policy accommodation. ConclusionI began my time as Chairman with the goal of increasing the transparency of the Federal Reserve, and of monetary policy in particular. In response to a financial crisis and a deep recession, the Fed's monetary policy communications have proved far more important and have evolved in different ways than I would have envisioned eight years ago. The economy has made significant progress since the depths of the recession. However, we are still far from where we would like to be, and, consequently, it may be some time before monetary policy returns to more normal settings. I agree with the sentiment, expressed by my colleague Janet Yellen at her testimony last week, that the surest path to a more normal approach to monetary policy is to do all we can today to promote a more robust recovery.19The FOMC remains committed to maintaining highly accommodative policies for as long as they are needed. Communication about policy is likely to remain a central element of the Federal Reserve's efforts to achieve its policy goals. ReferencesBernanke, Ben S. (2012). "Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008). "FOMC Statement and Board Approval of Discount Rate Requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and San Francisco," press release, December 16. ------ (2009). "FOMC Statement," press release, March 18. ------ (2011). "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9. ------ (2012a). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 25. ------ (2012b). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 13. ------ (2012c). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 12. ------ (2013a). "Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee Release Economic Projections from the September 17-18 FOMC Meeting," press release, September 18. ------ (2013b). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 18. ------ (2013c).Transcript of Chairman Bernanke's Press Conference(PDF), transcript, June 19. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012). "Macroeconomic Effects of FOMC Forward Guidance,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 43 (Spring), pp. 1-54. Carpenter, Seth B., Jane E. Ihrig, Elizabeth C. Klee, Daniel W. Quinn, and Alexander H. Boote (2013). "The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-01. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, pp. 139-211. Femia, Katherine, Steven Friedman, and Brian Sack (2013). "The Effects of Policy Guidance on Perceptions of the Fed's Reaction Function," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 652. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, November. Friedman, Milton (2000). "Canada and Flexible Exchange Rates (PDF)," speech delivered at "Revisiting the Case for Flexible Exchange Rates," a conference sponsored by the Bank of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, November. Posen, Adam (2012). "Comments on ‘Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound' by Michael Woodford (PDF)," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. Raskin, Matthew D. (2013). "The Effects of the Federal Reserve's Date-Based Forward Guidance," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-37. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936‑66. Swanson, Eric T. and John C. Williams (2013). "Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2012-02. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, January. Tobin, James (1965). "The Monetary Interpretation of History,"American Economic Review, vol. 55 (June), pp. 464-85. ------ (1969). "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 1 (February), pp. 15-29. Yellen, Janet (2013). "Confirmation Hearing," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C., November 14. 1. To be clear, although monetary policy has limited influence on the level of employment that can be sustained in the longer run, it can be used to help eliminate gaps between the current level of employment and its sustainable level--as policy is doing today.Return to text 2. The January 2013 statement is available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf.Return to text 3. The central tendency of the projections for the longer-run normal unemployment rate (which drops the three highest and three lowest values submitted by FOMC participants) was 5.2 to 5.8 percent in September. For the most recent FOMC projections, seewww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20130918ep.htmon the Board's website.Return to text 4. See, for example, Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Reifschneider and Williams (2000).Return to text 5. See Board of Governors (2008, 2009).Return to text 6. See Board of Governors (2011).Return to text 7. Evidence that this is the case has been provided by Campbell, Evans, Fisher, and Justiniano (2012), Swanson and Williams (2013), Raskin (2013), and by a recent study of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's survey of primary dealers (Femia, Friedman, and Sack, 2013).Return to text 8. See Board of Governors (2012a, b).Return to text 9. See Board of Governors (2012c).Return to text 10. See Board of Governors (2012c). Specifically, the guidance says that the Committee anticipates that its 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. The FOMC asserted in its statement that it viewed the new thresholds to be consistent with the earlier, date-based guidance. Femia, Friedman, and Sack (2013) present evidence that respondents to the survey of primary dealers largely shared this assessment.Return to text 11. An advantage of the state-contingent formulation is that it increases the tendency of financial market conditions to act as an automatic stabilizer for the economy. For example, bad news about the labor market, which tends to lengthen the amount of time the public expects to be required for the unemployment rate to reach the threshold, should likewise increase the length of time that the public expects policy to remain highly accommodative. In response to this shift in policy expectations, interest rates should fall and asset prices should rise, thus easing financial conditions and helping to offset the adverse change to the outlook.Return to text 12. I discussed this effect more fully in Bernanke (2012). As I noted then, both Milton Friedman (2000) and James Tobin (1965, 1969) made this argument. LSAPs may affect financial conditions through other channels as well; see Bernanke (2012) for a more complete discussion. One such channel is a "signaling channel," which works to the extent that the direct action of buying securities increases the credibility of communication tools like forward rate guidance (Posen, 2012).Return to text 13. An additional concern that some have raised about the Federal Reserve's expanded balance sheet is the possibility that financial conditions could evolve in a way that significantly reduces the Fed's net interest income on its portfolio for a time, which in turn could lead to a period during which the Fed is not remitting income to the Treasury; see Carpenter and others (2013) for an analysis. Such a situation, though unlikely, could have reputational costs and possibly increase risks to the Federal Reserve's independence. Although these costs must be taken into account, careful analysis suggests that, in fact, LSAPs almost certainly will result in improved government finances: First, even if a period of no payments to the Treasury occurs, it is highly likely that the payments over the period of unconventional monetary policy will be significantly higher than they would have been without LSAPs; indeed, since 2009, the Fed has remitted more than $350 billion to the Treasury, about the same total as it remitted during the 18 years prior to the crisis (1990-2007 inclusive). Second, a complete accounting of the fiscal effects of LSAPs should take into account the beneficial effects of a stronger economy on tax receipts, interest payments, and government spending; the reduction in the budget deficit from these sources will certainly outweigh the effects on the deficit of any changes in the pace of Fed payments. Finally, while fiscal effects are important, the full effect of the FOMC's policies also includes important additional benefits of increased economic growth and employment and of greater price stability.Return to text 14. This criterion was expressed in slightly different ways in the FOMC statements between September 2012 and January 2013. Since March 2013, the statement has included the sentence, "The Committee will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability." FOMC statements are available atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 15. See Board of Governors (2012c).Return to text 16. For example, the Eurodollar futures rate for mid-2015 rose about 40 basis points in the few days following the June FOMC meeting, far more than could be explained by revisions to the economic outlook.Return to text 17. See Board of Governors (2013a, b).Return to text 18. By the logic described earlier, the Fed's maintenance of a large balance sheet (by reinvesting principal paydowns and rolling over maturing securities) should continue to put downward pressure on term premiums and longer-term interest rates, even after purchases end. Also, as I noted at my June press conference, a strong majority of the Committee now expects that there will be no sales of agency MBS during the process of normalizing monetary policy, although in the longer run limited sales could be used to reduce or eliminate residual MBS holdings. See Board of Governors (2013c).Return to text 19. See Yellen (2013).Return to text
On November 18, 2013, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits with full allotment of tenders through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered 28-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.26000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on November 21, 2013, and will mature on December 19, 2013. The interest rate of 0.26000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the annual indexing of the amounts used in determining reserve requirements of depository institutions and deposit reporting panels effective in 2014. All depository institutions must hold a percentage of certain types of deposits as reserves in the form of vault cash, as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or as a deposit in a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). Depository institutions must also regularly submit reports of their deposits and other reservable liabilities. For net transaction accounts in 2014, the first $13.3 million, up from $12.4 million in 2013, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $13.3 million up to and including $89.0 million, up from $79.5 million in 2013. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts in excess of $89.0 million. These annual adjustments, known as the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment, are based on growth in net transaction accounts and total reservable liabilities, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 2012 and June 30, 2013. The new low reserve tranche and reserve requirement exemption amount will apply to the 14-day reserve maintenance period that begins January 23, 2014. For depository institutions that report deposit data weekly, this maintenance period corresponds to the 14-day computation period that begins Tuesday, December 24, 2013. For depository institutions that report deposit data quarterly, this maintenance period corresponds to the seven-day computation period that begins Tuesday, December 17, 2013. The Board also announced changes in two other amounts, the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit, that are used to determine the frequency with which depository institutions must submit deposit reports. The attached Federal Register notice contains a description of the new boundaries for deposit reporting that will be effective in 2014. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by Banco BPI, S.A., Porto, Portugal, to establish representative offices in Newark, New Jersey, and New Bedford, Massachusetts. Attached is the Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of an application under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act by Green Dot Bank DBA Bonneville Bank, Provo, Utah, to purchase certain assets and assume certain deposit liabilities of GE Capital Retail Bank, Draper, Utah. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve on Friday announced that it has not objected to a re-submitted capital plan from Ally Financial Inc. Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve objected to Ally's 2013 capital plan based on both quantitative and qualitative assessments conducted during the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. Ally was required to submit a new capital plan under the Federal Reserve's regulation. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Stress Tests and Capital Planning
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: FNB United Corp. (now known as CommunityOne Bancorp, Charlotte, North Carolina)Written Agreement dated October 21, 2010Terminated November 5, 2013 Highland Bancshares, Inc., St. Michael, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated August 20, 2010Terminated November 5, 2013 National Consumer Cooperative Bank, Washington, DCCease and Desist issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated March 15, 2010Terminated October 29, 2013 NCB Financial Corporation, Washington, DCCease and Desist issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated March 15, 2010Terminated October 29, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: North Milwaukee Bancshares, Inc. (PDF), Milwaukee, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated November 12, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Maquoketa State Bank (PDF), Maquoketa, IowaOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated November 18, 2013 Midland States Bank (PDF), Effingham, IllinoisOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated November 20, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued a final policy statement describing the processes it will use to develop scenarios for future capital planning and stress testing exercises. The policy statement will be used to develop scenarios for both annual supervisory and company-run stress tests. It describes the characteristics of the stress test scenarios and explains the procedures for formulating the scenarios. Although the policy statement is not effective until January 1, 2014, the macroeconomic scenarios released last week for the 2014 stress testing exercise are consistent with the policy statement. Also on Thursday, the Federal Reserve issued revised macroeconomic scenarios for the 2014 capital planning and stress testing program to correct a minor computational error for the projections of the five-year Treasury yield in the baseline and adverse scenarios. The severely adverse scenario was unchanged. As the Federal Reserve has previously said, the adverse and severely adverse scenarios are hypothetical scenarios and not forecasts. The baseline scenario does not represent the forecast of the Federal Reserve. For more information on the Federal Reserve's capital planning and stress testing program, go towww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/stress-tests-capital-planning.htm. Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Stress Tests and Capital Planning 2014 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF)|HTML 2014 Supervisory Scenarios (Excel)
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued the supervisory scenarios that will be used in the 2014 capital planning and stress testing program, as well as instructions to firms with timelines for submissions. The program includes the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) of 30 bank holding companies with $50 billion or more of total consolidated assets. The aim of the annual reviews is to ensure that large financial institutions have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks, and to help ensure that they have sufficient capital to continue operations throughout times of economic and financial stress. Capital is important to banking organizations, the financial system, and the economy broadly because it acts as a cushion to absorb losses and helps to ensure that losses are borne by shareholders, not taxpayers. "The capital planning and stress testing program has been an integral component of the Federal Reserve's broader supervisory and regulatory efforts to make the financial system stronger and safer since the financial crisis," Gov. Daniel K. Tarullo said. Financial institutions submitting capital plans will be evaluated to ensure they have sufficient capital to continue to lend to households and businesses even under stressful conditions. In addition, they must incorporate the transition requirements from the recently finalized Basel III capital standards into their stress tests and capital plans. CCAR includes an evaluation of institutions' plans to make capital distributions, such as dividend payments or stock repurchases. The Federal Reserve will approve capital distributions only for institutions whose capital plans it approves and who demonstrate sufficient financial strength even after making the planned capital distributions to continue operating as financial intermediaries under stressful economic and financial conditions. Eighteen bank holding companies will be participating in the CCAR for the fourth consecutive year in 2014. An additional 12 financial institutions will be participating in CCAR for the first time during this stress testing cycle. The capital planning and stress testing program led by the Federal Reserve since the financial crisis has contributed to a significant increase in capital at the largest banking organizations in the United States. The 18 bank holding companies have increased their aggregate tier 1 common capital to $836 billion in the second quarter of 2013, the period of most recent data, from $392 billion in the first quarter of 2009. The tier 1 common ratio for these firms, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, has more than doubled to a weighted average of 11.1 percent from 5.3 percent. All 30 of the companies in the CCAR in 2014 must submit their capital plans on or before January 6, 2014. As in previous years, the Federal Reserve in March will release summary results, including supervisory projections of capital ratios, losses, and revenues under stress scenarios. For the first time in 2014, the Federal Reserve will publish the results of stress tests conducted under the supervisory adverse scenario. As in prior years, results of stress tests under the severely adverse scenario will also be released. The Federal Reserve will require institutions to use the supervisory scenarios in both the stress tests conducted as part of the CCAR and in the stress tests that are part of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Some companies that are not part of CCAR, including state member bank subsidiaries of CCAR participants and some companies with between $10 billion and $50 billion in assets, also will use the supervisory scenarios for Dodd-Frank Act stress tests. The baseline, adverse, and severely adverse scenarios include 28 variables, including economic activity, unemployment, exchange rates, prices, incomes, and interest rates. To accompany the scenarios, the Federal Reserve is publishing a narrative that describes the general conditions surrounding the scenarios, changes to the scenarios from previous years, and a general description of other variables that firms may use in their stress tests. As in prior years, six bank holding companies with large trading operations will be required to factor in a global market shock as part of their scenarios. The Federal Reserve will publish the components of the global market shock soon. In addition, for the first time in 2014, eight bank holding companies with substantial trading or custodial operations will be required to incorporate a counterparty default scenario. Previous CCAR participants, also participants in 2014 Participants new to CCAR in 2014 Global market shock participants, 2014 Counterparty default participants, 2014 Ally Financial Inc. American Express Company Bank of America Corporation The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation BB&T Corporation Capital One Financial Corporation Citigroup Inc. Fifth Third Bancorp The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. JPMorgan Chase & Co. KeyCorp Morgan Stanley The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc. Regions Financial Corporation State Street Corporation SunTrust Banks, Inc. U.S. Bancorp Wells Fargo & Company BMO Financial Corp. BBVA Compass Bancshares, Inc. Comerica Inc. Discover Financial Services HSBC North America Holdings Inc. Huntington Bancshares Inc. M&T Bank Corp. Northern Trust Corp. RBS Citizens Financial Group, Inc. Santander Holdings USA, Inc. UnionBanCal Corp. Zions Bancorp Bank of America Corporation Citigroup Inc. The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. JPMorgan Chase & Co. Morgan Stanley Wells Fargo & Company Bank of America Corporation The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation Citigroup Inc. The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. JPMorgan Chase & Co. Morgan Stanley State Street Corporation Wells Fargo & Company 2014 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF)|HTML Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2014: Summary Instructions and Guidance (PDF)|HTML Stress Tests and Capital Planning For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On November 18, 2013, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits with full allotment of tenders through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer 28-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.26000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $1,250,000,000. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's April 26, 2013, release, this operation is part of ongoing small-value operations designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the operation is listed below; the operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Operation and Tender Parameters All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full at the interest rate shown above. The minimum tender amount is $10,000; the maximum amount is $1,250,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. All tenders must be submitted between the opening and closing time on the operation date. Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, summary results will be posted on the Term Deposit Facility Resource Center page of the Central Bank Central website (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html).
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday requested public comment on proposed changes to part II of the Federal Reserve Policy on Payment System Risk (PSR policy) that are designed to enhance the efficiency of the payment system. The proposed changes are largely related to the posting rules for automated clearing house (ACH) and commercial check transactions. Technology and processing improvements have enabled payment systems and depository institutions to achieve significant efficiencies since the Board first established posting rules to measure depository institutions' intraday Federal Reserve account balances. The proposed changes to the PSR policy posting rules are intended to align them with current operations and processing times and to strategically position the rules for future advancements in the speed of clearing and settlement. Specifically, the Board proposes to move the posting of ACH debit transactions processed by the Federal Reserve Banks' FedACH service overnight to 8:30 a.m. Eastern Time (ET) from 11:00 a.m. ET to align with the posting of ACH credit transactions. The Board is also proposing a set of principles for establishing future posting rules for the Reserve Banks' same-day ACH service. For commercial check transactions, the Board proposes to move the posting time for receiving most credits for deposits and debits for presentments to 8:30 a.m. ET, and to establish two other posting times at 1:00 p.m. ET and 5:30 p.m. ET. The current posting times were designed for a paper-processing environment and do not begin crediting or debiting for check transactions deposited and presented until 11:00 a.m. ET. The Board also is proposing companion amendments to Regulation J (Collection of Checks and Other Items by Federal Reserve Banks and Funds Transfers through Fedwire) to permit the Reserve Banks to obtain settlement from paying banks by as early as 8:30 a.m. ET for checks that the Reserve Banks present and to permit the Reserve Banks to require paying banks that receive presentment of checks from the Reserve Banks to make the proceeds of settlement for those checks available to the Reserve Banks as soon as 30 minutes after receipt of the checks. Comments must be submitted within 60 days from the date of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice for PSR policyHTML|PDF Federal Registernotice for Regulation JHTML|PDF Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for October 7 and October 28, 2013. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on October 29-30, 2013 and of the conference call held on October 16, 2013. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 29-30, 2013:HTML|PDF
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Clearing House 2013 Annual Meeting, New York, New York The financial crisis revealed important weaknesses in many areas of our financial system. In response, governments around the world have undertaken a variety of far-reaching regulatory reforms that, I would argue, can be grouped into three categories: those intended to strengthen institutions; those aimed at strengthening financial markets; and those that take steps to reinforce and, in some cases, build new market infrastructures. The reform effort seeks to address each of these areas in a comprehensive manner that recognizes the interplay among them. For instance, enhanced capital and liquidity regulations will strengthen the ability of financial institutions to withstand both credit losses and liquidity shocks. Stronger financial institutions, along with enhanced risk management and supervision, will strengthen market infrastructures. And new rules to improve the functioning of markets, such as those that require greater transparency of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets through trade repositories and swap execution facilities, will strengthen financial institutions and infrastructures alike. Moreover, greater post-trade transparency will improve competition and make it easier for market participants to make informed choices about which OTC derivatives are best suited to their needs. Today I will focus on the third aspect of this effort--reforms intended to strengthen financial market infrastructures. Specifically, I will look at measures to improve the clearing of OTC derivatives through the expanded use of central counterparties (CCPs) and the introduction of margin requirements for those OTC derivatives that remain bilateral. In the United States, several agencies are working together to implement these reforms. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) are responsible for establishing the regulatory regime for and supervising CCPs as well as determining which swaps must be centrally cleared. The Federal Reserve and six other agencies are responsible for establishing margin requirements for derivatives that are not cleared through a CCP.1The Federal Reserve shares with the other members of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) an interest in CCP regulation and central clearing from a broader financial stability perspective. The Fed also plays a role in supervising financial market utilities that are designated as systemically important under Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank). The financial crisis involved significant failures in the functioning, regulation, and supervision of OTC derivatives markets. These failures were well illustrated by the widespread and destabilizing effects of large losses by American International Group (AIG) on its OTC structured finance and credit derivative positions. In the absence of government intervention, AIG's failure would have exposed its counterparties to significant losses at a time of widespread financial stress. Further, the lack of transparency in OTC derivatives markets at that time led to a wave of uncertainty about who was exposed to AIG and the extent of that exposure. This fundamental lack of information fueled concerns about potential losses and drove a cycle of escalating pressure on large financial institutions around the globe. Government intervention was deemed necessary to stop this cycle and contain the threat to the financial system. AIG's failure revealed systemic problems in the OTC derivatives market that went well beyond the failure of a single market participant. The Group of Twenty governments responded by committing that all standardized derivatives would be moved to central clearing and that derivatives that are not centrally cleared would be subject to margin requirements.2Progress has been made on both of these fronts. Since credit default swaps clearing was introduced in 2009, the notional value of cleared credit derivatives has grown to more than $6 trillion. The notional value of interest rate swaps that are centrally cleared has more than doubled since 2009 and now stands at more than $400 trillion.3These amounts will surely increase further in the coming years. And international standards on margin requirements for derivatives that are not centrally cleared have recently been finalized.4I would like to briefly discuss how these reform efforts are intended to reduce systemic risks and offer my views on how to ensure that they are effectively implemented. The Enhanced Role of Central Counterparties in OTC Derivatives MarketsBy design, central clearing offers important advantages over a bilateral market structure in which no participant can know the full extent of its counterparties' risk exposures. The hub-and-spoke structure of central clearing enables the netting of gains and losses across multiple market participants, which has the potential to significantly reduce each participant's aggregate counterparty risk exposure. Central clearing can also improve transparency, which is important in reducing incentives for market participants to pull away from other institutions in times of stress. Rather than trying to assess its exposure to all of its trading partners, a market participant would need to manage only its exposure to the central counterparty. And CCPs can also reduce risk by imposing more effective risk controls on clearing members. Since their origins in the 19th century, CCPs have evolved significantly, and that evolution has allowed them to survive and continue functioning through many crises, including the most recent one.5 Of course, the other side of this coin is that concentrating risk in a central counterparty could create a single point of failure for the entire system. Given their heightened prominence in the financial infrastructure, if CCPs are to mitigate systemic risks they must hold themselves to--and be held to--the highest standards of risk management. In many respects, CCPs are the collective reflection of the financial institutions that are their members and the markets that they support. The credit and liquidity risks borne by a CCP arise from the clearing activities of its members. Those risks materialize when a clearing member defaults. Most of the financial resources to cover risk exposures will come from a CCP's members. And a member's default will require the CCP to work with surviving members in the context of prevailing market conditions. CCPs play a critical role in ensuring a robust risk management regime that fully takes account of this interplay among markets, institutions, and infrastructure. Regulators, clearing members, and their clients also must be engaged in making sure CCPs are safe and effective at managing the risks, interactions, and interdependencies inherent in the clearing process. I will now turn to some key aspects of the regulatory framework for CCPs that will strengthen the financial system and help reduce systemic risk. Three Keys to Ensuring Central Counterparties Are Effective in Mitigating Systemic RisksThere are three key dimensions to making the reform program work in practice: enhancing supervision and regulation of CCPs, strengthening CCP risk management and governance, and promoting the stability of clearing members. Enhancing Central Counterparty Supervision and RegulationThe decision to require central clearing of standardized derivatives as a foundation for reform has raised the stakes for CCPs, clearing members, regulators, and the general public. At the international level, financial regulatory authorities addressed this challenge by updating, harmonizing, and strengthening the minimum risk management standards applied to financial market infrastructures, including CCPs. The new Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures, commonly referred to as the PFMIs, set a higher bar for risk management to strengthen these core market infrastructures and promote financial stability.6Just last week, the CFTC finalized its adoption of the PFMIs for the derivatives clearing organizations it regulates and supervises.7 The PFMIs require that a CCP develop strategies to cover its losses and continue operating in a time of widespread financial stress. In particular, the PFMIs require that a CCP maintain financial resources sufficient to cover its current and potential future exposures to each participant fully with a high degree of confidence. CCPs must maintain additional resources to cover the failure of the clearing member with the largest exposure under extreme but plausible market conditions. In the case of CCPs with more complex risk profiles or those that are systemically important in multiple jurisdictions, the CCP must have adequate resources to handle the failure of the two clearing members with the largest exposures. Finally, the PFMIs require a CCP to identify scenarios that may potentially prevent it from being able to continue operations, including so-called end-of-default waterfall issues, and develop detailed plans for recovery or orderly wind-down. Regulators and industry groups are working to establish minimum expectations for CCP transparency of both qualitative and quantitative information that will allow key stakeholders to assess a CCP's risk management.8 This international strategy for strengthening CCPs has been complemented by several domestic initiatives to introduce regulatory frameworks for OTC derivatives and to enhance supervision of systemically important CCPs. The two most notable developments are the passage of the European Market Infrastructure Regulation and Dodd-Frank, notably titles VII and VIII. Both laws establish a framework for reporting, regulating, and clearing OTC derivatives transactions; call for international coordination; and emphasize enhanced risk management standards for CCPs. Differences of implementation have emerged, however, and it will be important to engage with other governments to ensure that such differences do not lead to regulatory arbitrage or weakened standards. Central Counterparty Risk Management and GovernanceThe two primary risks facing a CCP are credit risk (the potential for the CCP to incur losses after it closes out a defaulter's positions) and liquidity risk (the possibility that a CCP will not have sufficient cash on hand to meet its payment obligations in a timely manner). While credit risk and liquidity risk are interrelated, they are also distinct and need to be measured and managed separately. To promote sound credit risk management, the PFMIs require that a CCP collect variation margin from its members to limit the buildup of current exposures. In addition, CCPs must also calculate and collect initial margin sufficient to cover potential changes in the value of each participant's position between the last collection of variation margin and the final closeout of a participant's position should it default to the CCP. This process involves modeling potential price movements with an appropriate confidence threshold, determining the closeout period in the event the participant defaults, and numerous other factors. Given the complexity of this modeling, it is important that CCPs rigorously back-test and stress-test the adequacy of their margin models under a wide range of extreme yet plausible scenarios. More broadly, a CCP should test the sufficiency of its total financial resources--initial margin, default funds and capital--to cover potential credit losses, taking into account evolving market volatility and liquidity conditions. An important lesson from the financial crisis is that liquidity is extremely important in ensuring ongoing viability and resilience during a period of financial stress. No amount of resources can guarantee that a CCP will be able to meet its payment and settlement obligations, unless those resources can be converted to cash with certainty and within a very short time frame. CCP liquidity is especially important, since a failure to meet required payment obligations could undermine market confidence at precisely the moment when it is most fragile and trigger run-like behavior as financial institutions seek to reduce their exposure to the CCP and its members. To measure and manage its liquidity risks, the PFMIs require a CCP to have effective methodologies to estimate its funding exposures under a variety of stressed conditions, to identify available cash resources, and to establish mechanisms for converting its noncash collateral to cash. The need to assure adequate liquidity presents a number of challenges. CCPs will need to mobilize cash within a matter of hours on the day of a large clearing member's default. Cash balances on deposit at a bank can be quickly accessed, but CCPs often put their cash resources in overnight investments to earn a return. The nature and mechanics of such investments, as well as prevailing market conditions, can critically affect the ability of a CCP to unwind those investments quickly enough to meet its cash needs. A similar challenge will arise with the need to convert noncash collateral, such as initial margin collateral, to cash. The PFMIs require CCPs to have in place prearranged and highly reliable funding sources to address this need. Managing credit and liquidity risks requires effective governance. One important aspect of CCP governance is a commitment to transparency. Clearing members bear primary responsibility for understanding the risks associated with participating in a CCP, including their potential exposures in the event of a default. This will require the CCP to provide relevant and even firm-specific information to facilitate the members' analysis. Clearing members and their clients, regulators, and the broader public require transparency so that they can assess the adequacy of a CCP's risk management and its overall risk profile. Promoting the Stability of Central Counterparty MembersSo far, I have focused on CCPs. Now I would like to turn to the critical role played by clearing members of those CCPs. A CCP ultimately draws its strength and resilience from that of its members. And it is not a one-way street, since strong CCPs enable clearing members and their clients to significantly reduce their exposure to counterparty credit risk. Effective risk management by both a CCP and its clearing members need to work in concert. As a general matter, enhanced capital and liquidity requirements have substantially improved the overall risk position of the banks that constitute many of the major clearing members. For example, Tier 1 common equity capital ratios at the largest U.S. banks have nearly doubled since 2007.9In addition, new requirements address the specific interactions that banks have with CCPs and derivatives markets in order to promote both the use of central clearing and strong CCP risk management. Under Basel III, capital requirements for bank exposures to a CCP are sensitive to the risk management standards applied by the CCP. These requirements acknowledge that CCPs that adhere to the PFMIs present lower risks to their members. Exposures to such qualifying CCPs require less capital.10The capital rules also recognize that a CCP requiring more initial margin from its members exposes those members to less default risk, and therefore require less capital. On the liquidity front, the recently proposed liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) recognizes the liquidity-intensive nature of derivatives transactions. Under the LCR, a bank is required to maintain high-quality liquid assets that are sufficient to withstand an extreme yet plausible margin call from its derivatives counterparties.11Importantly, the liquidity requirement depends on the member's net derivatives position with the CCP--if the position is hedged, the liquidity requirement will be appropriately attenuated. Ensuring the Stability of OTC Derivatives Markets That Are Not Centrally Cleared: Margin Requirements for Noncleared DerivativesWhile central clearing is important and is expected to increase substantially over time, a significant portion of nonstandardized, bespoke derivatives will never be suitable for central clearing. This bilaterally cleared part of the market was a principal source of systemic risk during the crisis. For noncentrally cleared derivatives, margin requirements will serve as the main tool to mitigate systemic risks. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee) and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) have recently finalized a framework for margin requirements on noncentrally cleared derivatives that provides for harmonized rules and a level playing field, which is important given the global nature of derivatives markets. Regulatory authorities in participating countries are now in the process of developing margin rules for noncleared derivatives in light of the international framework. The framework requires both financial firms and systemically important nonfinancial firms that trade derivatives to collect both variation margin and initial margin, as is the case for centrally cleared derivatives. The initial margin requirements represent a significant change to existing market practice and will undoubtedly impose some costs on market participants. As originally proposed, the new framework would have required most market participants to collect initial margin from the first dollar of exposure. The International Swap Dealers Association estimated that roughly an additional $1.7 trillion in initial margin would have been required globally.12In light of this concern, the framework was released for public consultation on two separate occasions and the Basel Committee and IOSCO conducted a detailed impact study to determine the potential liquidity costs of the new requirements.13 The final version of the framework addressed these concerns by allowing firms to begin collecting initial margin only as potential future credit exposures rise above $65 million for a particular counterparty. According to the impact study, this revision reduced the estimated global liquidity requirement from roughly $2.3 trillion to $900 billion.14The result is a margin regime that will protect the financial system from the largest and most systemic exposures while also reducing overall liquidity costs and providing relief to smaller derivatives market participants. It should also be noted that these margin requirements are new to the market and their effects cannot be fully understood before they become effective. There is simply no substitute for experience. Accordingly, the Basel Committee and IOSCO have established a monitoring group that will evaluate the effects of the margin requirements. The evaluation will focus on the consistency of the margin standards with related regulatory initiatives such as the implementation of the LCR and potential minimum haircuts on repurchase transactions. Based on the findings of this monitoring group, the Basel Committee and IOSCO will jointly determine whether any modifications to the margin requirements are necessary or appropriate. In this way, regulators are taking an experience-based approach to managing systemic risk that looks across the combined effect of a number of related regulatory initiatives. ConclusionThe financial crisis revealed significant flaws in the structure of the OTC derivatives markets that are now being addressed as part of a worldwide reform effort. Increased central clearing and margins for noncleared derivatives are foundational elements of the program. Together, these reforms can help create a system in which the OTC derivatives market infrastructure acts as a pillar of strength in the next crisis. To achieve this goal, it is imperative that international standards such as the PFMIs and the margining framework for noncentrally cleared derivatives be forcefully and consistently implemented across the globe. Implementation of the new framework will present some real-world challenges. National rules still need to be written, including rules for margin requirements on noncentrally cleared derivatives. These national rules will need to deal with local legal regimes and markets, yet also be internationally consistent to ensure a level playing field. More broadly, international cooperation will be needed to ensure that the new framework works in practice. 1. In addition to the Federal Reserve, the CFTC, FDIC, FHFA, FCA, OCC and SEC are responsible for establishing margin requirements on derivatives that are not cleared through a CCP.Return to text 2. See Group of Twenty (2009), "The G20 Pittsburgh Summit Leaders' Statement (PDF)," item 13 under "Strengthening the International Financial Regulatory System" (Pittsburgh, PA: G-20, September); and Group of Twenty (2011), "Cannes Summit Final Declaration--Building Our Common Future: Renewed Collective Action for the Benefit of All," item 24 under "Meeting Our Commitments Notably on Banks, OTC Derivatives, Compensation Practices and Credit Rating Agencies, and Intensifying Our Monitoring to Track Deficiencies (DOC)" (Cannes, France: G-20, November).Return to text 3. Interest rate derivatives cleared volumes reflect notional amounts as of November 8, 2013, reported for LCH.Clearnet's SwapClear service. Credit default swap cleared volumes reflect notional amounts as of November 8, 2013, reported by the Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation's Trade Information Warehouse.Return to text 4. See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2013),Margin Requirements for Non-Centrally Cleared Derivatives, report (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, September).Return to text 5. See Ben S. Bernanke (2011), "Clearinghouses, Financial Stability, and Financial Reform," speech delivered at the "2011 Financial Markets Conference: Navigating the New Financial Landscape," sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, held in Stone Mountain, Ga., April 4-6.Return to text 6. See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012),Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures, report (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, April).Return to text 7. SeeDerivatives Clearing Organizations and International Standards (PDF)., 17 C.F.R. pts. 39, 140, and 190 (2013).Return to text 8. See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012), "Disclosure Framework and Assessment Methodology for Their Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures Issued by CPSS-IOSCO," press release, December 14; Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2013),Public Quantitative Disclosure Standards for Central Counterparties: Consultative Report, report (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, October); and Payments Risk Committee (2013),Recommendations for Supporting Clearing Member Due Diligence of Central Counterparties(PDF), report (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February).Return to text 9. The Tier 1 common equity ratio for the 18 largest bank holding companies increased from 5.9 percent in December of 2007 to 11.3 percent in September of 2013. For more information, see the FR Y-9C "Consolidated Financial Statements for Holding Companies (PDF)" reporting form.Return to text 10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Federal Reserve Board Approves Final Rule to Help Ensure Banks Maintain Strong Capital Positions," press release, July 2.Return to text 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Federal Reserve Board Proposes Rule to Strengthen Liquidity Positions of Large Financial Institutions," press release, October 24.Return to text 12. Documents on initial margin requirements are available on the International Swap Dealers Associationwebsite.Return to text 13. See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2013),Margin Requirements for Non-Centrally Cleared Derivatives: Second Consultative Document, report (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, February).Return to text 14. The Basel Committee-IOSCO impact study reports all results in terms of euros. The results above have been converted to U.S. dollar amounts by multiplying by the euro-dollar exchange rate of 1 euro=1.35 dollars as of November 15, 2013.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Americans for Financial Reform and Economic Policy Institute Conference, Washington, D.C. As illustrated, quite literally, by a chart that New York Fed staff produced a few years ago, the term "shadow banking system" encompasses a wide variety of institutions that engage in credit intermediation and maturity transformation outside the insured depository system.1In my remarks today, I want to concentrate on short-term wholesale funding and, especially, the pre-crisis explosion in the creation of assets that were thought to be "cash equivalents." Such assets were held by a range of highly risk-averse investors, who were in many cases not fully cognizant that the "cash equivalents" in their portfolios were liabilities of shadow banks--the institutions depicted in the memorable graphic. In some cases, the perception of claims on shadow banks as cash equivalents was based on explicit or implicit promises by regulated institutions to provide liquidity and credit support to such entities. In other cases, the perception came about because market participants viewed the instruments held on the balance sheets of shadow banking entities--notably highly rated, asset-backed securities--as liquid and safe. While reliance on private mechanisms to create seemingly riskless assets was sustainable in relatively calm years, the stress that marked the onset of the financial crisis reminded investors that claims on the shadow banking system could pose far more risk than deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Once reminded of their potential exposure, investors engaged in broad-based and sometimes disorderly flight from the shadow banking system. This experience of the run on the shadow banking system that occurred in 2007 and 2008 reminds us that similar disorderly flights of uninsured deposits from banks lay at the heart of the financial panics that afflicted the nation in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The most dramatic of these episodes were the bank runs of the early 1930s that culminated in the bank holiday in 1933. Just as it was necessary, though not sufficient, to alter the environment that led to those successive deposit runs by introducing deposit insurance in order to create a stable financial system in the early-twentieth century, today it is necessary, though not sufficient, to alter the environment that can lead to short-term wholesale funding runs in order to create a stable financial system for the early twenty-first century. As I will describe in a few moments, the Federal Reserve has taken some steps toward this end over the past few years. However, as I will also contend, completion of this task will require a more comprehensive set of measures, at least some of which must cover financial actors not subject to prudential regulatory oversight. Before turning to these points, I want to develop briefly the comparison between deposit runs of the pre-FDIC period and contemporary short-term wholesale funding runs in order better to explain the nature of the regulatory challenge. Vulnerabilities Created by Short-Term Wholesale FundingThere are notable similarities between the bank runs that periodically afflicted the U.S. banking system before the creation of federal deposit insurance and the dramatic short-term wholesale funding runs that began in 2007. Each had a cascading, self-reinforcing quality, fueled by questions concerning the solvency of borrowing entities--whether deposit-taking banks or dealers seeking credit in repo markets. And, in each case, the opaqueness of the balance sheets of the borrowing entities led lenders to fear that an institution holding assets similar to, or interconnected through counterparty relationships with, another, troubled institution might itself be in trouble. Significantly, though, in each case, at least some of the lending actors were interested not just in eventually recovering the full amount of the funds they had extended, but in having access to those funds more or less immediately. Some depositors in 1932 needed their money in order to meet the requirements of daily life, while many repo counterparties in 2008 needed their money to meet other short-term obligations. Thus the issue was not just a matter of solvency--whether the firm would ultimately be able to pay all the claims even after the run--but also a matter of the short-term liquidity of the bank or broker. The dynamic unleashed by short-term wholesale funding runs in 2007 and 2008 directly exacerbated financial stress. Many assets funded through the shadow banking system were traded assets, which could be liquidated rapidly, though often at distressed prices, to reduce the funding needs of the borrowing firms. The resulting fire sales recalled the asset liquidations by some trust companies during the Panic of 1907 and by some securities firms in the 1930s. In 2008, these fire sales created adverse feedback loops of mark-to-market losses, margin calls, and further liquidations. The unwinding of the risk illusion--that is, the assumption that lending to shadow banks was essentially risk-free--helped transform a dramatic correction in real estate valuations into a crisis that engulfed the entire economy. But for a few idiosyncratic instances since the introduction of deposit insurance in 1933, bank runs have been rendered a thing of the past. Deposits below the amount of the federal insurance cap are fully and explicitly guaranteed. Access to the Federal Reserve's discount window for depository institutions complements the deposit insurance system by helping to relieve liquidity pressures in solvent banks. In practice, failing banks usually merge into healthier ones, so that depositors do not lose access to their funds and deposits exceeding the amount of the federal insurance cap are effectively protected. In the relatively few instances of depositor payouts, the FDIC has reimbursed depositors expeditiously. Of course, the explicit and de facto extension of federal guarantees created moral hazard problems, which the safety-and-soundness regulation of insured depository institutions was strengthened to address. The similarities between deposit runs and short-term wholesale funding runs have suggested to some that the policy responses should also be similar. Those taking this position argue for providing discount window access to broker-dealers, guaranteeing certain kinds of wholesale funding, or both. Others, myself included, are wary of any such extension of the government safety net and would prefer a regulatory approach that requires market actors using or extending short-term wholesale funding to internalize the social costs of those forms of funding. Unlike deposit insurance, the savings of most U.S. households are generally not directly at risk in short-term wholesale funding arrangements. And, also unlike insured deposits, there is an argument in the short-term wholesale funding context that counterparties should be capable of providing some market discipline in at least some of the contexts in which such funding is provided. In thinking about how to regulate shadow banking, we must be mindful that it is not really a single system. It is immeasurably more complicated than the bank deposit system of either the 1930s or today. Even with the reduction in activity following the crisis, the scale of shadow banking activity remains very large. Banks and broker-dealers currently borrow about $1.6 trillion, much of this from money market funds and securities lenders, through tri-party repos, leaving aside additional funds sourced from asset managers and other investors through other channels.2The banks and broker dealers, in turn, use reverse repo to provide more than $1 trillion in financing to prime brokerage and other clients. While the volume of this activity has fallen considerably since the crisis and the haircuts and other conditions associated with current securities financing transactions are considerably more conservative than during the pre-crisis period, there is every reason to believe that the amount of this activity could increase, and the conservatism of the terms of the lending could be eroded, as economic conditions improve. Let me turn now to some of the specific vulnerabilities, steps that have been taken thus far to address these vulnerabilities, and the work that remains. Regulated Institutions and Shadow BankingWhile the term "shadow banking" implies activity outside the purview of regulatory oversight, regulated institutions are in fact heavily involved in these activities, both in funding their own operations and in extending credit and liquidity support to shadow banks beyond the regulatory perimeter. Support provided for shadow banking activities may be either explicit or implicit. In some cases, there are explicit contractual provisions for credit enhancements and liquidity support. In other cases, the support is implicit, based on a bank's historical pattern of providing support or a belief among investors that a bank will provide support to maintain the value of its franchise. In the lead-up to the crisis, explicit and implicit commitments by regulated banking firms to shadow banks often combined to create the assumption that the liabilities of such entities were risk-free. This perception led to an underpricing of the risks embedded in these money-like instruments, making them an artificially cheap source of funding and creating an oversupply of these instruments that contributed to systemic risk. Contractually committed credit and liquidity support lends itself more readily to regulation than does implicit support. Basel III reforms have strengthened the regulatory requirements for situations in which there is contractual support for shadow banking activities. For example, the Basel III capital requirements increase from 0 percent to 20 percent the credit conversion factor for commitments with an original maturity of one year or less that are not unconditionally cancellable. In addition, the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) assigns a 100 percent drawdown rate to undrawn amounts of credit and liquidity facilities extended by banks to a special purpose entity (SPE), effectively requiring a bank to hold $100 in high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) for every $100 it commits to a SPE. Implicit support presents more of a regulatory challenge. Identifying implicit forms of support requires a supervisory judgment that, despite sometimes stern warnings in offering documents, a banking organization bears some of the risk associated with that investment. Regulators must decide how much of the risk the banking organization retains and make context-sensitive judgments about the financial stability implications of various remedies. These challenges notwithstanding, regulators have made some progress in addressing instances of implicit support that played a major role in the last crisis. Let me mention two examples. The first involves the implicit support associated with the provision of intraday credit by clearing banks in the tri-party repo market. In a repurchase agreement or "repo," the cash borrower agrees to sell a security to a cash lender, and to repurchase the security from the cash lender at a later date. In a tri-party repo transaction, a clearing bank handles settlements through accounts held at that financial institution by the parties to the transaction. To allow broker-dealers who borrow in the tri-party repo market to have access to their securities for routine trading purposes, the market developed an operational feature known as the "daily unwind." Before the crisis and for some time afterwards, the clearing banks unwound all tri-party repo trades each day--even those with a significant term, which in theory represented longer-term financing commitments--returning securities to borrowers and cash to lenders. However, because the securities still required financing during the day, cash borrowers relied on uncommitted secured credit, backed by their overall portfolio of securities and provided by the clearing bank. Transactions were re-wound at the end of the day, with specific securities allocated as collateral to each lender at that time. Cash lenders in the tri-party repo market thus came to expect that the two clearing banks would always unwind their maturing trades in the morning, returning cash to their account, despite the absence of a contractual provision requiring them to do so. As a result, they grew comfortable in the belief that they held a cash-equivalent asset that was perfectly safe and liquid. But as the crisis deepened, cash lenders became aware of the fact that the clearing banks were not contractually obligated to unwind repo trades and that the dealers that were the primary borrowers in the tri-party repo market could fail, leaving lenders with collateral that they had little or no capacity to manage at a juncture when its value and liquidity was open to doubt. This resulted in several distinct episodes during the crisis when cash lenders, despite holding collateral, quickly withdrew financing from dealers perceived to be facing potential financial distress. The tri-party repo market might have suffered a full-scale run in the absence of public-sector intervention. Since the crisis, the Federal Reserve has led an effort to reduce reliance on intraday credit in the tri-party repo market. Work to date has reduced the amount of intraday credit provided by the clearing banks from 100 percent of the tri-party repo market to approximately 30 percent, and commitments by market participants suggest that this amount will fall to 10 percent by the end of next year. This operational change, in addition to enhancing the resiliency of the settlement process, should help limit the likelihood that tri-party repo lenders return to believing that lending in the tri-party repo market is a risk-free proposition. As a result, tri-party repo lenders are likely to conduct more thorough due diligence on their counterparties and exercise more care in considering the types of collateral that they will lend against than was the case before the crisis.3 The second example involves the implicit support provided by bank sponsors of certain securitization SPEs. Before the crisis, the interplay between bank capital requirements and accounting rules created a significant incentive for banks to shift assets off-balance sheet through the use of various SPEs. Under the capital requirements that applied at the time, a bank that sold assets to a conduit or other SPE it sponsored was required to hold capital only against its contractual exposure to the SPE. Yet because a bank that failed to support SPEs it sponsored might irreparably damage the value of its franchise, banks often provided credit and liquidity support in excess of contractually obligated amounts to asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) programs, credit card securitizations, and other structured finance vehicles. Recognizing this incentive, pre-crisis lenders were willing to hold commercial paper and other liabilities issued by bank-sponsored SPEs at yields only slightly higher than those on liabilities issued directly by the bank. In effect, the bank was able to hold less capital and reduce its funding costs without decreasing its economic exposure. Post-crisis reforms have reduced the opportunity for banks to exploit this regulatory arbitrage. In 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) adopted FAS 166 and 167 to modify the accounting treatment of structured finance transactions involving certain SPEs. Under the new accounting guidance, a company is required to consolidate those SPEs for which the company has the power to direct matters that most significantly impact the entity as well as the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits. Securitization sponsors have generally interpreted the new guidance as requiring a sponsor to consolidate a SPE under circumstances in which the sponsor retains loan-servicing obligations and exposure to the equity tranche of the securitization. Following the publication of FAS 166 and 167, the federal banking agencies adopted new rules requiring banking organizations to hold risk-based and leverage capital against assets of the newly consolidated SPEs.4These rules eliminated a provision in the bank capital requirements that permitted a banking organization to exclude from the calculation of its risk-weighted assets the assets of an ABCP program that the banking organization sponsored and was required to consolidate. As a result, bank sponsors of ABCP conduits and certain other securitizations must now hold levels of regulatory capital commensurate with the exposure arising from the implicit support they provide. Collateralized Borrowing Arrangements and Financial StabilityTurning now to financial stability concerns raised by short-term wholesale funding more generally, I want to focus on collateralized borrowing arrangements. These collateralized borrowing arrangements consist largely of securities financing transactions (SFTs), a term that generally refers to repo and reverse repo, securities lending and borrowing, and securities margin lending. Lenders are willing to extend credit on a secured basis because these transactions are usually short-term, over-collateralized, backed by reasonably liquid securities, subject to daily mark-to-market and re-margining requirements, and exempt from the automatic stay in insolvency proceedings. In the most common practice, a broker-dealer uses SFTs to finance either securities inventory or a back-to-back SFT loan to another financial firm (SFT matched book). The financial stability risks associated with a dealer's use of short-term SFT funding to finance its inventory are relatively straightforward. If a broker-dealer loses access to financing and is forced to sell securities at a depressed price, fire sale externalities may result because other market participants may be less able to borrow against the same securities. And if the broker-dealer fails due to runs by short-term SFT lenders, post-default fire sales by the firm's creditors or contagious runs on other financial intermediaries may ensue. Because broker-dealers generally do not internalize the externalities that arise in these cases, they may use more than the economically efficient level of short-term funding. The financial stability risks associated with SFT matched books are somewhat less obvious. Even if the outflows and inflows associated with a dealer's SFT positions are perfectly maturity-matched, reputational considerations may inhibit a dealer from reducing the amount of SFT credit that it provides its customers, exposing the dealer to considerable liquidity stress. If the dealer does reduce the amount of credit that it provides to its customers, those customers may be forced to engage in asset fire sales of their own. Particularly in situations in which the customers are highly leveraged, maturity-transforming entities that lack access to a liquidity provider of last resort may pose a significant risk of contagion. Post-crisis financial regulatory reform has taken some steps to address the financial stability risks associated with a dealer's use of short-term SFT funding to finance inventory. For example, the liquidity coverage ratio requires firms to hold a buffer of high-quality liquid assets when they use SFT liabilities that mature in less than 30 days to fund many types of securities. New risk-based capital rules have substantially increased the amount of capital that dealers are required to hold against assets in the trading book. But these reforms are limited: The LCR does not require firms to hold any liquidity buffer against SFT liabilities that mature in more than 30 days or that are backed by very liquid assets. There continues to be a need for standardized capital requirements for market risk to back up model-derived risk weights. Moreover, the current regulatory framework does not impose any meaningful regulatory charge on the financial stability risks associated with SFT matched books. The Basel III risk-based capital rules require banking organizations to hold relatively little capital against SFT assets, which are assumed to pose little microprudential risk. Because leverage requirements do not take into account the fact that SFTs are collateralized transactions, leverage requirements have the potential to impose higher charges on SFT assets. But leverage requirements have traditionally been calibrated at non-binding levels and, to the extent they do bind in the future, are unlikely to bind evenly across firms. As a result, the leverage ratio may simply cause SFT assets and liabilities to migrate to those firms with stronger leverage ratios. Similarly, the LCR and, at least at this stage of its development, the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), both assume that a firm with a perfectly matched book is in a stable position. The LCR assumes a bank can call in reverse repos and other SFT assets that mature in less than 30 days or reuse the collateral that secures those assets for purposes of its own borrowing. Thus, reverse repos and other SFT assets generally are treated as completely liquid instruments. Under the initial version of the NSFR, firms would not need to hold any stable funding against reverse repos, securities borrowing receivables, or other loans to financial entities that mature in less than one year. Again, this may be a reasonable position from a microprudential perspective, geared toward more or less normal times. But here is where we need an explicitly macroprudential perspective that forces firms to internalize the tail-event financial stability risks associated with SFT matched books. Policy OptionsThere are two kinds of policy options that can be considered, individually or together, in responding to the financial stability vulnerabilities inherent in firms with large amounts of short-term wholesale funding--whether loaned, borrowed, or both. The first would impose a regulatory charge calculated by reference to reliance on SFTs and other forms of short-term wholesale funding, whether the firm uses that funding to finance inventory or an SFT matched book. The second would directly increase the very low charges under current and pending regulatory standards attracted by SFT matched books. Among the first set of options, the idea that seems most promising is to tie capital and liquidity standards together by requiring higher levels of capital for large firms that substantially rely on short-term wholesale funding. The additional capital requirement would be calculated by reference to a definition of short-term wholesale funding, such as total liabilities minus regulatory capital, insured deposits, and obligations with a remaining maturity of greater than a specified term. There might be a kind of weighting system to take account of the specific risk characteristics of different forms of funding. The capital requirement would then be added to the Tier 1 common equity requirement already mandated by the minimum capital, capital conservation buffer, and globally systemic bank surcharge standards. However, this component of the Tier 1 common equity requirement would be calculated by reference to the liability side, rather than the asset side, of the firm's balance sheet. The rationale behind this policy option is that, while solid requirements are needed for both capital and liquidity, the relationship between the two also matters. For example, a firm with little reliance on short-term funding is less susceptible to runs and, thus, to the need for engaging in fire sales that can depress capital levels. A capital surcharge based on short-term wholesale funding usage would add an incentive to use more stable funding and, where a firm concluded that higher levels of such funding were nonetheless economically sensible, the surcharge would increase the loss absorbency of the firm. Such a requirement would be consistent with, though distinct from, the long-term debt requirement that the Federal Reserve Board will be proposing to enhance prospects for resolving large firms without taxpayer assistance. The second kind of policy option is to address head-on the macroprudential concerns arising from large matched books of securities financing transactions. A capital surcharge is in some respects an indirect response to the problem of short-term wholesale funding runs and, as earlier noted, current versions of capital and liquidity standards do not deal with matched book issues. One might choose either to increase capital charges applicable to SFT assets or to modify liquidity standards so as to require firms with large amounts of these assets to hold larger liquidity buffers or to maintain more stable funding structures. It is not clear how much appetite there may be internationally for revisiting agreements that have been completed, such as the LCR and the Basel III capital rules. However, with the NSFR still under discussion, and with the Basel Committee in the process of reconsidering the standardized banking book risk weights and capital regulations associated with traded assets, there are opportunities to pursue these options. Requirements building on any of the foregoing options would by definition be directly applicable only to firms already within the perimeter of prudential regulation. The obvious questions are whether these firms at present occupy enough of the market that standards applicable only to them would be reasonably effective in addressing systemic risk and, even if that question is answered affirmatively, whether the imposition of such standards would lead to a significant arbitrage through increased participation by those outside the regulatory perimeter. It does not seem far-fetched to think that, with time and sufficient economic incentive, the financial, technological, and regulatory barriers to the disintermediation of prudentially regulated dealers could be overcome. Indeed, there have already been reports of some hedge funds exploring the possibility of disintermediating dealers by lending cash against securities collateral to other market participants. For this reason, there is a need to supplement prudential bank regulation with a third set of policy options in the form of regulatory tools that can be applied on a market-wide basis. That is, regulation would focus on particular kinds of transactions, rather than just the nature of the firm engaging in the transactions. To date, over-the-counter derivatives reform is the primary example of a post-crisis effort at market-wide regulation.5Given that the 2007–2008 financial crisis was driven more by disruptions in the SFT markets than by disruptions in the over-the-counter derivative markets, comparable attention to SFT markets is surely needed. Over the past two years, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has been evaluating proposals for a system of haircuts and margin requirements for SFTs. In its broadest form, a system of numerical floors for SFT haircuts would require any entity that wants to borrow against any security to post a minimum amount of excess margin that would vary depending on the asset class of the collateral. Like minimum margin requirements for derivatives, numerical floors for SFT haircuts would be intended to serve as a mechanism for limiting the build up of leverage at the security level, and could mitigate the risk of procyclical margin calls. In August, the FSB released a proposal that would represent a first step in the direction of such a framework. However the FSB's proposal has some significant limitations. First, with respect to counterparty scope, the FSB's proposal would apply only to SFTs in which regulated entities provide financing to unregulated entities; the proposal would not cover SFTs between a regulated lender and a regulated borrower, between an unregulated lender and a regulated borrower, or between an unregulated lender and an unregulated borrower. Second, the proposal would apply only to lending against collateral other than sovereign obligations. And finally, with respect to calibration, the FSB's proposed numerical floors are set at relatively low levels--levels that are, for example, significantly below the haircuts that currently prevail in the tri-party repo market. An alternative to the FSB's proposal would be to apply a system of numerical floors to SFTs regardless of the identity of the parties to the transaction. Such an approach would at least partially offset the incentive that will otherwise exist to move more securities financing activity completely into the shadows. Regarding calibration, there are at least three conceptually plausible bases for setting the level of the numerical floors above the low backstop levels contemplated in the current FSB proposal. One approach would be to base the calibration of the numerical floors on current repo market haircuts. These haircuts have increased significantly compared to pre-crisis levels. Establishing numerical floors at around current levels could prevent the return of a less prudent set of practices as memories of the crisis fade. A second approach would be to set haircuts for a given asset class based on asset price volatility or haircut levels observed during times of stress or long-term periods that include times of stress. While minimum haircut levels should not be set as high as the haircuts lenders demanded at the depths of the crisis, setting numerical floors in proportion to those levels might be reasonable. A third alternative would be to set numerical floors for SFT haircuts at levels that are commensurate with the amount of capital a banking organization would need to hold against the security if it held the security in inventory. Such an approach could be viewed as an indirect way of extending bank capital requirements to the shadow banking system, and would reduce the current bank regulatory incentive to lend against a security rather than hold it directly. Finally, it is worth noting that, while a framework of universal margin requirements for SFTs could not be evaded through the disintermediation of regulated entities, it might be evaded through the use of alternative transactional structures. If margin requirements for cash SFT transactions are significantly higher than margin requirements for creating the same economic exposures using synthetic SFT transactions, a framework of minimum margins for SFTs could push market participants to rely more heavily on derivatives that are the functional equivalent of cash SFTs. Moreover, market participants might attempt to arbitrage margin floors through arrangements whereby the lender effectively lends the SFT borrower the minimum excess margin amount. These and similar issues will need to be addressed as options for minimum margins are further developed. ConclusionIf we think back to the rapid growth of the shadow banking system in the pre-crisis period, we are reminded of some glaring vulnerabilities: Large firms that could themselves be considered shadow banks and that relied on the shadow banking system for a significant proportion of their funding--a group that included the "free-standing" investment banks--were outside the perimeter of prudential regulation. The breaking of the buck by the Reserve Primary Fund following Lehman's collapse triggered a run on the shadow banking system that required unprecedented support by the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve. The process established by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for designation of systemically important non-bank firms has provided a means for ensuring that the perimeter of prudential regulation can be extended as appropriate to cover large shadow banking institutions. The proposals of the Securities and Exchange Commission on money market fund regulation are a response to continuing vulnerabilities as well as to the run in the fall of 2008. These are important initiatives that will contribute to a safer system of funding throughout the financial system. Yet the risk of contagious runs would persist even in the absence of individually systemic institutions. And with less vulnerable money market funds, other cash-rich entities could emerge as a source of inexpensive funding for the shadow banking system. Finally, as I have noted, the systemic risks associated with short-term wholesale funding in prudentially regulated institutions have not fully been countered by the important capital and liquidity standards adopted since the crisis. My purpose today has been to reinforce the point that a sounder, more stable financial system requires a more comprehensive reform agenda. 1.See Zoltan Pozsar, Tobias Adrian, Adam Ashcraft, and Hayley Boesky (2010), "Shadow Banking (PDF)," Staff Report No. 458 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July).Return to text 2.Federal Reserve Bank of New York, "Tri-Party Repo Statistics as of 10/09/2013 (PDF)," Tri-Party Statistical Data file.Return to text 3.This work is explained on thewebsiteof the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Return to text 4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2010), "Agencies Issue Final Rule for Regulatory Capital Standards Related to Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167," press release, January 21.Return to text 5.Although the Dodd-Frank Act gives the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission primary responsibility in this area, a broad range of federal financial regulators (including the Federal Reserve) is responsible for developing margin requirements for over-the-counter derivatives transactions. These requirements will limit the amount of leverage that market participants can take on through the use of derivative instruments. In addition, by requiring margin to be posted at the outset of a transaction and mark-to-market gains and losses to be continually offset through transfers of additional collateral, these requirements will help to avoid situations in which firms face margin calls only when they are most pressed for liquidity.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At A Teacher Town Hall Meeting: 100 Years of the Federal Reserve, Washington, D.C. Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Thank you for that introduction. Tonight marks the third time in just a little over three years that the Federal Reserve System has hosted a teacher town hall, and I am very pleased to have this opportunity to speak with educators, both those of you here in Washington, D.C., and those watching at Reserve Bank gatherings around the country. I look forward to your questions in a few moments. But let me begin by briefly discussing an important milestone for the Federal Reserve--its centennial--and the opportunity that this occasion affords to teach and learn about the Fed's origins, history, and role, and about how this institution has helped shape the nation's economy and financial system. President Woodrow Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act, which established the Federal Reserve System, on December 23, 1913. As the 100th anniversary of that event approaches, we have several reasons to look back at an eventful century. One important reason is to better understand what historical experience can teach us about how best to respond to current challenges. For example, as many of you know, the bold measures the Fed took in response to the recent financial crisis reflected in part its determination to avoid repeating the sorts of mistakes it made before and during the Great Depression of the 1930s. Similarly, our commitment to safeguarding price stability is reinforced by memories of the costs of high inflation during the 1970s and the Federal Reserve's subsequent restoration of price stability under Chairman Volcker during the 1980s. Beyond the insights that the study of the Federal Reserve's first 100 years offer to economists, historians, and policymakers about how the Fed can best meet its objectives today and in the future, a second reason to mark the centennial is the opportunity it affords to educate young people about the Federal Reserve and its important role in promoting a healthy economy and stable financial system. When I was an educator, I quickly came to understand that students are most motivated to learn when they can see the connection of the lesson to their own lives. The Fed and its activities, and economics in general, can seem remote from daily concerns. But as teachers, you can show students how the Federal Reserve's decisions concretely affect them and their families. The Fed's actions influence the overall strength and stability of the economy, as you know, but they also affect the cost of a mortgage, the prices of goods and services, and the health of the job market that your students are part of or will soon be entering. Economics also complements and enriches the study of history. When I took history classes in high school, we spent much of our time memorizing dates and important events--revolutions, wars, elections, the passage of laws, and so on. While I appreciated the need to be familiar with such milestones, I remember feeling that I would like to know more about the lives of ordinary people at those times, not just about kings and queens and presidents. In college and graduate school, I studied economic history and found what I was looking for. For me, economic history added critical context by zooming in on the conditions of ordinary life--how people earned their livings, what their wages would buy, the extent to which they felt economically secure, the pace of economic change that they faced. Appreciating what the lives of ordinary people were like at various times and places helped explain the larger events--the wars, revolutions, and elections--as well. By the same token, understanding history also requires an appreciation of the role of key economic institutions, including central banks like the Federal Reserve. When I was in graduate school, my teacher, Stanley Fischer, introduced me to the work of Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, which demonstrated that monetary policy can have enormous effects on how the economy performs, for good or for ill. That realization helped motivate me to specialize, in graduate school and after, in monetary economics and related fields. Similarly, for your students, it's impossible to understand the Great Depression, America's strong economic performance after World War II, or the recent financial crisis without learning about the Federal Reserve and the debates that have surrounded it. Learning about the Federal Reserve and about economics more generally will help students in their daily lives, by helping them make better financial or career decisions, for example, and by helping them become more informed citizens and voters. Learning about the Federal Reserve and its economic context will also give students a deeper understanding of history, as I noted. Yet there is one more reason why we at the Fed hope to use this centennial as an educational opportunity--to maintain and strengthen the democratic accountability and effectiveness of this institution. Traditionally, like other central banks, the Fed was reluctant to explain its policy decisions or otherwise engage with the public, partly based on a belief that this approach increased the effectiveness of monetary policy. However, this lack of openness became increasingly out of step with other institutions in our democratic society; it also reduced the effectiveness of Fed policies by inhibiting public understanding and discussion of policy goals and strategies. This approach began to change in the 1990s, when the Federal Reserve began to regularly provide more information about how it saw the economic situation and how it would respond. Increasing the Fed's transparency, openness, and accountability has been one of my top priorities as Chairman. A more open Fed, in my view, is both a more effective and more democratically legitimate institution. Indeed, the complex challenges we face as a nation are best addressed in an environment of informed public discourse, which is only possible when policy decisions are made in as transparent a way as possible. The centennial may be just an accident of the calendar, but any time is a good time to help more people learn about the Fed and what it does to enhance the economic well-being of Americans. It is often said--alas, accurately--that teaching is a thankless profession, so let me close by thanking you for what you give to your students. Our country and our economy need informed citizens who can think independently and critically. More pertinent to today's meeting, let me also thank you for your interest in teaching your students about the history and role of the Federal Reserve. As many of you have discovered, the Federal Reserve has a variety of classroom tools available through our education portal,FederalReserveEducation.org. Notably, the System's economic and financial education staff is introducing today a set of three lesson plans that examine the past 100 years of central banking. I hope they will provide practical help in your classes. Thank you for participating in today's event. I look forward to your questions and to an interesting discussion of the Federal Reserve's past, present, and future.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Fourteenth Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, Washington, D.C. I am very pleased to participate in this event in honor of Stanley Fischer. Stan was my teacher in graduate school, and he has been both a role model and a frequent adviser ever since. An expert on financial crises, Stan has written prolifically on the subject and has also served on the front lines, so to speak--notably, in his role as the first deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund during the emerging market crises of the 1990s. Stan also helped to fight hyperinflation in Israel in the 1980s and, as the governor of that nation's central bank, deftly managed monetary policy to mitigate the effects of the recent crisis on the Israeli economy. Subsequently, as Israeli housing prices ran upward, Stan became an advocate and early adopter of macroprudential policies to preserve financial stability. Stan frequently counseled his students to take a historical perspective, which is good advice in general, but particularly helpful for understanding financial crises, which have been around a very long time. Indeed, as I have noted elsewhere, I think the recent global crisis is best understood as a classic financial panic transposed into the novel institutional context of the 21st century financial system.1An appreciation of the parallels between recent and historical events greatly influenced how I and many of my colleagues around the world responded to the crisis. Besides being the fifth anniversary of the most intense phase of the recent crisis, this year also marks the centennial of the founding of the Federal Reserve.2It's particularly appropriate to recall, therefore, that the Federal Reserve was itself created in response to a severe financial panic, the Panic of 1907. This panic led to the creation of the National Monetary Commission, whose 1911 report was a major impetus to the Federal Reserve Act, signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on December 23, 1913. Because the Panic of 1907 fit the archetype of a classic financial panic in many ways, it's worth discussing its similarities and differences with the recent crisis.3 Like many other financial panics, including the most recent one, the Panic of 1907 took place while the economy was weakening; according to the National Bureau of Economic Research, a recession had begun in May 1907.4Also, as was characteristic of pre-Federal Reserve panics, money markets were tight when the panic struck in October, reflecting the strong seasonal demand for credit associated with the harvesting and shipment of crops. The immediate trigger of the panic was a failed effort by a group of speculators to corner the stock of the United Copper Company. The main perpetrators of the failed scheme, F. Augustus Heinze and C.F. Morse, had extensive connections with a number of leading financial institutions in New York City. When the news of the failed speculation broke, depositor fears about the health of those institutions led to a series of runs on banks, including a bank at which Heinze served as president. To try to restore confidence, the New York Clearinghouse, a private consortium of banks, reviewed the books of the banks under pressure, declared them solvent, and offered conditional support--one of the conditions being that Heinze and his board step down. These steps were largely successful in stopping runs on the New York banks. But even as the banks stabilized, concerns intensified about the financial health of a number of so-called trust companies--financial institutions that were less heavily regulated than national or state banks and which were not members of the Clearinghouse. As the runs on the trust companies worsened, the companies needed cash to meet the demand for withdrawals. In the absence of a central bank, New York's leading financiers, led by J.P. Morgan, considered providing liquidity. However, Morgan and his colleagues decided that they did not have sufficient information to judge the solvency of the affected institutions, so they declined to lend. Overwhelmed by a run, the Knickerbocker Trust Company failed on October 22, undermining public confidence in the remaining trust companies. To satisfy their depositors' demands for cash, the trust companies began to sell or liquidate assets, including loans made to finance stock purchases. The selloff of shares and other assets, in what today we would call a fire sale, precipitated a sharp decline in the stock market and widespread disruptions in other financial markets. Increasingly concerned, Morgan and other financiers (including the future governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Benjamin Strong) led a coordinated response that included the provision of liquidity through the Clearinghouse and the imposition of temporary limits on depositor withdrawals, including withdrawals by correspondent banks in the interior of the country. These efforts eventually calmed the panic. By then, however, the U.S. financial system had been severely disrupted, and the economy contracted through the middle of 1908. The recent crisis echoed many aspects of the 1907 panic. Like most crises, the recent episode had an identifiable trigger--in this case, the growing realization by market participants that subprime mortgages and certain other credits were seriously deficient in their underwriting and disclosures. As the economy slowed and housing prices declined, diverse financial institutions, including many of the largest and most internationally active firms, suffered credit losses that were clearly large but also hard for outsiders to assess. Pervasive uncertainty about the size and incidence of losses in turn led to sharp withdrawals of short-term funding from a wide range of institutions; these funding pressures precipitated fire sales, which contributed to sharp declines in asset prices and further losses. Institutional changes over the past century were reflected in differences in the types of funding that ran: In 1907, in the absence of deposit insurance, retail deposits were much more prone to run, whereas in 2008, most withdrawals were of uninsured wholesale funding, in the form of commercial paper, repurchase agreements, and securities lending. Interestingly, a steep decline in interbank lending, a form of wholesale funding, was important in both episodes. Also interesting is that the 1907 panic involved institutions--the trust companies--that faced relatively less regulation, which probably contributed to their rapid growth in the years leading up to the panic. In analogous fashion, in the recent crisis, much of the panic occurred outside the perimeter of traditional bank regulation, in the so-called shadow banking sector.5 The responses to the panics of 1907 and 2008 also provide instructive comparisons. In both cases, the provision of liquidity in the early stages was crucial. In 1907 the United States had no central bank, so the availability of liquidity depended on the discretion of firms and private individuals, like Morgan. In the more recent crisis, the Federal Reserve fulfilled the role of liquidity provider, consistent with the classic prescriptions of Walter Bagehot.6The Fed lent not only to banks, but, seeking to stem the panic in wholesale funding markets, it also extended its lender-of-last-resort facilities to support nonbank institutions, such as investment banks and money market funds, and key financial markets, such as those for commercial paper and asset-backed securities. In both episodes, though, liquidity provision was only the first step. Full stabilization requires the restoration of public confidence. Three basic tools for restoring confidence are temporary public or private guarantees, measures to strengthen financial institutions' balance sheets, and public disclosure of the conditions of financial firms. At least to some extent, Morgan and the New York Clearinghouse used these tools in 1907, giving assistance to troubled firms and providing assurances to the public about the conditions of individual banks. All three tools were used extensively in the recent crisis: In the United States, guarantees included the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's (FDIC) guarantees of bank debt, the Treasury Department's guarantee of money market funds, and the private guarantees offered by stronger firms that acquired weaker ones. Public and private capital injections strengthened bank balance sheets. Finally, the bank stress tests that the Federal Reserve led in the spring of 2009 and the publication of the stress-test findings helped restore confidence in the U.S. banking system. Collectively, these measures helped end the acute phase of the financial crisis, although, five years later, the economic consequences are still with us. Once the fire is out, public attention turns to the question of how to better fireproof the system. Here, the context and the responses differed between 1907 and the recent crisis. As I mentioned, following the 1907 crisis, reform efforts led to the founding of the Federal Reserve, which was charged both with helping to prevent panics and, by providing an "elastic currency," with smoothing seasonal interest rate fluctuations. In contrast, reforms since 2008 have focused on critical regulatory gaps revealed by the crisis. Notably, oversight of the shadow banking system is being strengthened through the designation, by the new Financial Stability Oversight Council, of nonbank systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) for consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve, and measures are being undertaken to address the potential instability of wholesale funding, including reforms to money market funds and the triparty repo market.7 As we try to make the financial system safer, we must inevitably confront the problem of moral hazard. The actions taken by central banks and other authorities to stabilize a panic in the short run can work against stability in the long run, if investors and firms infer from those actions that they will never bear the full consequences of excessive risk-taking. As Stan Fischer reminded us following the international crises of the late 1990s, the problem of moral hazard has no perfect solution, but steps can be taken to limit it.8First, regulatory and supervisory reforms, such as higher capital and liquidity standards or restriction on certain activities, can directly limit risk-taking. Second, through the use of appropriate carrots and sticks, regulators can enlist the private sector in monitoring risk-taking. For example, the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) process, the descendant of the bank stress tests of 2009, requires not only that large financial institutions have sufficient capital to weather extreme shocks, but also that they demonstrate that their internal risk-management systems are effective.9In addition, the results of the stress-test portion of CCAR are publicly disclosed, providing investors and analysts information they need to assess banks' financial strength. Of course, market discipline can only limit moral hazard to the extent that debt and equity holders believe that, in the event of distress, they will bear costs. In the crisis, the absence of an adequate resolution process for dealing with a failing SIFI left policymakers with only the terrible choices of a bailout or allowing a potentially destabilizing collapse. The Dodd-Frank Act, under the orderly liquidation authority in Title II, created an alternative resolution mechanism for SIFIs that takes into account both the need, for moral hazard reasons, to impose costs on the creditors of failing firms and the need to protect financial stability; the FDIC, with the cooperation of the Federal Reserve, has been hard at work fleshing out this authority.10A credible resolution mechanism for systemically important firms will be important for reducing uncertainty, enhancing market discipline, and reducing moral hazard. Our continuing challenge is to make financial crises far less likely and, if they happen, far less costly. The task is complicated by the reality that every financial panic has its own unique features that depend on a particular historical context and the details of the institutional setting. But, as Stan Fischer has done with unusual skill throughout his career, one can, by stripping away the idiosyncratic aspects of individual crises, hope to reveal the common elements. In 1907, no one had ever heard of an asset-backed security, and a single private individual could command the resources needed to bail out the banking system; and yet, fundamentally, the Panic of 1907 and the Panic of 2008 were instances of the same phenomenon, as I have discussed today. The challenge for policymakers is to identify and isolate the common factors of crises, thereby allowing us to prevent crises when possible and to respond effectively when not. 1.See Ben S. Bernanke (2012), "Some Reflections on the Crisis and the Policy Response," speech delivered at "Rethinking Finance," a conference sponsored by the Russell Sage Foundation and Century Foundation, New York, April 13. For the classic discussion of financial panics and the appropriate central bank response, see Walter Bagehot ([1873] 1897),Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market(New York: Charles Scribner's Sons).Return to text 2.Information on the centennial of the Federal Reserve System is available atwww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/centennial/about.htm.Return to text 3.The Panic of 1907 is discussed in a number of sources, including O.M.W. Sprague (1910),A History of Crises under the National Banking System (PDF),National Monetary Commission (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office), and, with a focus on its monetary consequences, Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz (1963),A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press). An accessible discussion of the episode, from which this speech draws heavily, can be found in Jon R. Moen and Ellis W. Tallman (1990), "Lessons from the Panic of 1907 (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Economic Review, May/June, pp. 2-13.Return to text 4.See Charles W. Calomiris and Gary Gorton (1991), "The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, Facts, and Bank Regulation," in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed.,Financial Markets and Financial Crises(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 109-74.Return to text 5.As discussed in Bernanke, "Some Reflections on the Crisis" (see note 1), shadow banking, as usually defined, comprises a diverse set of institutions and markets that, collectively, carry out traditional banking functions--but do so outside, or in ways only loosely linked to, the traditional system of regulated depository institutions. Examples of important components of the shadow banking system include securitization vehicles, asset-backed commercial paper conduits, money market funds, markets for repurchase agreements, investment banks, and mortgage companies.Return to text 6.See Bagehot,Lombard Street, in note 1.Return to text 7.For a more comprehensive discussion of recent changes in the regulatory framework, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), "Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, May 3.Return to text 8.See Stanley Fischer (1999), "On the Need for an International Lender of Last Resort,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 13 (Fall), pp. 85-104.Return to text 9.For example, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013),Capital Planning at Large Bank Holding Companies: Supervisory Expectations and Range of Current Practice (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, August).Return to text 10.For a more detailed discussion, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), "Toward Building a More Effective Resolution Regime: Progress and Challenges," speech delivered at "Planning for the Orderly Resolution of a Global Systemically Important Bank," a conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Washington, October 18.Return to text
Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and International Monetary Fund Conference, Chicago, Illinois Thank you. I thought I would focus my remarks today on one piece of the shadow banking system, namely the market for securities financing transactions (SFTs). In so doing, I want to call attention to the fire-sales problem associated with SFTs, and consider potential policy remedies.1I will do so in three parts. First, I will briefly discuss the welfare economics of fire sales. That is, I will try to make clear when a forced sale of an asset is not just an event that leads to prices being driven below long-run fundamental values, but also one that involves a market failure, or externality, of the sort that might justify a regulatory response. Second, I will argue that securities financing transactions are a leading example of the kind of arrangement that can give rise to such externalities, and hence are particularly deserving of policy attention. And third, I will survey some of the recently enhanced tools in our regulatory arsenal (e.g., capital, liquidity, and leverage requirements) and ask to what extent they are suited to tackling the specific externalities associated with fire sales and SFTs. To preview, a general theme is that while many of these tools are likely to be helpful in fortifying individual regulated institutions--in reducing the probability that, say, a given bank or broker-dealer will run into solvency or liquidity problems--they fall short as a comprehensive, marketwide approach to the fire-sales problem associated with SFTs. In this regard, some of what I have to say will echo a recent speech by my Board colleague Daniel Tarullo.2 The Positive and Normative Economics of Fire SalesIn a recent survey paper, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny write that: "…[A] fire sale is essentially a forced sale of an asset at a dislocated price. The asset sale is forced in the sense that the seller cannot pay creditors without selling assets….Assets sold in fire sales can trade at prices far below value in best use, causing severe losses to sellers."3Shleifer and Vishny go on to discuss the roles of investor specialization and limited arbitrage as factors that drive the magnitude of observed price discounts in fire sales, and there is, by now, a large body of empirical research that supports the importance of these factors. However, by itself, the existence of substantial price discounts in distressed sales speaks only to the positive economics of fire sales, not the normative economics, and hence is not sufficient to make a case for regulatory intervention. To see why, consider the following example: An airline buys a 737, and finances the purchase largely with collateralized borrowing. During an industry downturn, the airline finds itself in distress, and is forced to sell the 737 to avoid defaulting on its debt. Other airlines also are not faring well at this time, and are not interested in expanding their fleets. So the only two bidders for the 737 are a movie star, who plans to reconfigure it for his personal use, and a private-equity firm, which plans to lease out the plane temporarily and wait for the market to recover so the firm can resell it at a profit. In the end, the private-equity firm winds up buying the plane at half its original price. Two years later, it does indeed resell it, having earned a 60 percent return. This is clearly a fire sale in the positive-economics sense, but is there a market failure here that calls for regulation? Intuition suggests not. The airline arguably caused the fire sale by using a lot of leverage in its purchase of the 737, but it also seems to bear most of the cost, by being forced to liquidate at a large loss. The movie star and the private-equity firm are, if anything, made better off by the appearance of a buying opportunity, and there are no other innocent bystanders. So the airline's ex ante capital structure choice would seem to internalize things properly; the fire sale here is just like any other bankruptcy cost that a firm has to weigh in choosing the right mix of debt and equity. For a fire sale to have the sort of welfare effects that create a role for regulation, the reduced price in the fire sale has to hurt somebody other than the original party making the leverage decision, and this adverse impact of price has to run through something like a collateral constraint, whereby a lowered price actually reduces, rather than increases, the third party's demand for the asset.4So if hedge fund A buys an asset-backed security and finances it largely with collateralized borrowing, A's fire selling of the security will create an externality in the conventional sense only if the reduced price and impaired collateral value lower the ability of hedge funds B and C to borrow against the same security, and therefore force them to involuntarily liquidate their positions in it as well.5The market failure in this case is not simply the fact that this downward spiral causes a large price decline, it is that when hedge fund A makes its initial leverage choice, it does not take into account the potential harm--in the form of tightened financing constraints--that this may cause to hedge funds B and C.6 Another key point is that the fire-sales problem is not necessarily caused by a lack of appropriate conservatism on the part of whoever lends to hedge fund A in this example--let's call it dealer firm D. By lending on an overnight basis to A, and with an appropriate haircut, D can virtually assure itself of being able to terminate its loan and get out whole by forcing a sale of the underlying collateral. So D's interests may be very well-protected here. But precisely in the pursuit of this protection, A and D have set up a financing arrangement that serves them well, but that creates a negative spillover onto other market participants, like B and C. It follows that even if policies aimed at curbing too-big-to-fail (TBTF) problems are entirely successful in aligning D's interests with those of taxpayers, this is not sufficient to deal with fire-sales externalities. They are a fundamentally different problem, and one that arises even absent any individually systemic institutions or any TBTF issues. Fire-Sale Externalities in Securities Financing TransactionsThe preceding discussion makes clear why SFTs, such as those done via repurchase (repo) agreements, are a natural object of concern for policymakers. This market is one where a large number of borrowers finance the same securities on a short-term collateralized basis, with very high leverage--often in the range of twenty-to-one, fifty-to-one, or even higher. Hence, there is a strong potential for any one borrower's distress--and the associated downward pressure on prices--to cause a tightening of collateral or regulatory constraints on other borrowers. I won't go into much detail about the institutional aspects of SFTs and the repo market. Instead, I will just lay out two stylized examples of SFTs that I can then use to illustrate the properties of various regulatory tools. Example 1: Broker-dealer as principalIn this first example, a large broker-dealer firm borrows in the triparty repo market--from, say, a money market fund--in order to finance its own holdings of a particular security. Perhaps the broker-dealer is acting as a market-maker in the corporate bond market, and uses repo borrowing to finance its ongoing inventory of investment-grade and high-yield bonds. In this case, the asset on the dealer's balance sheet is the corporate bond, and the liability is the repo borrowing from the money fund. Example 2: Broker-dealer as SFT intermediaryIn this second example, the ultimate demand to own the corporate bond comes not from the dealer firm, but from one of its prime brokerage customers--say, a hedge fund. Moreover, the hedge fund cannot borrow directly from the money market fund sector in the triparty repo market, because the money funds are not sufficiently knowledgeable about the hedge fund to be comfortable taking it on as a counterparty. So instead, the hedge fund borrows on a collateralized basis from the dealer firm in the bilateral repo market, and the dealer then turns around and, as before, uses the same collateral to borrow from a money fund in the triparty market. In this case, the asset on the dealer's balance sheet is the repo loan it makes to the hedge fund. Clearly, there is the potential for fire-sale risk in both of these examples. One source of risk would be an initial shock either to the expected value of the underlying collateral or to its volatility that leads to an increase in required repo-market haircuts (e.g., the default probability of the corporate bond goes up). Another source of risk would be concerns about the creditworthiness of the broker-dealer firm that causes lenders in the triparty market to step away from it. In either case, if the associated externalities are deemed to create significant social costs, the goal of regulatory policy should be to get private actors to internalize these costs. At an abstract level, this means looking for a way to impose an appropriate Pigouvian (i.e., corrective) tax on the transactions.7Of course, the tax must balance the social costs against the benefits that accompany SFTs; these benefits include both "money-like" services from the increased stock of near-riskless private assets, as well as enhanced liquidity in the market for the underlying collateral--the corporate bond market, in my examples.8So in the absence of further work on calibrating costs and benefits, there is no presumption that the optimal tax should be large, only that it may be non-zero, and that it may make sense for it to differ across asset classes. Can Existing Regulatory Tools Be Used to Tax SFTs Efficiently?With this last observation in mind, my next step is to run through a number of our existing regulatory instruments, and in each case ask: to what extent can the instrument at hand be used efficiently to impose a Pigouvian tax on an SFT, either one of the dealer-as-principal type or one of the dealer-as-intermediary type? As will become clear, the answer can depend crucially on both the structure of the transaction as well as the nature of the underlying collateral involved. Also, I should emphasize that nothing in this exercise amounts to a judgment on the overall desirability of any given regulatory tool. Obviously, even if risk-based capital requirements are not particularly helpful in taxing SFTs, they can be very valuable for other reasons. I am asking a different question: to what extent can the existing toolkit be used--or be adapted--to deal with the specific problem of fire-sale externalities in SFTs? 1. Risk-based capital requirementsCurrent risk-based capital requirements are of little relevance for many types of SFTs. In my Example 1, where the dealer firm holds a corporate bond as a principal and finances it with repo borrowing, there would be a capital charge on the corporate bond, but this capital charge is approximately independent of whether the corporate bond is financed with repo or with some other, more stable, form of funding. So there is no tax on the incremental fire-sale risk created by the more fragile funding structure.9 In Example 2, in which the dealer is an intermediary with a matched book of repo borrowing and lending, there is, in principle, a capital requirement on its asset-side repo loan to the hedge fund. However, the Basel III risk-based capital rules allow banks and bank holding companies to use internal models to compute this capital charge for repo lending, and the resulting numbers are typically very small--for all practical purposes, close to zero--for overcollateralized lending transactions, with repo being the canonical example. I'm not arguing that the very low risk-based charges on repo lending in Basel III are "wrong" in any microprudential sense. After all, they are designed to solve a different problem--that of ensuring bank solvency. And if a bank holding company's broker-dealer sub makes a repo loan of short maturity that is sufficiently well-collateralized, it may be at minimal risk of bearing any losses--precisely because it operates on the premise that it can dump the collateral and get out of town before things get too ugly. The risk-averse lenders in the triparty market--who, in turn, provide financing to the dealer--operate under the same premise. As I noted earlier, these defensive reactions by providers of repo finance mean that the costs of fire sales are likely to be felt elsewhere in the financial system. 2. Liquidity requirementsLiquidity requirements, such as those embodied in the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), can impose a meaningful tax on certain SFTs in which the dealer acts as a principal. If the dealer holds a corporate bond and finances it with repo borrowing of less than 30 days' maturity, the LCR kicks in and requires the dealer to hold high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) against the risk that it is unable to roll the repo over. In this particular case, there can be said to be a direct form of regulatory attack on the fire-sales problem. However, this conclusion is sensitive to the details of the example. If, instead of holding a corporate bond, the dealer holds a Treasury security that is deemed to count as Level 1 HQLA, there is no impact of the LCR. Moreover, the LCR plays no role in mitigating fire-sales externalities in the important matched-book case in which the dealer acts as an intermediary.10If a dealer borrows on a collateralized basis with repo and then turns around and lends the proceeds to a hedge fund in a similar fashion, the LCR deems the dealer to have no net liquidity exposure--and hence imposes no incremental liquidity requirement--so long as the lending side of the transaction has a maturity of less than 30 days. The implicit logic is that as long as the dealer can generate the necessary cash by not rolling over its loan to the hedge fund, it will always be able to handle any outflows of funding that come from being unable to roll over its own borrowing. This logic is not incorrect per se, but it is very micro-focused in nature, and does not attend to fire-sales externalities. It worries about the ability of the dealer firm to survive a liquidity stress event, but does not take into account that the dealer's survival may come at the cost of forcing its hedge fund client to engage in fire sales.11 3. Leverage ratioIf a broker-dealer firm faces a binding leverage ratio, this constraint can act as a significant tax on two types of SFTs that are largely untouched either by risk-based capital requirements or by liquidity regulations. The first is when the dealer, acting as a principal, uses repo to finance its holdings of Treasury securities or agency mortgage-backed securities, assets that generally have only modest risk weights when held as trading positions. The second is when the dealer acts as an intermediary and has a matched repo book. In both cases, the SFTs blow up the firm's balance sheet and, hence, the denominator of the leverage ratio, even while having little impact on risk-based capital or LCR calculations. The crucial issue here, however, is whether the leverage ratio does, in fact, bind. A traditional view among regulators has been that the leverage ratio should be calibrated so as to serve as a meaningful "backstop" for risk-based capital requirements, but that under ordinary circumstances it should not actually be the binding constraint on firms. For if it were to bind, this would put us in a regime of completely un-risk-weighted capital requirements, where the effective capital charge for holding short-term Treasury securities would be the same as that for holding, say, risky corporate debt securities or loans. Recently, U.S. regulators have issued a proposed rulemaking that seeks to raise the BaselIII supplementary leverage ratio requirement to 5 percent for the largest U.S. bank holding companies, and to 6 percent for their affiliated depository institutions. While this increase might be considered a parallel shift that preserves the backstop philosophy in light of the fact that risk-based requirements have also gone up significantly, it does increase the likelihood that the leverage ratio may bind for some of these firms at some times--particularly for those firms with a broker-dealer-intensive business model in which the ratio of total assets to risk-weighted assets tends to be higher. In this event, there would indeed be a significant tax on SFTs undertaken in the affected firms. However, because it is unlikely that the leverage constraint would bind symmetrically across all of the largest firms, my guess is that the effect would be less to deter SFT activity in the aggregate than to cause it to migrate in such a way as to be predominantly located in those firms that--because they have, say, a larger lending business and, hence, more risk-weighted assets--have more headroom under the leverage ratio constraint. Other Possible ApproachesTo summarize the discussion thus far, the mainstays of our existing regulatory toolkit--risk-based capital, liquidity, and leverage requirements--have a variety of other virtues, but none seem well-suited to lean in a comprehensive way against the specific fire-sale externalities created by SFTs. The liquidity coverage ratio affects a subset of SFTs in which a dealer firm acts as a principal to fund its own inventory of securities positions, but does not meaningfully touch those in which it acts as an intermediary. By contrast, an aggressively calibrated leverage ratio could potentially impose a significant tax on a wider range of SFTs, but the tax would by its nature be blunt and highly asymmetric, falling entirely on those firms for whom the leverage ratio constraint was more binding than the risk-based capital constraint. As such, it would be more likely to induce regulatory arbitrage than to rein in overall SFT activity. These observations raise the question of whether there are other tools that might be better suited to dealing with SFT-related fire-sales externalities. I will touch briefly on three of these. 1. Capital surchargesIn his May speech, Governor Tarullo alluded to the possibility of liquidity-linked capital surcharges that would effectively augment the existing regime of risk-based capital requirements.12Depending on how these surcharges are structured, they could act in part as a tax on both the dealer-as-principal and dealer-as-intermediary types of SFTs. Accomplishing the latter would require a capital surcharge based on something like the aggregate size of the dealer's matched repo book; this comes quite close to the Pigouvian notion of directly taxing this specific activity. As compared to relying on the leverage ratio to implement the tax, this approach has the advantage that it is more likely to treat institutions uniformly: the tax on SFTs would not be a function of the overall business model of a given firm, but rather just the characteristics of its SFT book. This is because the surcharge is embedded into the existing risk-based capital regime, which should in principle be the constraint that binds for most firms. There are a couple of important qualifications, however. First, going this route would involve a significant conceptual departure from the notion of capital as a prudential requirement at the firm level. As noted previously, a large matched repo book may entail relatively little solvency or liquidity risk for the broker-dealer firm that intermediates this market. So, to the extent that one imposes a capital surcharge on the broker-dealer, one would be doing so with the express intention of creating a tax that is passed on to the downstream borrower (i.e., to the hedge fund, in my example). Second, and a direct corollary of the first, imposing the tax at the level of the intermediary naturally raises the question of disintermediation. In other words, might the SFT market respond to the tax by evolving so that large hedge funds are more readily able to borrow via repo directly from money market funds and securities lenders, without having to go through broker-dealers? I can't say that I have a good understanding of the institutional factors that might facilitate or impede such an evolution. But if the market ultimately does evolve in this way, it would be hard to argue that the underlying fire-sales problem has been addressed. 2. Modified liquidity regulationA conceptually similar way to get at matched-book repo would be to modify liquidity regulation so as to introduce an asymmetry between the assumed liquidity properties of repo loans made by a broker-dealer, and its own repo borrowing. For example, in the context of the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), one could assume that a dealer's repo loans to a hedge fund roll off more slowly than do its own repo borrowings from the triparty market. This assumption would create a net liquidity exposure for a matched repo book, and would thereby force the dealer to hold some long-term debt or other stable funding against it. Although the implementation is different, the end result is quite close to that obtained with the capital-surcharge approach I just described: in one case, there is a broad stable funding requirement for intermediaries against a matched repo book; in the other case, there is an equity requirement. It follows that, whatever its other advantages, going the modified-NSFR route does not eliminate concerns about disintermediation and regulatory arbitrage. 3. Universal margin requirementsThese sorts of regulatory-arbitrage concerns have motivated some academics and policymakers to think about a system of universal margin requirements for SFTs.13In its simplest form, the idea would be to impose a minimum haircut, or down payment requirement, on any party--be it a hedge fund or a broker-dealer--that uses short-term collateralized funding to finance its securities holdings. Because the requirement now lives at the security level, rather than at the level of an intermediary in the SFT market, it cannot be as easily evaded by, say, a hedge fund going outside the broker-dealer sector to obtain its repo funding.14This is the strong conceptual appeal of universal margin from the perspective of a fire-sales framework. In this regard, it is worth noting that the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has recently released a proposal to establish minimum haircut requirements for certain SFTs.15However, the FSB proposal stops well short of being a universal margin requirement. Rather, the minimum haircuts envisioned by the FSB would apply only to SFTs in which entities not subject to capital and liquidity regulation (e.g., hedge funds) receive financing from entities that are subject to regulation (i.e., banks and broker-dealers), and only to transactions in which the collateral is something other than government or agency securities. In this sense, there is a close relationship between the FSB minimum-haircut proposal and the specific variant of the capital-surcharge idea that I mentioned a moment ago. Both have the potential to act as a restraint on those SFTs that are intermediated by regulated broker-dealer firms, but both are vulnerable to an evolution of the business away from this intermediated mode. The minimum margin levels in the FSB proposal are also quite small, so it is unclear how much of an effect, if any, they will have on market behavior. For example, the minimums for long-term corporate bonds, securitized products, and equities are 2 percent, 4 percent, and 4 percent, respectively. ConclusionsLet me wrap up. My aim here has been to survey the landscape--to give a sense of the possible tools that can be used to address the fire-sales problem in SFTs--without making any particularly pointed recommendations. I would guess that a sensible path forward might involve drawing on some mix of the latter set of instruments that I discussed: namely, capital surcharges, modifications to the liquidity regulation framework, and universal margin requirements. As we go down this path, conceptual purity may have to be sacrificed in some places to deliver pragmatic and institutionally feasible results. It is unlikely that we will find singular and completely satisfactory fixes. With this observation in mind, I would be remiss if I did not remind you of another, highly complementary area where reform is necessary: the money market fund sector. Money funds are among the most significant repo lenders to broker-dealer firms, and an important source of fire-sale risk comes from the fragility of the current money fund model. This fragility stems in part from their capital structures--the fact that they issue stable-value demandable liabilities with no capital buffer or other explicit loss-absorption capacity--which make them highly vulnerable to runs by their depositors. I welcome the work of the Securities and Exchange Commission on this front, particularly its focus on floating net asset values, and look forward to concrete action. Another source of fragility arises from money funds investing in repo loans collateralized by assets that they are unwilling or unable to hold if things go bad. This feature creates an incentive for them to withdraw repo financing from broker-dealers at the first sign of counterparty risk, even if the underlying collateral is in good shape. In closing, I just want to acknowledge how much my own thinking about these complicated issues has benefited from the work of so many of you on the program at this conference. I look forward to continuing the conversation. Thank you. 1.A version of these remarks was previously presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Workshop on "Fire Sales as a Driver of Systemic Risk in Triparty Repo and Other Secured Funding Markets" (October 4, 2013). I am grateful for comments from Matt Eichner, Mike Gibson, Nellie Liang, Bill Nelson, and Mark Van Der Weide. The thoughts in this speech are my own, and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), "Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability," speech at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington, D.C., May 3.Return to text 3.Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (2011), "Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics (PDF),"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25 (Winter), p. 30.Return to text 4.An alternative mechanism that works similarly is when the third party is a regulated intermediary and mark-to-market losses reduce its capital ratios, and again force it to involuntarily sell assets in the face of falling prices.Return to text 5.The fundamental welfare economics at work here is developed in John Geanakoplos and Heracles M. Polemarchakis (1986), "Existence, Regularity, and Constrained Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations When the Asset Market Is Incomplete," in Walter P. Heller, Ross M. Starr, and David A. Starrett, eds.,Essays in Honor of Kenneth Arrow: Vol 3., Uncertainty, Information, and Communication(New York: Cambridge University Press), pp. 65-95. A discussion of the connection of this work to specific aspects of macroprudential regulation is in Samuel G. Hanson, Anil K. Kashyap, and Jeremy C. Stein (2011), "A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation (PDF),"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 3-28.Return to text 6.This is the first-round externality. Adverse spillovers from a fire sale of this sort may also take the form of a credit crunch that affects borrowers more generally. Such a credit crunch may arise as other financial intermediaries (e.g., banks) withdraw capital from lending, so as to exploit the now-more-attractive returns to buying up fire-sold assets. Ultimately, it is the risk of this credit contraction, and its implications for economic activity more broadly, that may be the most compelling basis for regulatory intervention.Return to text 7.Of course, the Pigouvian taxation approach by itself cannot completely eliminate the ex post costs associated with fire sales. This would require a broad and active lender-of-last resort function, which I do not discuss here. The best that any form of ex ante regulation can hope to do is to reduce the incidence and magnitude of ex post fire-sales damage.Return to text 8.Further discussion on the money-like benefits that are created by near-riskless private assets such as repo can be found in the following: Arvind Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), "The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 120, issue 2 (April), pp. 233-267; Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick (2012), "Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 103, pp. 425-451; and Jeremy C. Stein (2012), "Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 127, pp. 57-95.Return to text 9.To be more precise, under Basel III capital rules, there is a small risk-based capital requirement on the repo liability. This requirement is driven by counterparty credit risk, not liquidity risk, and is independent of the term of the repo borrowing. The basic idea is that the repo borrower has to hold a little bit of capital because it has sent $102 in Treasury securities over to its counterparty lender and only received $100 cash. If the repo lender defaults, the borrower could be out $2.Return to text 10.A similar comment applies to the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), which requires regulated firms to fund illiquid exposures with some amount of long-term debt or other form of stable funding. Like the LCR, the NSFR effectively treats matched-book repo as creating no net liquidity exposure, and hence imposes no requirement on it.Return to text 11.Even from a microprudential perspective, the LCR can be said to have a flaw in that it is blind to maturity mismatches within the 30-day window. For example, if a dealer borrows on an overnight basis from a money fund, and then makes a 29-day loan to a hedge fund, the LCR deems it to be fully matched, and to have no incremental liquidity exposure.Return to text 12.Tarullo (2013)Return to text 13.A closely related motivation for universal margin requirements is that they might be able to limit procyclicality by leaning against increases in leverage during boom times.Return to text 14.Of course, there is always the potential for other forms of regulatory arbitrage. For example, a hedge fund that faces a minimum margin requirement when it uses repo borrowing to fund a corporate-bond position may instead seek to take a leveraged position in the corporate bond through other means by, for example, engaging in a total-return swap with its prime broker. This is the growing business of "synthetic" prime brokerage. Properly harmonized initial margin requirements on uncleared derivatives may help to level the playing field between traditional and synthetic prime brokerage activities.Return to text 15.Financial Stability Board (2013),Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Addressing Shadow Banking Risks in Securities Lending and Repos(PDF), August 29.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Senator Crapo, and members of the Committee, thank you for this opportunity to appear before you today. It has been a privilege for me to serve the Federal Reserve at different times and in different roles over the past 36 years, and an honor to be nominated by the President to lead the Fed as Chair of the Board of Governors. I approach this task with a clear understanding that the Congress has entrusted the Federal Reserve with great responsibilities. Its decisions affect the well-being of every American and the strength and prosperity of our nation. That prosperity depends most, of course, on the productiveness and enterprise of the American people, but the Federal Reserve plays a role too, promoting conditions that foster maximum employment, low and stable inflation, and a safe and sound financial system. The past six years have been challenging for our nation and difficult for many Americans. We endured the worst financial crisis and deepest recession since the Great Depression. The effects were severe, but they could have been far worse. Working together, government leaders confronted these challenges and successfully contained the crisis. Under the wise and skillful leadership of Chairman Bernanke, the Fed helped stabilize the financial system, arrest the steep fall in the economy, and restart growth. Today the economy is significantly stronger and continues to improve. The private sector has created 7.8 million jobs since the post-crisis low for employment in 2010. Housing, which was at the center of the crisis, seems to have turned a corner--construction, home prices, and sales are up significantly. The auto industry has made an impressive comeback, with domestic production and sales back to near their pre-crisis levels. We have made good progress, but we have farther to go to regain the ground lost in the crisis and the recession. Unemployment is down from a peak of 10 percent, but at 7.3 percent in October, it is still too high, reflecting a labor market and economy performing far short of their potential. At the same time, inflation has been running below the Federal Reserve's goal of 2 percent and is expected to continue to do so for some time. For these reasons, the Federal Reserve is using its monetary policy tools to promote a more robust recovery. A strong recovery will ultimately enable the Fed to reduce its monetary accommodation and reliance on unconventional policy tools such as asset purchases. I believe that supporting the recovery today is the surest path to returning to a more normal approach to monetary policy. In the past two decades, and especially under Chairman Bernanke, the Federal Reserve has provided more and clearer information about its goals. Like the Chairman, I strongly believe that monetary policy is most effective when the public understands what the Fed is trying to do and how it plans to do it. At the request of Chairman Bernanke, I led the effort to adopt a statement of the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) longer-run objectives, including a 2 percent goal for inflation. I believe this statement has sent a clear and powerful message about the FOMC's commitment to its goals and has helped anchor the public's expectations that inflation will remain low and stable in the future. In this and many other ways, the Federal Reserve has become a more open and transparent institution. I have strongly supported this commitment to openness and transparency, and will continue to do so if I am confirmed and serve as Chair. The crisis revealed weaknesses in our financial system. I believe that financial institutions, the Federal Reserve, and our fellow regulators have made considerable progress in addressing those weaknesses. Banks are stronger today, regulatory gaps are being closed, and the financial system is more stable and more resilient. Safeguarding the United States in a global financial system requires higher standards both here and abroad, so the Federal Reserve and other regulators have worked with our counterparts around the globe to secure improved capital requirements and other reforms internationally. Today, banks hold more and higher-quality capital and liquid assets that leave them much better prepared to withstand financial turmoil. Large banks are now subject to annual "stress tests" designed to ensure that they will have enough capital to continue the vital role they play in the economy, even under highly adverse circumstances. We have made progress in promoting a strong and stable financial system, but here, too, important work lies ahead. I am committed to using the Fed's supervisory and regulatory role to reduce the threat of another financial crisis. I believe that capital and liquidity rules and strong supervision are important tools for addressing the problem of financial institutions that are regarded as "too big to fail." In writing new rules, however, the Fed should continue to limit the regulatory burden for community banks and smaller institutions, taking into account their distinct role and contributions. Overall, the Federal Reserve has sharpened its focus on financial stability and is taking that goal into consideration when carrying out its responsibilities for monetary policy. I support these developments and pledge, if confirmed, to continue them. Our country has come a long way since the dark days of the financial crisis, but we have farther to go. Likewise, I believe the Federal Reserve has made significant progress toward its goals but has more work to do. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I would be happy to respond to your questions.