Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the "A Trans-Atlantic Agenda for Shared Prosperity" conference sponsored by the AFL-CIO, Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, and the IMK Macroeconomic Policy Institute, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today about the Federal Reserve's efforts to strengthen the recovery and pursue a goal that it shares with the labor movement: maximum employment.1 As an objective of public policy, maximum employment doesn't appear in the U.S. Constitution, in any presidential decree, or even in the mission statement of the Labor Department. A law passed in 1946 made it a general goal for the U.S. government, but so far the Federal Reserve is the only agency assigned the job of pursuing maximum employment. The 1977 law spelling out that responsibility also assigned the goal of stable prices, and we call this combination of objectives the Federal Reserve's dual mandate.2 With so many people today unable to find work, it might seem odd to highlight such an ambitious and distant goal for employment. I do so because the gulf between maximum employment and the very difficult conditions workers face today helps explain the urgency behind the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts to strengthen the recovery. My colleagues and I are acutely aware of how much workers have lost in the past five years. In response, we have taken, and are continuing to take, forceful action to increase the pace of economic growth and job creation. In the three years after the Great Recession ended, growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) averaged only 2.2 percent per year. In the same span of time following the previous 10 U.S. recessions, real GDP grew, on average, more than twice as fast--at a 4.6 percent annual rate.3So, why has the economy's recovery from the Great Recession been so weak? The slow recovery was preceded, of course, by the deepest recession since the end of the Second World War. The bursting of an unprecedented housing bubble, together with the financial crisis that followed, dealt a huge blow to demand. These developments robbed homeowners of wealth built over a generation, impaired their access to credit, decimated retirement savings, and shattered the confidence of consumers. Businesses slashed capital spending and payrolls, and real GDP contracted by 4.7 percent, more than twice the average for the 10 other recessions since World War II. The Great Recession was also the longest postwar recession--it lasted 18 months, compared with an average of 10 months for the others. The experience of the United States and other advanced economies suggests that deeper recessions are usually followed by stronger-than-average recoveries. While it's also true that longer recessions tend to result in weaker recoveries, even after accounting for this factor, this recovery has been significantly weaker than past experience would have predicted. The dashed line inexhibit 1shows how real GDP would have been expected to increase in this recovery, based on the experience of the United States and other advanced economies and given the depth and duration of the Great Recession.4The gap between the actual and the predicted path of real output gives a sense of how much economic performance has lagged in this recovery. But the implications of this result may seem a little abstract, so let me illustrate the same idea in a way that tries to show the burden that workers continue to bear in this slow recovery. Exhibit 2shows how employment has declined and recovered following several previous recessions. The employment measure attempts to control for the fact that demographic changes and other factors have altered the trend, or potential, workforce over the years. For example, in the 1970s, the pool of potential workers was expanding as baby boomers and an increasing share of women moved into the labor force, such that employment needed to rise relatively quickly just to absorb these additional workers. More recently, the aging of the population has put downward pressure on labor force participation, so employment hasn't had to grow as quickly to keep pace with the potential workforce. Even after making this adjustment, however, the Great Recession stands out both for the magnitude of the job losses that attended the downturn and for the weak recovery in employment that occurred after the recession ended. In trying to account for why this recovery has been so weak, it is helpful to first consider several important factors that have in the past supported most economic recoveries. By this I don't mean everything that contributes to economic growth, but rather those things that typically play a key role when the U.S. economy is recovering from recession. Think of these as the tailwinds that usually promote a recovery. The first tailwind I'll mention is fiscal policy. History shows that fiscal policy often helps to support an economic recovery. Some of this fiscal stimulus is automatic, and intended to be. The income loss that individuals and businesses suffer in a recession is partly offset when their tax bills fall as well. Government spending on unemployment benefits and other safety-net programs rises in recessions, helping individuals hurt by the downturn and also supporting consumer spending and the broader economy by replacing lost income. These automatic declines in tax collections and increases in government spending are often supplemented with discretionary fiscal action--tax rate cuts, spending on infrastructure and other goods and services, and extended unemployment benefits. These discretionary fiscal policy actions are typically a plus for growth in the years just after a recession. For example, following the severe 1981-82 recession, discretionary fiscal policy contributed an average of about 1 percentage point per year to real GDP growth over the subsequent three years.5 However, discretionary fiscal policy hasn't been much of a tailwind during this recovery. In the year following the end of the recession, discretionary fiscal policy at the federal, state, and local levels boosted growth at roughly the same pace as in past recoveries, asexhibit 3indicates. But instead of contributing to growth thereafter, discretionary fiscal policy this time has actually acted to restrain the recovery. State and local governments were cutting spending and, in some cases, raising taxes for much of this period to deal with revenue shortfalls. At the federal level, policymakers have reduced purchases of goods and services, allowed stimulus-related spending to decline, and have put in place further policy actions to reduce deficits. I was relieved that the Congress and the Administration were able to reach agreement on avoiding the full force of the "fiscal cliff" that was due to take effect on January 1. While a long-term plan is needed to reduce deficits and slow the growth of federal debt, the tax increases and spending cuts that would have occurred last month, absent action by the Congress and the President, likely would have been a headwind strong enough to blow the United States back into recession. Negotiations continue over the extent of spending cuts now due to take effect beginning in March, and I expect that discretionary fiscal policy will continue to be a headwind for the recovery for some time, instead of the tailwind it has been in the past. A second tailwind in most recoveries is housing. Residential investment creates jobs in construction and related industries. Before the Great Recession, housing investment added an average of 1/2 percentage point to real GDP growth in the two years after each of the previous four recessions, considerably more than its contribution to growth at other times.6 During this recovery, in contrast, residential investment, on net, has contributed very little to growth since the recession ended. The reasons are easy to understand, given the central role that housing played in the Great Recession. Following an extended boom in construction driven in large part by overly loose mortgage lending standards and unrealistic expectations for future home price increases, the housing market collapsed--sales and prices plunged and mortgage credit was sharply curtailed. Tight mortgage credit conditions are continuing to make it difficult for many families to buy homes, despite record-low mortgage interest rates that have helped make housing very affordable. I'm encouraged by recent improvement in the residential sector, but the contribution of housing investment to overall economic activity remains considerably below the average seen in past recoveries, asexhibit 4shows. Beyond the direct effects on residential investment, the extraordinary collapse in house prices resulted in a huge loss of household wealth--at last count, net home equity is still down 40 percent, or about $5 trillion, from 2005.7This loss of wealth has weighed on the finances and spending of many homeowners. Households are less able to tap their home equity to deal with economic shocks, fund their children's education, or start new businesses. For some households, the collapse in house prices has left them underwater on their mortgages, and thus less able to refinance or sell their homes. Another important tailwind in most economic recoveries is one that tends to be taken for granted--the faith most of us have, based on history and personal experience, that recessions are temporary and that the economy will soon get back to normal. Even during recessions, households' expectations for income growth tend to be reasonably stable, which provides support for overall spending. In the most recent recession, however, surveys suggest that consumers sharply revised down their prospects for future income growth and have only partially adjusted up their expectations since then (exhibit 5). The recovery has also encountered some unusual headwinds. The fiscal and financial crisis in Europe has resulted in a euro-area recession and contributed to slower global growth. Europe's difficulties have blunted what had been strong growth in U.S. exports earlier in the recovery by sapping demand worldwide. Let me say a few words now, and more later, about the role of monetary policy in this recovery. The Federal Reserve typically plays a large role in promoting recoveries by reducing the federal funds rate and keeping it low until the economy is again on a solid footing. Reducing the federal funds rate tends to reduce other interest rates and boost asset prices, thus encouraging spending and investment throughout the economy. As it has before, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in 2007 started reducing the federal funds rate at the first signs of economic weakness and made sharper rate cuts as the recession deepened. As in some past recoveries that were disappointingly slow, the FOMC has kept rates low well after the end of the recession. But unlike the past, by December 2008 the Committee had reduced the federal funds rate effectively to zero. Because that rate, for practical purposes, cannot be cut further, this level is referred to as the effective lower bound. Without the option of using its conventional policy tool, and with the recession getting worse, the FOMC decided to employ unconventional tools to further ease monetary policy, even though the efficacy of these tools was uncertain and it was recognized that their use might carry some potential costs. The better known of these tools is the purchase of large amounts of longer-term government securities, which is commonly referred to as quantitative easing. The other unconventional tool is known as forward guidance--providing information about the future path of short-term interest rates anticipated by the Committee. Both of these approaches are intended to address a gap caused by the effective lower bound. This gap is the shortfall between what the FOMC likelywoulddo in current economic circumstances, were it able to reduce the federal funds rate below zero, and the reality that the rate can't be cut further. I believe that the Federal Reserve's asset purchases and other unconventional policy actions have helped, and are continuing to help, fill this gap and thus shore up aggregate demand. The evidence suggests that the FOMC's actions have lowered short- and longer-term private borrowing rates and boosted asset prices.8However, while this contribution has been significant, lower interest rates may be doing less to increase spending than in past recoveries because of some unusual features of the Great Recession and the current recovery. For example, as I noted, the housing crisis left many homeowners with high loan-to-value ratios and damaged credit records, creating barriers to their access to credit, while the financial crisis led many banks to lend only to borrowers with higher credit scores. As a consequence, the proportion of households that have been able to take advantage of declining rates to refinance their mortgages or to borrow to purchase new homes has probably been lower than in past recoveries. In addition, pronounced uncertainty about economic conditions has weighed on capital spending decisions and may have blunted the normal effect of lower interest rates on business investment. These are the major reasons why I believe this recovery has been so slow. After a lengthy recession that imposed great hardships on American workers, the weak recovery has made the past five years the toughest that many of today's workers have ever experienced. The unemployment rate now stands at 7.9 percent. To put this number in perspective, while that's a big improvement from the 10 percent reached in late 2009, it is now higher than unemployment ever got in the 24 years before the Great Recession. Moreover, the government's current estimate of 12 million unemployed doesn't include 800,000 discouraged workers who say they have given up looking for work. And, asexhibit 6shows, 8 million people, or 5.6 percent of the workforce, say they are working part time even though they would prefer a full-time job. A broader measure of underemployment that includes these and other potential workers stands at 14.4 percent. The effects of the recession and the subsequent slow recovery have been harshest on some of the most vulnerable Americans. The poverty rate has risen sharply since the onset of the recession, after a decade in which it had been relatively stable, and stands at 15 percent of the population, significantly above the average of the past three decades.9Even those today who are fortunate enough to hold jobs have seen their hourly compensation barely keep pace with the cost of living over the past three years, while labor's share of income--as measured by the percent of production by nonfinancial corporations accruing to workers as compensation--remains near the postwar low reached in 2011 (exhibit 7). Compared with the 7.9 percent unemployment rate for all workers, the unemployment rate for African Americans is 13.8 percent. The unemployment rate for those without a high school diploma is 12 percent. For young people--workers 16 to 19 years old--the unemployment rate is 23.4 percent, little changed from the end of the recession. Among African Americans in that age group, 38 percent of those in the labor force can't find a job. Another gauge of the effect that this slow recovery has had on workers is how long it is taking to find a job. At its worst point in the 1980s, the median length of unemployment for those looking for a job was 12 weeks, but the median since the Great Recession hasaveraged20 weeks and now stands at 16 weeks. Three million Americans have been looking for work for one year or more; that's one-fourth of all unemployed workers, which is down from 2011's peak but far larger than was seen before the Great Recession. These are not just statistics to me. We know that long-term unemployment is devastating to workers and their families. Longer spells of unemployment raise the risk of homelessness and have been a factor contributing to the foreclosure crisis. When you're unemployed for six months or a year, it is hard to qualify for a lease, so even the option of relocating to find a job is often off the table. The toll is simply terrible on the mental and physical health of workers, on their marriages, and on their children.10 Long-term unemployment is also a great concern because it has the potential to itself become a headwind restraining the economy. Individuals out of work for an extended period can become less employable as they lose the specific skills acquired in their previous jobs and also lose the habits needed to hold down any job. Those out of work for a long time also tend to lose touch with former co‑workers in their previous industry or occupation--contacts that can often help an unemployed worker find a job. Long-term unemployment can make any worker progressively less employable, even after the economy strengthens. A factor contributing to the high level of long-term unemployment in the current recovery is the relatively large proportion of workers who have permanently lost their previous jobs, as opposed to being laid off temporarily. For example, in past recessions, a considerable share of jobs lost in construction has been temporary, but that isn't the case this time. Construction employment fell from its peak of 7.7 million in 2006 to a low of 5.4 million in 2011. Only about 300,000 of those 2.3 million jobs have returned and most won't, at least for many years. In general, individuals who permanently lose their previous jobs take longer to become reemployed than do those on temporary layoff, are more likely to have to change industries or occupations to find a new job, and earn significantly less when they become reemployed.11 The greater amount of permanent job loss seen in the recent recession also suggests that there might have been an increase in the degree of mismatch between the skills possessed by the unemployed and those demanded by employers. This possibility and the unprecedented level and persistence of long-term unemployment in this recovery have prompted some to ask whether a significant share of unemployment since the recession is due tostructuralproblems in labor markets and not simply acyclicalshortfall in aggregate demand. This question is important for anyone committed to the goal of maximum employment, because it implicitly asks whether the best we can hope for, even in a healthy economy, is an unemployment rate significantly higher than what has been achieved in the past. For the Federal Reserve, the answer to this question has important implications for monetary policy. If the current, elevated rate of unemployment is largely cyclical, then the straightforward solution is to take action to raise aggregate demand. If unemployment is instead substantially structural, some worry that attempts to raise aggregate demand will have little effect on unemployment and serve only to stoke inflation. This question is frequently discussed by the FOMC.12I cannot speak for the Committee or my colleagues, some of whom have publicly related their own conclusions on this topic. However, I see the evidence as consistent with the view that the increase in unemployment since the onset of the Great Recession has been largely cyclical and not structural. For example, the rise in unemployment during the recession was accompanied by a dramatic decline in job vacancies and was widespread across industry and occupation groups. Job losses in the construction and financial services industries were particularly large--hardly surprising given the collapse in these sectors in 2008 and 2009--but manufacturing and other cyclically sensitive industries were hit hard as well, and employment in these industries has likewise recovered slowly. Moreover, if skills mismatch in the labor market has led to an excess supply of workers in some sectors and a shortage of workers in others, then we would expect to see an atypical amount of variation in the balance between job openings and unemployment across sectors. Based on this insight, researchers Ed Lazear and Jim Spletzer constructed quantitative measures of mismatch across industries and occupations.13They found that their mismatch indexes were indeed elevated at the end of the Great Recession, asexhibit 8shows. But these measures have fallen over the course of the recovery to near pre-recession levels. In addition, widespread mismatch between job vacancies and workers across different sectors might be expected to cause wage rates to rise relatively quickly in sectors with many job openings and relatively slowly in sectors with an excess supply of available workers. But work by Jesse Rothstein fails to uncover evidence of such a pattern.14 This and related research suggests to me, first, that a broad-based cyclical shortage of demand is the main cause of today's elevated unemployment rate, and, second, that whatever problems there may be today with labor market functioning are likely to be substantially resolved as the broader economy improves and bolsters the demand for labor. I don't mean to suggest that there aren't some workers who have been stranded by structural changes in the economy. More can and should be done to help dislocated workers acquire new skills to transition from industries and occupations with fewer opportunities. But making this transition will be much easier in a healthy economy, which is one reason why I am encouraged by the evidence that elevated unemployment is indeed largely cyclical. I will now describe what the Federal Reserve is doing to try to raise demand and create jobs. I have described the two unconventional policy tools that the FOMC has employed since it reduced the target federal funds rate in 2008 to its effective lower bound. The first is large-scale asset purchases, intended to lower long-term interest rates to encourage borrowing for spending and investment. Between 2008 and mid-2011, the FOMC purchased agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS), agency debt, and Treasury securities totaling $2.3 trillion. In 2011, the FOMC began the maturity extension program, under which it reduced its holdings of short-term Treasury securities and used the proceeds to purchase an equivalent amount of longer-term Treasury securities. However, as the scheduled endpoint of that program approached, it became clear that the economy remained weak, and the FOMC took a series of steps to provide further impetus to the recovery. In June 2012, the Committee extended its maturity extension program until the end of the year. Then in September, it made a major new commitment to asset purchases. Unlike its past purchase programs, which were fixed in size, this time the FOMC stated its determination to continue the program, provided that inflation remains well contained, until it judges that there has been a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. The Committee currently intends to purchase MBS and Treasury debt at a pace that will add about $85 billion per month of such securities to the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. In determining the size, pace, and composition of these purchases over time, the Committee will also take into account ongoing assessments of their efficacy and costs. The second unconventional policy tool that the FOMC has used is forward guidance, in the form of more-explicit and more-detailed information about the future path of monetary policy. The longer-term interest rates that most profoundly influence housing demand, capital spending, and asset prices depend on currentandexpected future levels of short-term interest rates, such as the federal funds rate that has been the Fed's conventional monetary policy tool. Signaling the future path of the federal funds rate can therefore directly affect interest rates today on auto loans, home mortgages, and bonds issued by companies and state and local governments, even when the current level of the federal funds rate cannot be lowered. The FOMC has substantially expanded its forward guidance in recent years. In 2009, the Committee stated that economic conditions "are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period."15In 2011, the FOMC said this period would likely last "at least through mid-2013," and extended this date guidance several times.16 A disadvantage of this calendar-based approach was that it might not be clear whether changes in the date reflect changes in the FOMC's outlook for growth, for inflation, or a shift in the desired stance of policy. In December 2012, the FOMC therefore replaced the date with greater detail on the economic conditions that would warrant maintaining the federal funds rate at its present, exceptionally low level. Specifically, it stated that near-zero rates would likely remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and "at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored."17 It deserves emphasis that a 6-1/2 percent unemployment rate and inflation one to two years ahead that is 1/2 percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent objective are thresholds forpossibleaction, not triggers that will necessarily prompt an immediate increase in the FOMC's target rate. In practical terms, it means that the Committee does not expect to raise the federal funds rate as long as unemployment remains above 6‑1/2 percentandinflation one to two years ahead is projected to be less than 1/2 percentage point above its 2 percent objective. When one of these thresholds is crossed, action is possible but not assured. Moreover, these thresholds for possible action do not reflect any change in the Committee's longer-run goals. With respect to maximum employment, most FOMC participants continue to estimate that the longer-run normal unemployment rate lies in a range of 5.2 to 6 percent, and the Committee continues to believe an inflation rate of 2 percent (as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures) is most consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. Indeed, the Committee reaffirmed these longer-run goals, first adopted in January 2012, just last month.18Of course, our control over the economy is imperfect, and so temporary deviations from the FOMC's specific longer-term goals will sometimes occur. Importantly, these quantitative goals are neither ceilings nor floors for inflation and unemployment, and the Committee will take a balanced approach to returning both measures to their objectives over time. I believe the policy steps we have taken recently are in accord with this balanced approach. With employment so far from its maximum level and with inflation currently running, and expected to continue to run, at or below the Committee's 2 percent longer-term objective, it is entirely appropriate for progress in attaining maximum employment to take center stage in determining the Committee's policy stance. While the Committee's longer-term goals remain unchanged, whathaschanged is that the FOMC is now providing more information about how it expects to pursue its inflation and employment goals. In particular, we will employ our policy tools, as appropriate, to raise aggregate demand and employment in the context of continued price stability, consistent with our balanced approach. That's good news for workers, because I believe that these steps will increase demand, and more demand means more jobs. It will be a long road back to a healthy job market. It will be years before many workers feel like they have regained the ground lost since 2007. Longer-term trends, such as globalization and technological change, will continue to pose challenges to workers in many industries. Let me close with some words of encouragement. The job market is improving. The progress has been too slow, but there is progress. My colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve are well aware of the difficulties faced by workers in this slow recovery, and we're actively engaged in continuing efforts to promote a stronger economy, more jobs, and better conditions for all workers. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. I am indebted to members of the Board staff--John Maggs,Karen Pence,Jeremy Rudd, andWilliam Wascher--who contributed to the preparation of these remarks, and to Board staff members Sejla Karalic and Christopher Nekarda for assistance with the exhibits.Return to text 2.The law calls on the Federal Reserve to "promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates." See section 2A of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. §225a as added by act of Nov. 16, 1977 (91 Stat. 1387) and amended by acts of Oct. 27, 1978 (92 Stat. 1897); Aug. 23, 1988 (102 Stat. 1375); and Dec. 27, 2000 (114 Stat. 3028)).Return to text 3.The average for other postwar recoveries would be even higher if one were to exclude the three-year periods following the 1957-58 and 1980 recessions, which included at least part of subsequent recessions.Return to text 4.The results in the figure are derived from a model that relates GDP growth in recoveries to recession depth and duration. See Greg Howard, Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2011), "Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different?" International Finance Discussion Papers 1037 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).Return to text 5.These calculations are based on Federal Reserve Board estimates of fiscal impetus, which measures the boost to aggregate demand from increased government purchases as well as the effects of changes in tax and entitlement policies on consumer and business spending. See Glenn Follette and Byron Lutz (2010), "Fiscal Policy in the United States: Automatic Stabilizers, Discretionary Fiscal Policy Actions, and the Economy," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-43 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text 6.See Michael W. McCracken (2011), "Housing's Role in a Recovery (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Economic Synopses, no. 6 (February), pp. 1-2.Return to text 7.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statistical Release Z.1, "Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States," table B.100, line 49 (Owners' Equity in Household Real Estate).Return to text 8.See Ben S. Bernanke (2012), "Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1.Return to text 9.Mean annual poverty rate for all people, U.S. Bureau of the Census.Return to text 10.See Steven J. Davis and Till Von Wachter (2011), "Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp.1-72.Return to text 11.See Louis S. Jacobson, Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan (1993), "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers,"American Economic Review,vol. 83 (September), pp. 685-709.Return to text 12.See, for example, the minutes of several recent FOMC meetings held on December 11-12, 2012; September 12-13, 2012; and July 31-August 1, 2012: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 11-12, 2012," press release, January 3; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 12-13, 2012," press release, October 4; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July31-August 1, 2012," press release, August 22.Return to text 13.See Edward P. Lazear and James R. Spletzer (2012), "The United States Labor Market: Status Quo or a New Normal?" NBER Working PaperSeries18386(Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September). See also Ayșegül Șahin, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante (2012), "Mismatch Unemployment," NBER Working Paper Series18265 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August).Return to text 14.See Jesse Rothstein (2012), "The Labor Market Four Years into the Crisis: Assessing Structural Explanations,"Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 65 (July), pp. 467-500.Return to text 15.For example, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "FOMC Statement," press release, March 18.Return to text 16.For example, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9.Return to text 17.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "FOMC Statement," press release, December 12.Return to text 18.The FOMC's Statement onLonger-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF), as amended effective on January 29, 2013, is available on the Board's website.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Reserve Board today released amendments to their enforcement actions against 13 mortgage servicers for deficient practices in mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. The amendments require the servicers to provide $9.3 billion in payments and other assistance to borrowers. The amendments memorialize agreements in principle announced in January with Aurora, Bank of America, Citibank, Goldman Sachs, HSBC, JPMorgan Chase, MetLife Bank, Morgan Stanley, PNC, Sovereign, SunTrust, U.S. Bank, and Wells Fargo. The amount includes $3.6 billion in cash payments and $5.7 billion in other assistance to borrowers such as loan modifications and forgiveness of deficiency judgments. Borrowers covered by the amendments include 4.2 million people whose homes were in any stage of the foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010 and whose mortgages were serviced by one of the companies listed above. These borrowers are expected to be contacted by the Paying Agent--Rust Consulting, Inc.--by the end of March 2013 with payment details. The Paying Agent will send payments and correspondence. Borrowers covered by the amendments are expected to receive compensation ranging from hundreds of dollars up to $125,000. Borrowers are not required to take any additional steps to receive the payments. In addition, borrowers will not be required to execute a waiver of any legal claims they may have against their servicer as a condition for receiving payment. Borrowers can call the Paying Agent at 1-888-952-9105 to update their contact information or to verify that they are covered by the amendments. In providing the $5.7 billion in assistance, the 13 servicers are expected to undertake well-structured loss mitigation efforts focused on foreclosure prevention, with preference given to activities designed to keep borrowers in their homes through affordable, sustainable, and meaningful home preservation actions. Borrowers seeking assistance should work directly with their servicer or a counselor approved by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Borrowers can reach HUD-approved counselors by calling 888-995-HOPE (4673). OCC and Federal Reserve examiners continue to monitor the servicers’ implementation of corrective actions required by the original enforcement actions to address unsafe and unsound mortgage servicing and foreclosure practices. For the 13 servicers, these amendments to the enforcement actions replace the requirements related to the Independent Foreclosure Review. For GMAC Mortgage, Everbank, and OneWest, which did not enter agreements in principle with federal regulators, the Independent Foreclosure Review process continues. Regulators expect the reviews for these servicers to be completed over the course of the coming year. These companies service 457,000 mortgages that were in some stage of foreclosure in 2009 or 2010. Related Links: Amendments to the Consent Orders issued by the OCCAmendments to the Consent Orders issued by the Federal ReserveBank of America Corporation (PDF)Citigroup Inc., and Citifinancial Credit Company (PDF)The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and Goldman Sachs Bank U.S.A. (PDF)HSBC North America Holdings, Inc., and HSBC Finance Corporation (PDF)JPMorgan Chase & Co. and EMC Mortgage Corporation (PDF)Morgan Stanley (PDF)The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc. (PDF)SunTrust Banks, Inc., SunTrust Bank, and SunTrust Mortgage, Inc. (PDF)U.S. Bancorp (PDF)Wells Fargo & Company (PDF)
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Bernanke presented identical remarks before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives on February 27, 2013 Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Crapo, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Report. I will begin with a short summary of current economic conditions and then discuss aspects of monetary and fiscal policy. Current Economic ConditionsSince I last reported to this Committee in mid-2012, economic activity in the United States has continued to expand at a moderate if somewhat uneven pace. In particular, real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have risen at an annual rate of about 3 percent in the third quarter but to have been essentially flat in the fourth quarter.1The pause in real GDP growth last quarter does not appear to reflect a stalling-out of the recovery. Rather, economic activity was temporarily restrained by weather-related disruptions and by transitory declines in a few volatile categories of spending, even as demand by U.S. households and businesses continued to expand. Available information suggests that economic growth has picked up again this year. Consistent with the moderate pace of economic growth, conditions in the labor market have been improving gradually. Since July, nonfarm payroll employment has increased by 175,000 jobs per month on average, and the unemployment rate declined 0.3 percentage point to 7.9 percent over the same period. Cumulatively, private-sector payrolls have now grown by about 6.1 million jobs since their low point in early 2010, and the unemployment rate has fallen a bit more than 2 percentage points since its cyclical peak in late 2009. Despite these gains, however, the job market remains generally weak, with the unemployment rate well above its longer-run normal level. About 4.7 million of the unemployed have been without a job for six months or more, and millions more would like full-time employment but are able to find only part-time work. High unemployment has substantial costs, including not only the hardship faced by the unemployed and their families, but also the harm done to the vitality and productive potential of our economy as a whole. Lengthy periods of unemployment and underemployment can erode workers' skills and attachment to the labor force or prevent young people from gaining skills and experience in the first place--developments that could significantly reduce their productivity and earnings in the longer term. The loss of output and earnings associated with high unemployment also reduces government revenues and increases spending, thereby leading to larger deficits and higher levels of debt. The recent increase in gasoline prices, which reflects both higher crude oil prices and wider refining margins, is hitting family budgets. However, overall inflation remains low. Over the second half of 2012, the price index for personal consumption expenditures rose at an annual rate of 1-1/2 percent, similar to the rate of increase in the first half of the year. Measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained in the narrow ranges seen over the past several years. Against this backdrop, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely will run at or below its 2 percent objective. Monetary PolicyWith unemployment well above normal levels and inflation subdued, progress toward the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability has required a highly accommodative monetary policy. Under normal circumstances, policy accommodation would be provided through reductions in the FOMC's target for the federal funds rate--the interest rate on overnight loans between banks. However, as this rate has been close to zero since December 2008, the Federal Reserve has had to use alternative policy tools. These alternative tools have fallen into two categories. The first is "forward guidance" regarding the FOMC's anticipated path for the federal funds rate. Since longer-term interest rates reflect market expectations for shorter-term rates over time, our guidance influences longer-term rates and thus supports a stronger recovery. The formulation of this guidance has evolved over time. Between August 2011 and December 2012, the Committee used calendar dates to indicate how long it expected economic conditions to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate. At its December 2012 meeting, the FOMC agreed to shift to providing more explicit guidance on how it expects the policy rate to respond to economic developments. Specifically, the December postmeeting statement indicated that the current exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate "will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored."2An advantage of the new formulation, relative to the previous date-based guidance, is that it allows market participants and the public to update their monetary policy expectations more accurately in response to new information about the economic outlook. The new guidance also serves to underscore the Committee's intention to maintain accommodation as long as needed to promote a stronger economic recovery with stable prices.3 The second type of nontraditional policy tool employed by the FOMC is large-scale purchases of longer-term securities, which, like our forward guidance, are intended to support economic growth by putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. The Federal Reserve has engaged in several rounds of such purchases since late 2008. Last September the FOMC announced that it would purchase agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per month, and in December the Committee stated that, in addition, beginning in January it would purchase longer-term Treasury securities at an initial pace of $45 billion per month.4These additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities replace the purchases we were conducting under our now-completed maturity extension program, which lengthened the maturity of our securities portfolio without increasing its size. The FOMC has indicated that it will continue purchases until it observes a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market in a context of price stability. The Committee also stated that in determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, it will take appropriate account of their likely efficacy and costs. In other words, as with all of its policy decisions, the Committee continues to assess its program of asset purchases within a cost-benefit framework. In the current economic environment, the benefits of asset purchases, and of policy accommodation more generally, are clear: Monetary policy is providing important support to the recovery while keeping inflation close to the FOMC's 2 percent objective. Notably, keeping longer-term interest rates low has helped spark recovery in the housing market and led to increased sales and production of automobiles and other durable goods. By raising employment and household wealth--for example, through higher home pricesââthese developments have in turn supported consumer sentiment and spending. Highly accommodative monetary policy also has several potential costs and risks, which the Committee is monitoring closely. For example, if further expansion of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet were to undermine public confidence in our ability to exit smoothly from our accommodative policies at the appropriate time, inflation expectations could rise, putting the FOMC's price-stability objective at risk. However, the Committee remains confident that it has the tools necessary to tighten monetary policy when the time comes to do so. As I noted, inflation is currently subdued, and inflation expectations appear well anchored; neither the FOMC nor private forecasters are projecting the development of significant inflation pressures. Another potential cost that the Committee takes very seriously is the possibility that very low interest rates, if maintained for a considerable time, could impair financial stability. For example, portfolio managers dissatisfied with low returns may "reach for yield" by taking on more credit risk, duration risk, or leverage. On the other hand, some risk-taking--such as when an entrepreneur takes out a loan to start a new business or an existing firm expands capacity--is a necessary element of a healthy economic recovery. Moreover, although accommodative monetary policies may increase certain types of risk-taking, in the present circumstances they also serve in some ways to reduce risk in the system, most importantly by strengthening the overall economy, but also by encouraging firms to rely more on longer-term funding, and by reducing debt service costs for households and businesses. In any case, the Federal Reserve is responding actively to financial stability concerns through substantially expanded monitoring of emerging risks in the financial system, an approach to the supervision of financial firms that takes a more systemic perspective, and the ongoing implementation of reforms to make the financial system more transparent and resilient. Although a long period of low rates could encourage excessive risk-taking, and continued close attention to such developments is certainly warranted, to this point we do not see the potential costs of the increased risk-taking in some financial markets as outweighing the benefits of promoting a stronger economic recovery and more-rapid job creation.5 Another aspect of the Federal Reserve's policies that has been discussed is their implications for the federal budget. The Federal Reserve earns substantial interest on the assets it holds in its portfolio, and, other than the amount needed to fund our cost of operations, all net income is remitted to the Treasury. With the expansion of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, yearly remittances have roughly tripled in recent years, with payments to the Treasury totaling approximately $290 billion between 2009 and 2012.6However, if the economy continues to strengthen, as we anticipate, and policy accommodation is accordingly reduced, these remittances would likely decline in coming years. Federal Reserve analysis shows that remittances to the Treasury could be quite low for a time in some scenarios, particularly if interest rates were to rise quickly.7However, even in such scenarios, it is highly likely that average annual remittances over the period affected by the Federal Reserve's purchases will remain higher than the pre-crisis norm, perhaps substantially so. Moreover, to the extent that monetary policy promotes growth and job creation, the resulting reduction in the federal deficit would dwarf any variation in the Federal Reserve's remittances to the Treasury. Thoughts on Fiscal PolicyAlthough monetary policy is working to promote a more robust recovery, it cannot carry the entire burden of ensuring a speedier return to economic health. The economy's performance both over the near term and in the longer run will depend importantly on the course of fiscal policy. The challenge for the Congress and the Administration is to put the federal budget on a sustainable long-run path that promotes economic growth and stability without unnecessarily impeding the current recovery. Significant progress has been made recently toward reducing the federal budget deficit over the next few years. The projections released earlier this month by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) indicate that, under current law, the federal deficit will narrow from 7 percent of GDP last year to 2-1/2 percent in fiscal year 2015.8As a result, the federal debt held by the public (including that held by the Federal Reserve) is projected to remain roughly 75 percent of GDP through much of the current decade. However, a substantial portion of the recent progress in lowering the deficit has been concentrated in near-term budget changes, which, taken together, could create a significant headwind for the economic recovery. The CBO estimates that deficit-reduction policies in current law will slow the pace of real GDP growth by about 1-1/2 percentage points this year, relative to what it would have been otherwise. A significant portion of this effect is related to the automatic spending sequestration that is scheduled to begin on March 1, which, according to the CBO's estimates, will contribute about 0.6 percentage point to the fiscal drag on economic growth this year. Given the still-moderate underlying pace of economic growth, this additional near-term burden on the recovery is significant. Moreover, besides having adverse effects on jobs and incomes, a slower recovery would lead to less actual deficit reduction in the short run for any given set of fiscal actions. At the same time, and despite progress in reducing near-term budget deficits, the difficult process of addressing longer-term fiscal imbalances has only begun. Indeed, the CBO projects that the federal deficit and debt as a percentage of GDP will begin rising again in the latter part of this decade, reflecting in large part the aging of the population and fast-rising health-care costs. To promote economic growth in the longer term, and to preserve economic and financial stability, fiscal policymakers will have to put the federal budget on a sustainable long-run path that first stabilizes the ratio of federal debt to GDP and, given the current elevated level of debt, eventually places that ratio on a downward trajectory. Between 1960 and the onset of the financial crisis, federal debt averaged less than 40 percent of GDP. This relatively low level of debt provided the nation much-needed flexibility to meet the economic challenges of the past few years. Replenishing this fiscal capacity will give future Congresses and Administrations greater scope to deal with unforeseen events. To address both the near- and longer-term issues, the Congress and the Administration should consider replacing the sharp, frontloaded spending cuts required by the sequestration with policies that reduce the federal deficit more gradually in the near term but more substantially in the longer run. Such an approach could lessen the near-term fiscal headwinds facing the recovery while more effectively addressing the longer-term imbalances in the federal budget. The sizes of deficits and debt matter, of course, but not all tax and spending programs are created equal with respect to their effects on the economy. To the greatest extent possible, in their efforts to achieve sound public finances, fiscal policymakers should not lose sight of the need for federal tax and spending policies that increase incentives to work and save, encourage investments in workforce skills, advance private capital formation, promote research and development, and provide necessary and productive public infrastructure. Although economic growth alone cannot eliminate federal budget imbalances, in either the short or longer term, a more rapidly expanding economic pie will ease the difficult choices we face. 1. Data for the fourth quarter of 2012 from the national income and product accounts reflect the advance estimate released on January 30, 2013.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 12.Return to text 3. The numerical values for unemployment and inflation included in the guidance are thresholds, not triggers; that is, depending on economic circumstances at the time, the Committee may judge that it is not appropriate to begin raising its target for the federal funds rate as soon as one or both of the thresholds is reached. The 6-1/2 percent threshold for the unemployment rate should not be interpreted as the Committee's longer-term objective for unemployment; because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, the first increase in the target for the funds rate will likely have to occur when the unemployment rate is still above its longer-run normal level. Likewise, the Committee has not altered its longer-run goal for inflation of 2 percent, and it neither seeks nor expects a persistent increase in inflation above that target.Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 13; and Board of Governors, "FOMC Statement," December 12, in note 2.Return to text 5. The Federal Reserve is also monitoring financial markets to ensure that asset purchases do not impair their functioning.Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Reserve Bank Income and Expense Data and Transfers to the Treasury for 2012," press release, January 10.Return to text 7. See Carpenter, Seth B., Jane E. Ihrig, Elizabeth C. Klee, Daniel W. Quinn, and Alexander H. Boote (2013), "The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-01 (Washington: Federal Reserve Board, January).Return to text 8. See Congressional Budget Office (2013),The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2013 to 2023(Washington: CBO, February).Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the "U.S. Monetary Policy Forum" conference sponsored by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York The issue of fiscal sustainability and its interaction with monetary policy is certainly timely.1Many advanced economies are in an extended period of slow growth and high deficits, and face long-term fiscal pressures from aging populations. I agree with much in this broad-ranging paper.2In particular, the authors join others in finding that accommodative monetary policy is often associated with successful fiscal consolidations. They conclude that a "tough love" alternative, which would call for the Federal Reserve to withhold monetary accommodation until fiscal policymakers enact legislation to reduce budget imbalances, is likely to be counterproductive. Indeed, I would argue that the tough love approach also would require the Fed to deviate from the dual mandate that the Congress has assigned it, while assuming a role in influencing fiscal policy that the Congress has not assigned it. I find myself in disagreement, however, with the paper's assessment that the current fiscal policy challenges might interfere in the near-term with the conduct of monetary policy in the United States. Three important propositions underlie the authors' argument on this issue: I believe all of these statements to be true. They are also widely, if not universally, accepted. However, based on these points and, importantly, on their empirical findings, the authors set out to show that fiscal difficulties present a near-term threat to the conduct of monetary policy. The paper argues that rising fiscal pressures, exacerbated by Federal Reserve losses on asset sales and low remittances to the Treasury, could lead the Federal Reserve to delay balance sheet normalization and to fail to remove monetary accommodation as needed to keep inflation expectations stable and inflation in check. In that case, the market could perceive the onset of fiscal dominance, thus setting off a vicious cycle of rising inflation expectations, increasing interest rates, and ever greater fiscal unsustainability. In my view, this proposition seems highly unlikely. At a minimum, it is premature. U.S. Fiscal PositionThe paper led me to look back over the past century of U.S. sovereign debt history. On two prior occasions, federal debt as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) increased significantly--during the Great Depression-World War II era and, to a smaller extent, the two decades ending in the mid-1990s.3 After each of these high-debt periods, fiscal policy responded by running sustained primary surpluses and reducing debt to levels below 40 percent of GDP. In a recent paper, Henning Bohn observed that "the foundation of U.S. debt policy is the promise of safety for bondholders backed by primary surpluses only in response to a high debt-GDP ratio."4That nicely captures our recent history and suggests a principal reason why the federal debt of the United States still has the market's trust. The Great Recession has generated a third substantial increase in federal debt, from about 35 percent of GDP in 2007 to around 75 percent at the end of this fiscal year, an increase that is consistent with other increases in sovereign debt for advanced economies after severe financial crises during the post-World War II period.5History and common sense suggest that the federal government should again run primary surpluses sufficient over time to reduce debt to pre-crisis levels of perhaps 35 to 40 percent of GDP. That would leave fiscal space to address the coming wave of health and pension costs, as well as unexpected new shocks. In the past two years, spending cuts and tax increases totaling about $3.5 trillion over the next 10 years have been enacted. Assuming these measures are not rolled back--in particular, that the spending sequestration either takes effect or is replaced by equivalent deficit-reducing measures--a reasonable "current policy" projection is that the ratio of debt to GDP will be roughly stable at around 75 percent through about 2020.6After that, under current policy, health-care costs and, to a much lesser extent, pension costs will produce a sharp, sustained increase in the ratio of debt to GDP. Fiscal Sustainability and Monetary PolicyThe authors review empirical evidence of sovereign borrowing costs for 20 advanced economies. They join others in finding a statistically significant relationship between sovereign debt levels and borrowing costs.7They also find nonlinear increases in borrowing costs beginning at debt-to-GDP ratios of around 80 percent. But the nonlinearities they find are driven to a great extent by the experience of smaller euro-zone nations that, of course, borrow in euros. The United States borrows in its own currency--the world's primary reserve currency. That difference is crucial for investors, along with the fact that the United States economy remains the world's largest and most productive. The United Kingdom and Japan are also high-debt countries that borrow in their own currencies; neither shows any detectable rate increase, let alone a nonlinear one. These countries present a serious problem for the authors' case. Of course, the United States is not exempt from concerns about the potential long-term effects of an unsustainable fiscal path. There is almost certainly a level of debt at which the United States would be at risk of an interest rate spike. However, we should expect that level to be substantially above one identified based on the experience of smaller euro-zone nations. The argument also has a serious timing problem. The Federal Reserve's balance sheet likely will be normalized by late this decade, before the federal debt-to-GDP ratio even increases materially from today's level. Under the reasonable projection mentioned above, the debt-to-GDP ratio will remain roughly stable until 2020 before rising significantly in the next decade.8That's not a favorable longer-term forecast, all the more so because it is importantly the result of demographic changes that have been expected for decades. But the forecast doesn't support the authors' claim that fears of fiscal dominance could materialize in the United States within the next five to seven years, during the period when the Fed is normalizing its balance sheet. No current market signal suggests that the United States is near the point of losing the market's confidence. In my view, nothing in the Congressional Budget Office debt forecasts or the authors' empirical findings provides grounds for such an event during this decade. The market has every reason to believe--and apparently still does believe--that the United States will continue the difficult task of fiscal consolidation until the job is done. Terribly difficult fiscal adjustments lie ahead. Although there is still time to make them, delay will sharply increase the pain of adjustment. The time to act is now. In my view, the problem is not principally one of economics or fiscal policy; it is one of governance. The real threat to the fiscal standing of the United States is that of inaction caused by a long period of political polarization and dysfunction. That would be a self-inflicted wound. And that is a problem that can't be derived from the traditional fiscal metrics. We may have more room than other economies around the globe, but I do not intend to project any sense of complacency around this topic. The authors' basic message seems just right to me: We don't know where the tipping point is; wherever it is, we are clearly getting closer to it, and the costs of misestimating its location are enormous and one-sided. The benefits to long-term fiscal consolidation--conducted at the right pace, and without jeopardizing the near-term economic recovery--would be substantial. Balance Sheet Losses and RemittancesThe authors' work on Federal Reserve income and remittances to the Treasury overlaps with a paper published last month by Federal Reserve Board staff members Seth Carpenter, Jane Ihrig, Beth Klee, Daniel Quinn, and Alexander Boote.9Both papers provide a basis for public discussion of these matters, which is a highly positive development. Some of the assets acquired through the Federal Reserve's large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) may be sold at a loss, and it is important to be transparent about this possibility. Thus far, the Federal Reserve's asset purchases have greatly increased our income and remittances to the Treasury. Indeed, remittances have run at an annual level of about $80 billion from 2010 to 2012. Both papers show that remittances are likely to decline substantially from these elevated levels as interest rates rise and the Fed balance sheet normalizes, and there may be a period of zero remittances. If so, the balance sheet would show a deferred asset representing a flow of future income to be retained and not remitted to the Treasury. Nonetheless, we expect that the LSAPs, which began in late 2008, will result in a net increase in remittances over the life of these programs. Moreover, any temporary losses should be weighed against the expected social benefits of the increased economic growth generated by the LSAPs, which would include higher tax revenue from increased output. Greenlaw and his coauthors also note that we have the flexibility to normalize the balance sheet more slowly. For example, a "no asset sale" plan--under which assets would simply run off as they mature--would push out the date of normalization by only a year or so. That approach would also address concerns over potential market disruption from the sale of off-the-run agency mortgage-backed securities. And it would also smooth remittances. Remittances averaged about $25 billion per year, or 0.2 percent of GDP, over the decade before the crisis. After the balance sheet is normalized, these remittances should return to a similar, modest share of GDP. From the standpoint of the sustainability of federal fiscal policy, remittances are not a first-order concern. That said, an extended period of zero remittances could certainly bring the Federal Reserve under criticism from the public and the Congress. The question is whether the Federal Reserve would permit inflation and thereby abandon its post in the face of such criticism. There is no reason to expect that to happen. The Federal Reserve was created as an independent agency, and a broad consensus has emerged among policymakers, academics, and other informed observers around the world that better overall economic performance is achieved when the conduct of monetary policy is free from political control.10Of course, we are accountable to the Congress and the American people. The Congress has given us a job to do, and as long as I am a member of the Federal Reserve Board, I will do my utmost to carry out our mandate. Other ObservationsThe authors note that Federal Reserve asset purchases shorten the duration of debt held by the public, by the issuance of reserves to fund purchases of long-term securities. And shortening the maturity of the public debt does make any government more susceptible, in theory, to fiscal dominance. There is also a general assumption that under fiscal dominance any government has a strong incentive to allow inflation to reduce the real value of the debt. In the case of the United States, there is less to that than one might expect. By shortening the duration of debt held by the public, asset purchases have also reduced any benefit to the government of an unexpected inflation. More fundamentally, the liabilities that matter in the long term for the federal budget are those associated with health care and pension costs. These liabilities are not nominal but real, and cannot be inflated away. ConclusionI am not suggesting, and I do not expect, that the path ahead for monetary policy will be an easy one. There are legitimate concerns associated with the costs and benefits of continuing asset purchases. We may face challenges related to financial stability, as well as market function and inflation expectations. I do not personally see fiscal dominance as high on the list of near term risks. I thank the authors for their interesting work. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. I am indebted to members of the Board staff--Eric Engen, Edward Nelson, David Lopez-Salido, and Jon Faust--who contributed to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text 2.See David Greenlaw, James D. Hamilton, Peter Hooper, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2013), "Crunch Time: Fiscal Crises and the Role of Monetary Policy," paper written for "U.S. Monetary Policy Forum," a conference sponsored by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, February 22.Return to text 3.Figure 1shows federal debt held by the public and primary budget surpluses--that is, the difference between federal revenues and federal noninterest outlays--as a percent of nominal GDP from fiscal year 1912 through fiscal 2012.Return to text 4.See quote on p. 290 in Henning Bohn (2011), "The Economic Consequences of Rising U.S. Government Debt: Privileges at Risk,"FinanzArchiv/Public Finance Analysis, vol. 67 (September), pp. 282-302.Return to text 5.See Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009), "The Aftermath of Financial Crises,"American Economic Review, vol. 99 (May), pp. 466-72.Return to text 6.See Loren Adler, Shai Akabas, and Brian Collins (2013), "Key Takeaways from the 2013-2023 CBO Budget and Economic Outlook,"Bipartisan Beat Blog, Bipartisan Policy Center, February 7. Numbers are modified to assume that the spending sequestration either takes effect or is replaced by equivalent deficit reducing measures.Return to text 7.For example, see Eric Engen and R. Glenn Hubbard (2005), "Federal Government Debt and Interest Rates," in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004,vol. 19 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), pp. 83-138; Thomas Laubach (2009), "New Evidence on the Interest Rate Effects of Budget Deficits and Debt,"Journal of the European Economic Association,vol. 7 (June), pp. 858-85; and Joseph W. Gruber and Steven B. Kamin (2012), "Fiscal Positions and Government Bond Yields in OECD Countries,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44 (December), pp. 1563-87.Return to text 8.This is the alternative baseline scenario presented in Adler, Akabas, and Collins, "Key Takeaways," in note 6.Return to text 9.See Seth B. Carpenter, Jane E. Ihrig, Elizabeth C. Klee, Daniel W. Quinn, and Alexander H. Boote (2013), "The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-01 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).Return to text 10.Among many studies, see, for example, Alex Cukierman (1992),Central Bank Strategy, Credibility, and Independence: Theory and Evidence(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press); Alberto Alesina and Lawrence H. Summers (1993), "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62; and Alex Cukierman, Pantelis Kalaitzidakis, Lawrence H. Summers, and Steven B. Webb (1993), "Central Bank Independence, Growth, Investment, and Real Rates,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 95-140.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday requested comment on a proposed rule to amend Regulation HH to set out the conditions and requirements for a Federal Reserve Bank to open and maintain accounts for and provide financial services to financial market utilities designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council. In addition, the proposed rule, which implements provisions of Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, would authorize a Reserve Bank to pay interest on the balances maintained by a designated financial market utility in accordance with the title and other terms and conditions as the Board may prescribe. The Board is requesting public comment on all aspects of the proposed amendments to Regulation HH contained in the attachedFederal Registernotice. Comments on the proposal will be due 60 days after the rule is published in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Comments:View
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Central Pacific Financial Corporation, Honolulu, HawaiiWritten Agreement dated July 2, 2010Terminated February 12, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Progressive Growth Corp., Gaylord, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated November 15, 2010Terminated February 1, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Rurban Financial Corp. and Rurbanc Data Services, Inc., both of Defiance, OhioCease and Desist Order dated March 9, 2011Terminated February 8, 2013 For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has extended until April 30, 2013, the comment period on a proposed rule to implement the enhanced prudential standards and early remediation requirements established under sections 165 and 166 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for foreign banking organizations and foreign nonbank financial companies supervised by the Board. The enhanced prudential standards include risk-based capital and leverage requirements, liquidity standards, risk management and risk committee requirements, single-counterparty credit limits, and stress test requirements. The Board extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Originally, comments were due by March 31, 2013. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Federal Reserve Board releases proposed rules to strengthen the oversight of U.S. operations of foreign banks
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Commonwealth Savingshares Corporation (PDF), Huntsville, AlabamaWritten Agreement dated February 5, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Countricorp (PDF), White Sulphur Springs, MontanaWritten Agreement dated January 29, 2013 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: JLL Associates G.P. FCH, L.L.C., JLL Associates FCH, L.P., JLL Partners Fund FCH, L.P., JLL/FCH Holdings I, L.L.C, all of New York, New York and FC Holdings, Inc., Webster, TexasWritten Agreement dated June 21, 2011Terminated February 1, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Cornell International Law Journal Symposium: The Changing Politics of Central Banks, New York, New York Next month marks the fifth anniversary of the failure of Bear Stearns--in retrospect, the beginning of the most acute phase of the financial crisis. The cross-border dimensions of the crisis itself and the global effects of the Great Recession that followed provoked a major effort to strengthen international cooperation in financial regulation. While a good deal has already been accomplished, this evening I will suggest the next steps that would be most useful in advancing global financial stability. Of course, the fashioning of an international agenda requires a clear understanding of the overall regulatory aims of participating national authorities. Here is where international regulatory cooperation links to the subject of this conference--if not quite the changingpoliticsof central banks, then at least their changingpolicygoalsin the wake of the financial crisis. Almost by definition, systemic crises reveal failures across the financial system, from breakdowns in risk management at many financial firms to serious deficiencies in government regulation of financial institutions and markets. While the recent crisis was no exception, it has presented particular challenges to the policy foundations of central banks, especially those like the Federal Reserve that carry out regulatory mandates alongside their monetary policy missions. So I begin with some remarks on the nature of those challenges, before turning to a discussion of how changes in approach should inform international cooperation in financial regulation. Central Banks and the Financial CrisisIn surveying the failings of financial authorities, both here and abroad, one can certainly identify some specific characteristics of pre-crisis regulation that look today to have been significantly misguided, rather than the advances they were formerly thought to be. So, for example, regulators became prone to place too much confidence in the capacity of firms to measure and manage their risks. Indeed, the decade or so prior to the crisis had seen an acceleration of the shift from a dominantlyregulatoryapproach to achieving prudential aims--one that rests on activities and affiliation restrictions, and other reasonably transparent rules‑‑toward greater emphasis on asupervisoryapproach, which relies on a more opaque, firm-specific process of watching over banks' own risk-management and compliance systems. Yet the breadth and depth of the financial breakdown suggest that it has much deeper roots. In many respects, this crisis was the culmination of fundamental shifts in both the organization and regulation of financial markets that began in the 1970s. The New Deal reforms of financial regulation, themselves spawned by a systemic crisis, had separated commercial banking from investment banking, cured the problem of commercial bank runs by providing federal deposit insurance, and brought transparency and investor protections to trading and other capital markets activities. This regulatory approach fostered a commercial banking system that was, for the better part of 40 years, quite stable and reasonably profitable, though not particularly innovative in meeting the needs of depositors and borrowers. In the 1970s, however, turbulent macroeconomic developments combined with technological and business innovations to produce an increasingly tight squeeze on the traditional commercial banking business model. The squeeze came from both the liability side of banks' balance sheets, in the form of more attractive savings vehicles such as money market funds, and from the asset side, with the growth of public capital markets and international competition. The large commercial banking industry that saw both its funding and its customer bases under attack sought removal or relaxation of the regulations that confined bank activities, affiliations, and geographic reach. While supervisors differed with banks on some important particulars, they were sympathetic to this industry request, in part because of the potential threat to the viability of the traditional commercial banking system. The period of relative legal and industry stability that had followed the New Deal thus gave way in the 1970s to a nearly 30-year period during which many prevailing restrictions on banks were relaxed. A good number were loosened through administrative action by the banking agencies, but important statutory measures headed in the same direction. This legislative trend culminated in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999, which consolidated and extended the administrative changes that had allowed more extensive affiliations of commercial banks with investment banks, broker-dealers, private equity firms, and other financial entities. But in sweeping away the remnants of one key element of the New Deal regulatory system, neither Gramm-Leach-Bliley nor financial regulators substituted new regulatory mechanisms to match the wholesale changes in the structure of the financial services industry and the dramatic growth of novel financial instruments. In fact, I would generalize this last observation to say that the need to address the consequences of the progressive integration of traditional lending, trading activities, and capital markets lies at the heart of three post-crisis challenges to the policy foundations of the Federal Reserve and, to a greater or lesser degree, many other central banks. Microprudential Regulation.The first challenge posed by the crisis was to traditional, microprudential regulation, which focuses on the safety and soundness of each prudentially regulated firm. Not all central banks have microprudential regulatory authority, of course, and‑‑as in the United States--those that do sometimes share it with other agencies. But the shortcomings of pre-crisis regulatory regimes have been of concern to all central banks. Most notably, capital requirements for banking organizations, particularly the large ones that might be regarded as too-big-to-fail, simply were not strong enough. Risk-weights were too low for certain traded assets that had proliferated as credit and capital markets integrated more thoroughly. In some cases, the arbitrage opportunities presented by existing capital requirements were an incentive for securitization and other capital markets activities. The exposures created by off-balance-sheet activities such as structured investment vehicles (SIVs) were badly underweighted. Minimum capital ratios were not high enough and, in meeting even those inadequate requirements, firms were allowed to count liabilities that did not really provide the ability to absorb losses and still maintain the firms as viable, functioning intermediaries. There has already been a substantial response to this challenge. With the support of the Federal Reserve and other U.S. bank regulators, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has strengthened capital requirements by raising risk-weightings for traded assets and improved the quality of loss-absorbing capital through a new minimum common equity ratio. The committee also has created a capital conservation buffer and introduced an international leverage ratio. These Basel 2.5 and Basel III reforms either have been, or soon will be, implemented in the United States and most other countries that are home to internationally active banking firms. Also, the Basel Committee has just recently adopted the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), a first step in addressing liquidity problems. In the United States, some important additional steps have been taken. Beginning at the peak of the crisis, the Federal Reserve has conducted stress tests of large banking organizations, making capital requirements more forward-looking by estimating the effect of an adverse economic scenario on firm capital levels in a manner less dependent on firms' internal risk-measurement infrastructure. And the provision of the Dodd-Frank Act popularly known as the Collins Amendment ensures that banking organizations cannot use models-based approaches to reduce their minimum capital below generally applicable, more standardized risk-based ratios. Macroprudential Regulation.A second challenge for central banks is that the crisis revealed the need for a much more active set of macroprudential monitoring and regulatory policies--that is, a reorientation toward safeguarding financial stability through the containment of systemic risk. The failure to attend to, or even recognize, financial stability risks was perhaps the most glaring public sector deficiency in the pre-crisis period. This was a fault by no means limited to central banks. On the contrary, systemic risk had also come to seem more theoretical than real to many academics and financial market participants. Even most of those inside and outside the official sector who argued for stronger capital or other prudential standards did not appreciate the degree to which the secondary mortgage market had turned into a house of cards. Still, regardless of formal mandates, central banks are better positioned than most other government agencies to see and evaluate the emergence of asset bubbles, excessive leverage, and other signs of potential systemic vulnerability. In some respects this second challenge is an extension of the first, since the safety and soundness of large institutions must take account of the relative correlation of their asset holdings, interconnectedness, common liquidity constraints, and other characteristics of large banking organizations as a group. Similarly, systemic risks and too-big-to-fail problems can increase if large, highly leveraged firms may operate outside the perimeter of statutory microprudential oversight, as was the case prior to 2008 with the large, free-standing investment banks in the United States. And market discipline will be badly compromised if financial market participants believe that an insolvent counterparty cannot be resolved in an orderly fashion and thus is likely to receive government assistance under stress. Here again, domestic and international efforts have already produced significant reform programs, though implementation of some of these programs is less advanced than Basel 2.5 and Basel III. Domestically, the Federal Reserve's annual stress tests examine the effects of unexpected macroeconomic shocks on asset classes held within all major regulated firms. The Dodd-Frank Act gave the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) authority to bring systemically important firms that are not already bank holding companies within the perimeter of Federal Reserve regulation and supervision. The FSOC is actively considering several firms for possible designation. Finally, the Dodd-Frank Act gave the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation orderly liquidation authority for systemically important financial firms, thereby creating an alternative to the Hobson's choice of bailout or bankruptcy that authorities faced in 2008. Internationally, the Basel Committee has agreed to a regime of capital surcharges for large banks based on their systemic importance. There is also an initiative to parallel U.S. efforts to identify non-bank systemically important firms. The Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board have developed international principles for resolution authority, though most of the rest of the world is behind the United States in actually implementing those principles. But meeting the macroprudential challenge will require measures beyond a more comprehensive, cross-firm approach to microprudential regulation. Much academic and policy work of the past several years has revived and elaborated the previously somewhat heterodox view that financial instability is endogenous to the financial system, or at least the kind of financial system we now have. Consider, for example, how the intertwining of traditional lending and capital markets gave rise to what has become known as the shadow banking system. Shadow banking, which refers to credit intermediation partly or wholly outside the limits of the traditional banking system, involves not only sizeable commercial and investment banks, but many firms of varying sizes across a range of markets. While some of the more notorious pre-crisis components of the shadow banking system are probably gone forever, current examples include money market funds, the triparty repo market, and securities lending. From the perspective of financial stability, the parts of the shadow banking system of most concern are those that create assets thought to be safe, short-term, and liquid--in effect, cash equivalents. For a variety of reasons, demand for such assets has grown steadily in recent years, and is not likely to reverse direction in the foreseeable future. Yet these are the assets whose funding is most likely to run in periods of stress, as investors realize that their resemblance to cash or insured deposits in normal times has disappeared in the face of uncertainty about their underlying value. And, as was graphically illustrated during the crisis, the resulting forced sales of assets whose values are already under pressure can accelerate an adverse feedback loop, in which all firms with similar assets suffer mark-to-market losses, which, in turn, can lead to more fire sales. This kind of contagion lay at the heart of the financial stresses of 2007 and 2008. As already noted, pre-crisis shortcomings at the intersection of microprudential and macroprudential regulation have motivated a variety of reforms, many explicitly directed at the problem of too-big-to-fail institutions. While some of these reforms remain unfinished, and some additional measures are needed, there has been considerable progress. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said with respect to shadow banking and, more generally, the vulnerabilities associated with wholesale short-term funding. These vulnerabilities involve both large, prudentially regulated institutions, and thus too-big-to-fail concerns, and the broader financial system. Except for the liquidity requirements agreed to in the Basel Committee, however, the liability side of the balance sheets of financial firms has barely been addressed in the reform agenda. Yet here is where the systemic problems of interconnectedness and contagion are most apparent. And, as evidenced by the funding stresses experienced by a number of European banks prior to the stabilizing measures taken by the European Central Bank, these problems are still very much with us. Within the United States, reform efforts are underway in some discrete, but important, areas. The provisions of Dodd-Frank requiring more central clearing of derivatives and minimum margins for those that remain uncleared are designed to provide more systemic stability. As to shadow banking itself, the FSOC recently proposed options to address the structural vulnerabilities in money market mutual funds, with an eye toward recommending action by the Securities and Exchange Commission. And the Federal Reserve has begun using its supervisory authority to press for a reduction in intraday credit risk in the triparty repo market. But these measures are incomplete, and do not extend to all forms of short-term funding that can pose run risks, a universe that is likely to expand as prudential constraints begin to apply to large existing shadow banking channels. Monetary Policy.While the first two policy challenges are shared among regulatory and financial agencies, the third lies solely with central banks. In the wake of the crisis, we need to consider carefully the view that central banks should assess the effect of monetary policy on financial stability and, in some instances, adjust their policy decisions to take account of these effects. The dramatic rise in housing prices, and the associated high amounts of leverage taken on by both households and investors, occurred during an extended period of low inflation. Some have suggested that, by not raising rates because inflation remained subdued, monetary policy in the United States and elsewhere may have contributed to the magnitude of the housing bubble. Whatever the merits of that much-contested point, it seems wise to address this issue as we face what could well be another extended period of low inflation and low interest rates. It is important to note that incorporating financial stability considerations into monetary policy decisions need not imply the creation of an additional mandate for monetary policy. The potentially huge effect on price stability and employment associated with bouts of serious financial instability gives ample justification. Here I want to mention some comments by my colleague Jeremy Stein a couple of weeks ago.1After reviewing the traditional arguments against using monetary policy in response to financial stability concerns and relying instead on supervisory policies, Governor Stein offered several reasons for keeping a more open mind on the subject. First, regulation has its own limits, not the least of which is the opportunity for arbitrage outside the regulated sector. Second, whatever its bluntness, monetary policy has the advantage of being able to "get in all the cracks" of the financial system, an attribute that is especially useful if imbalances are building across the financial sector and not just in a particular area. Finally, by altering the composition of its balance sheet, central banks may have a second policy instrument in addition to changing the targeted interest rate. So, for example, it is possible that a central bank might under some conditions want to use a combination of the two instruments to respond to concurrent concerns about macroeconomic sluggishness and excessive maturity transformation by lowering the target (short-term) interest rate and simultaneously flattening the yield curve through swapping shorter duration assets for longer-term ones. To be clear, I do not think that we are at present confronted with a situation that would warrant these kinds of monetary policy action. But for that very reason, it seems that now is a good time to discuss these issues more actively, so that if and when we do face financial stability concerns associated with asset bubbles backed by excessive leverage, we will have a well-considered view of the role monetary policy might play in mitigating those concerns. Advancing the International Reform AgendaLet me turn now to the way in which our shifts in policy approach should inform the agenda for international cooperation in financial regulation. For obvious reasons, the monetary policy issues are not directly related to this agenda, though our understanding of these issues may profit from discussions with our central bank colleagues from around the world. It is equally obvious that the other two sets of policy changes are quite closely related to the international agenda. More than in most other areas, the financial sphere suffers from a basic lack of congruence between the authority to regulate and the object of regulation. Thus we have a significantly internationalized financial system, in which shocks are quickly transmitted across borders, but a nationally-based structure of regulation. Within countries, responsibilities may be divided between prudential regulators and market regulators, among regulators with similar mandates, or both. Central banks may have exclusive prudential authority, share it with other agencies, or have none at all. International arrangements both reflect, and try to compensate for, this web of divided and overlapping domestic authority. Thus there are sectoral standards setters like the Basel Committee, the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) on the one hand, but also broader groupings such as the Group of Twenty, the Financial Stability Board (FSB), and the International Monetary Fund on the other. In addition, under the umbrella of the international home of central bankers, the Bank for International Settlements, numerous other committees work across fields also covered by one or more of the groups I have just mentioned. There are some obvious weaknesses with such an assortment of international arrangements, notably the difficulty of coordinating initiatives where more than one group is working on an issue. This kind of coordination challenge can be further complicated by the participation in international discussions of various national officials without domestic authority in a particular area. The sheer proliferation of international arrangements, each with its own staff, has at times also led to a proliferation of studies and initiatives that become burdensome to the national regulators and supervisors who have been overtaxed at home since the onset of the crisis and ensuing domestic reform efforts. Yet there are also some strengths derived from the crowded international field of organizations and committees. One such virtue is that issues not falling squarely within the remit of a particular kind of standards setter can nonetheless be dealt with internationally. This, in fact, has been the experience with the ongoing international effort to agree on minimum margin requirements for derivatives that are not centrally cleared. Another is that different perspectives are frequently brought to bear on a single set of problems. At some point, it likely will be beneficial to rationalize somewhat the overlapping, sometimes competing efforts of these various international arrangements. For the near to medium term, though, it is important to have some principles for deciding upon the international agenda that should govern the efforts of these arrangements as a whole. First, initiatives should be prioritized. One point of emphasis should be completing, and ensuring implementation of, the internationally agreed-upon framework for containing the too-big-to-fail risks associated with systemically important firms. Another should be distilling the various ideas relating to short-term funding vulnerabilities into a few that have promise as discrete, relatively near-term initiatives, while continuing study of other, more comprehensive measures. A second, related principle is that initiatives should be focused and manageable, reflecting not only the limited capacity of participating national authorities, but also the desirability of reaching at least a temporary equilibrium at which firms can get on with the business of planning their strategies in a clearer regulatory environment, and regulators can begin to take stock of the cumulative effects and effectiveness of the changes that have taken place in that environment. A third principle is that, in most instances at least, international efforts to develop new regulatory mechanisms or approaches should build on experience derived from national practice in one or more jurisdictions. The challenges encountered during the initial effort to devise an LCR in the Basel Committee, with little or no precedent of national quantitative liquidity requirements from which to learn, should counsel caution in trying to construct new regulatory mechanisms from scratch at the international level. There will doubtless be exceptions to this general principle, such as where the transnational arbitrage incentives of a regulatory measure are so strong as to make national efforts difficult to initiate and sustain without substantial loss of financial activity to other countries. And, in the immediate aftermath of the crisis, there was a need to harness the broad-based demands for reform and move forward on some priority reforms without benefit of learning from national initiatives. On the other hand, there may also be areas where, notwithstanding the importance of a particular regulatory objective for international financial stability, it may be preferable to maintain a variety of approaches to achieving that objective. Bearing in mind both these principles and the key areas for policy change at central banks and other financial regulators, let me now suggest some specific subjects for near-term emphasis. As to the framework for systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), I would urge that two ongoing initiatives be completed over the next year and two ideas that have been in the discussion stage be developed into concrete proposals. First, the proposal for a capital surcharge for systemically important banking organizations is nearing completion. The Basel Committee continues to refine the methodology to be used in identifying the firms and calibrating the surcharge amount--perhaps a byproduct of the fact that this methodology had to be developed in the Basel Committee without benefit of prior precedent. But I have confidence that this work will be successfully completed. The second ongoing initiative--work on designating non-bank SIFIs--has to date been pursued mostly in the IAIS and thus has concentrated on insurance companies. It is important to take the time to evaluate carefully the actual systemic risk associated with these companies, and to understand the amount of such risk relative to other financial firms, before fixing on a list of firms and surcharges. But this seems to me a realistic goal over the next six months. Third, we should build on the very good analytic work in the Basel Committee, both on simplifying capital requirements for credit risk and on fashioning standardized capital requirements for market risk, to apply standardized credit and market risk capital measures to all internationally active banking firms. As I mentioned earlier, the United States has already adopted such a requirement for capital requirements on credit risk. These standardized measures serve as a floor to guard against the potential for models-based capital measures to understate capital needs under some circumstances. They are also substantially less opaque than, for example, the advanced internal ratings-based approach of Basel II, and thus would provide more comparable measures that are also more amenable to international monitoring. Fourth, I would hope to see a requirement proposed for large internationally active financial institutions to have minimum amounts of long-term unsecured debt, which would be available to absorb losses in the event of insolvency. As I mentioned earlier, work on resolution continues, albeit at different paces in different jurisdictions. Given the complexities arising from the independent, often differing national bankruptcy and insolvency laws, the goal of achieving a fully integrated resolution regime for internationally active financial firms may take a good deal of time. But a minimum long-term debt requirement would at least provide national authorities with sufficient equity and long-term debt in these firms to bear all losses in the event of insolvency, and thereby counteract the moral hazard associated with taxpayer bailouts without risking disorderly failure. This requirement would not break brand new regulatory ground, since it would really be a modification of existing Tier 2 gone-concern capital concepts, and would complement the requirement for minimum equity levels included in Basel III. As implied in my identification of short-term funding vulnerabilities as a priority area, the best way forward here is considerably less easy to specify. Short-term initiatives on money market funds and triparty repo are both possible and desirable. In truth, though, because money market funds are largely American and, to a somewhat lesser extent, European, the United States and the European Union together have the ability to address the global run risks associated with these products. I think we also have the responsibility to do so, but not necessarily in identical ways. Accordingly, I would hope that both the United States and the European Union would each take effective action to counter the run risk, tailored as appropriate to their regulatory environments, and then explain those actions at IOSCO and the FSB, where their efficacy can be reviewed. Similarly, since the settlement process for triparty repo that remains of concern is centered at two institutions, both of which are regulated American banks, the United States can take effective action without need of an international agreement As to broader initiatives, proposals to require minimum haircuts for all securities financing transactions have been tentatively discussed in the FSB. This is certainly a ripe subject for discussion, insofar as securities financing transactions facilitate leverage, enable maturity transformation, and produce the kind of interconnectedness that can spawn runs and contagion. At present, no set of generally applicable prudential standards governs these activities. Even within regulated firms, microprudential risk-weighted capital standards have little effect, since they are calibrated against credit risk and most such transactions are short-term and fully (or over) collateralized. Thus requirements that would attach to instruments and transactions, as opposed to firms that happen to be prudentially regulated for other reasons, have considerable attraction. On the other hand, universal haircut requirements are the type of regulatory innovation that I suggested earlier was best developed internationally following some experience within financially significant countries. One may, for example, have significant concern about some of the unintended consequences that would ensue. My instinct, then, is that the analysis of this idea should continue within the FSB and, one hopes, in other venues both in and out of the official sector. There should also be concerted efforts internationally to gather relevant data, some of which is at present uncollected. But we are not going to be in a position to establish an international securities transaction financing regime in the near term. However, one proposal already on the international agenda might be reconsidered, so as to address more directly the short-term funding problem. Following completion of the LCR earlier this year, the Basel Committee is turning its attention back to the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), a proposal that was intended to complement the LCR by regulating liquidity levels beyond the 30-day LCR horizon. Like the LCR, the NSFR proposal raised many questions even among those favoring robust measures to deal with the liability side of firm balance sheets. There is some appeal to moving forward with this complementary measure fairly quickly by simply making some incremental changes to the NSFR while keeping its current structure. But I think we may be better advised to take the opportunity of this review to examine whether there are approaches that might address more directly the vulnerabilities for the financial system created by large non-deposit, short-term funding dependence at major financial institutions. I do not mean to prejudge the outcome of such an examination, or the degree to which we might build on measures being considered in various jurisdictions to address these vulnerabilities. But I do think it worth the effort. ConclusionResponses to what I have described as the three challenges to pre-crisis central bank policies will continue to evolve. So will the reenergized international agenda for cooperation in international financial regulation. My aim tonight has not been to lay out a comprehensive program for either, but to suggest that these changing agendas are neither completely correlated nor completely independent. In suggesting some concrete next steps, I have tried to define some useful and important points of intersection between the two. 1.See Jeremy C. Stein (2013), "Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses," speech delivered at the "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter," a research symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, held in St. Louis, Mo., February 7.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings of January 14 and January 28, 2013. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 29-30, 2013. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 29-30, 2013:HTML|PDF
Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter" research symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri Thank you very much. It's a pleasure to be here. The question I'd like to address today is this: What factors lead to overheating episodes in credit markets?1In other words, why do we periodically observe credit booms, times during which lending standards appear to become lax and which tend to be followed by low returns on credit instruments relative to other asset classes?2We have seen how such episodes can sometimes have adverse effects on the financial system and the broader economy, and the hope would be that a better understanding of the causes can be helpful both in identifying emerging problems on a timely basis and in thinking about appropriate policy responses. Two Views of the Overheating MechanismI will start by sketching two views that might be invoked to explain variation in the pricing of credit risk over time: a "primitive preferences and beliefs" view and an "institutions, agency, and incentives" view. While the first view is a natural starting point, I will argue that it must be augmented with the second view if one wants to fully understand the dynamics of overheating episodes in credit markets. According to the primitives view, changes in the pricing of credit over time reflect fluctuations in the preferences and beliefs of end investors such as households, where these beliefs may or may not be entirely rational. Perhaps credit is cheap when household risk tolerance is high--say, because of a recent run-up in wealth.3Or maybe credit is cheap when households extrapolate current good times into the future and neglect low-probability risks.4 The primitives view is helpful for understanding some aspects of the behavior of the aggregate stock market, with the 1990s Internet bubble being one illustration. It seems clear that the sentiment of retail investors played a prominent role in inflating this bubble.5More generally, research using survey evidence has shown that when individual investors are most optimistic about future stock market returns, the market tends to be overvalued, in the sense that statistical forecasts of equity returns are abnormally low.6This finding is consistent with the importance of primitive investor beliefs. By contrast, I am skeptical that one can say much about time variation in the pricing of credit--as opposed to equities--without focusing on the roles of institutions and incentives. The premise here is that since credit decisions are almost always delegated to agents inside banks, mutual funds, insurance companies, pension funds, hedge funds, and so forth, any effort to analyze the pricing of credit has to take into account not only household preferences and beliefs, but also the incentives facing the agents actually making the decisions. And these incentives are in turn shaped by the rules of the game, which include regulations, accounting standards, and a range of performance-measurement, governance, and compensation structures. At an abstract level, one can think of the agents making credit decisions and the rulemakers who shape their incentives as involved in an ongoing evolutionary process, in which each adapts over time in response to changing conditions. At any point, the agents try to maximize their own compensation, given the rules of the game. Sometimes they discover vulnerabilities in these rules, which they then exploit in a way that is not optimal from the perspective of their own organizations or society. If the damage caused is significant enough, the rules themselves adapt, driven either by internal governance or by political and regulatory forces. Still, it is possible that at different times in this process, the rules do a better or worse job of managing the incentives of the agents. To be more specific, a fundamental challenge in delegated investment management is that many quantitative rules are vulnerable to agents who act to boost measured returns by selling insurance against unlikely events--that is, by writing deep out-of-the-money puts. An example is that if you hire an agent to manage your equity portfolio, and compensate the agent based on performance relative to the S&P 500, the agent can beat the benchmark simply by holding the S&P 500 and stealthily writing puts against it, since this put-writing both raises the mean and lowers themeasuredvariance of the portfolio.7Of course, put-writing also introduces low-probability risks that may make you, as the end investor, worse off, but if your measurement system doesn't capture these risks adequately--which is often difficult to do unless one knows what to look for--then the put-writing strategy will create the appearance of outperformance. Since credit risk by its nature involves an element of put-writing, it is always going to be challenging in an agency context, especially to the extent that the risks associated with the put‑writing can be structured to partially evade the relevant measurement scheme. Think of the AAA-rated tranche of a subprime collateralized debt obligation (CDO), where the measurement scheme is the credit risk model used by the rating agency. To the extent that this model is behind the curve and does not fully recognize the additional structural leverage and correlational complexities embedded in a second-generation securitization like the CDO, as opposed to a first-generation one, it will be particularly vulnerable to the introduction of a second-generation product.8 These agency problems may be exacerbated by competitive pressures among intermediaries and by the associated phenomenon of relative performance evaluation. A leading example here comes from the money market fund sector, where even small increases in a money fund's yield relative to its competitors can attract large inflows of new assets under management.9And if these yield differentials reflect not managerial skill but rather additional risk-taking, then competition among funds to attract assets will only make the underlying put-writing problem worse. But it is not all that satisfying--either intellectually or from a policy perspective--to simply list all of the ways that the delegation of credit decisions to agents inside big, complicated institutions can lead things astray. It must be the case that, on average over long periods of time, these agency problems are contained tolerably well by the rules of the game--by some combination of private governance and public policy--or else our credit markets would not be as large and as well developed as they are. A more interesting set of questions has to do with time-series dynamics: Why is it that sometimes, things get out of balance, and the existing set of rules is less successful in containing risk-taking? In other words, what does the institutions view tell us about why credit markets sometimes overheat? Let me suggest three factors that can contribute to overheating. The first is financial innovation. While financial innovation has provided important benefits to society, the institutions perspective warns of a dark side, which is that innovation can create new ways for agents to write puts that are not captured by existing rules. For this reason, policymakers should be on alert any time there is rapid growth in a new product that is not yet fully understood. Perhaps the best explanation for the existence of second-generation securitizations like subprime CDOs is that they evolved in response to flaws in prevailing models and incentive schemes.10Going back further, a similar story can be told about the introduction of payment-in-kind (PIK) interest features in the high-yield bonds used in the leveraged buyouts (LBOs) of the late 1980s. I don't think it was a coincidence that among the buyers of such PIK bonds were savings and loan associations, at a time when many were willing to take risks to boost their accounting incomes. The second closely related factor on my list is changes in regulation. New regulation will tend to spur further innovation, as market participants attempt to minimize the private costs created by new rules. And it may also open up new loopholes, some of which may be exploited by variants on already existing instruments. The third factor that can lead to overheating is a change in the economic environment that alters the risk-taking incentives of agents making credit decisions. For example, a prolonged period of low interest rates, of the sort we are experiencing today, can create incentives for agents to take on greater duration or credit risks, or to employ additional financial leverage, in an effort to "reach for yield."11An insurance company that has offered guaranteed minimum rates of return on some of its products might find its solvency threatened by a long stretch of low rates and feel compelled to take on added risk.12A similar logic applies to a bank whose net interest margins are under pressure because low rates erode the profitability of its deposit-taking franchise. Moreover, these three factors may interact with one another. For example, if low interest rates increase the demand by agents to engage in below-the-radar forms of risk-taking, this demand may prompt innovations that facilitate this sort of risk-taking. Why the Distinction MattersTo summarize the argument thus far, I have drawn a distinction between two views of risk-taking in credit markets. According to the primitives view, changes over time in effective risk appetite reflect the underlying preferences and beliefs of end investors. According to the institutions view, such changes reflect the imperfectly aligned incentives of the agents in large financial institutions who do the investing on behalf of these end investors. But why should anybody care about this distinction? One reason is that your view of the underlying mechanism shapes how you think about measurement. Consider this question: Is the high-yield bond market currently overheated, in the sense that it might be expected to offer disappointing returns to investors? What variables might one look at to shape such a forecast? In a primitives-driven world, it would be natural to focus on credit spreads, on the premise that more risk tolerance on the part of households would lead them to bid down credit spreads; these lower spreads would then be the leading indicator of low expected returns. On the other hand, in an institutions-driven world, where agents are trying to exploit various incentive schemes, it is less obvious that increased risk appetite is as well summarized by reduced credit spreads. Rather, agents may prefer to accept their lowered returns via various subtler nonprice terms and subordination features that allow them to maintain a higher stated yield. Again, the use of PIK bonds in LBOs is instructive. A long time ago, Steve Kaplan and I did a study of the capital structure of 1980s-era LBOs.13What was most noteworthy about the PIK bonds in those deals was not that they had low credit spreads. Rather, it was that they were subject to an extreme degree of implicit subordination. While these bonds were not due to get cash interest for several years, they stood behind bank loans with very fast principal repayment schedules, which in many cases required the newly leveraged firm to sell a large chunk of its assets just to honor these bank loans. Simply put, much of the action--and much of the explanatory power for the eventual sorry returns on the PIK bonds--was in the nonprice terms. It is interesting to think about recent work by Robin Greenwood and Sam Hanson through this lens.14They show that if one is interested in forecasting excess returns on corporate bonds (relative to Treasury securities) over the next few years, credit spreads are indeed helpful, but another powerful predictive variable is a nonprice measure: the high-yield share, defined as issuance by speculative-grade firms divided by total bond issuance. When the high-yield share is elevated, future returns on corporate credit tend to be low, holding fixed the credit spread.Exhibit 1provides an illustration of their finding. One possible interpretation is that the high-yield share acts as a summary statistic for a variety of nonprice credit terms and structural features. That is, when agents' risk appetite goes up, they agree to fewer covenants, accept more-implicit subordination, and so forth, and high-yield issuance responds accordingly, hence its predictive power. A second implication of the institutions view is what one might call the "tip of the iceberg" caveat. Quantifying risk-taking in credit markets is difficult in real time, precisely because risks are often taken in opaque ways that escape conventional measurement practices. So we should be humble about our ability to see the whole picture, and should interpret those clues that we do see accordingly. For example, I have mentioned the junk bond market several times, but not because this market is necessarily the most important venue for the sort of risk-taking that is likely to raise systemic concerns. Rather, because it offers a relatively long history on price and nonprice terms, it is arguably a useful barometer. Thus, overheating in the junk bond market might not be a major systemic concern in and of itself, but it might indicate that similar overheating forces were at play in other parts of credit markets, out of our range of vision. Recent Developments in Credit MarketsWith these remarks as a prelude, what I'd like to do next is take you on a brief tour of recent developments in a few selected areas of credit markets. This tour draws heavily on work conducted by the Federal Reserve staff as part of our ongoing quantitative surveillance efforts, under the auspices of our Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research. The first stop on the tour is the market for leveraged finance, encompassing both the public junk bond market and the syndicated leveraged loan market. As can be seen inexhibit 2, issuance in both of these markets has been very robust of late, with junk bond issuance setting a new record in 2012. In terms of the variables that could be informative about the extent of market overheating, the picture is mixed. On the one hand, credit spreads, though they have tightened in recent months, remain moderate by historical standards. For example, asexhibit 3shows, the spread on nonfinancial junk bonds, currently at about 400 basis points, is just above the median of the pre-financial-crisis distribution, which would seem to imply that pricing is not particularly aggressive.15 On the other hand, the high-yield share for 2012 was above its historical average, suggesting--based on the results of Greenwood and Hanson--a somewhat more pessimistic picture of prospective credit returns.16This notion is supported by recent trends in the sorts of nonprice terms I discussed earlier (exhibit 4). The annualized rates of PIK bond issuance and of covenant-lite loan issuance in the fourth quarter of 2012 were comparable to highs from 2007. The past year also saw a new record in the use of loan proceeds for dividend recapitalizations, which represents a case in which bondholders move further to the back of the line while stockholders--often private equity firms--cash out.17Finally, leverage in large LBOs rose noticeably, though less dramatically, in the third and fourth quarters of 2012. Putting it all together, my reading of the evidence is that we are seeing a fairly significant pattern of reaching-for-yield behavior emerging in corporate credit. However, even if this conjecture is correct, and even if it does not bode well for the expected returns to junk bond and leveraged-loan investors, it need not follow that this risk-taking has ominous systemic implications. That is, even if at some point junk bond investors suffer losses, without spillovers to other parts of the system, these losses may be confined and therefore less of a policy concern. In this regard, one lesson from the crisis is that it is not just bad credit decisions that create systemic problems, but bad credit decisionscombined withexcessive maturity transformation. A badly underwritten subprime loan is one thing, and a badly underwritten subprime loan that serves as the collateral for asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) held by a money market fund is something else--and more dangerous. This observation suggests an idealized measurement construct. In principle, what we'd really like to know, for any given asset class--be it subprime mortgages, junk bonds, or leveraged loans--is this: What fraction of it is ultimately financed by short-term demandable claims held by investors who are likely to pull back quickly when things start to go bad? It is this short-term financing share that creates the potential for systemic spillovers in the form of deleveraging and marketwide fire sales of illiquid assets. This short-term financing share is difficult to measure comprehensively, butexhibit 5presents one graph that gives some comfort. The graph shows dealer financing of corporate debt securities, much of which is done via short-term repurchase agreements (repos). This financing rose rapidly in the years prior to the crisis, then fell sharply, and remains well below its pre-crisis levels today. So, on this score, there appears to be only modest short-term leverage behind corporate credit, which would seem to imply that even if the underlying securities were aggressively priced, the potential for systemic harm resulting from deleveraging and fire sales would be relatively limited. Nevertheless, I want to urge caution here and, again, stress how hard it is to capture everything we'd like. As I said, ideally we would total all of the ways in which a given asset class is financed with short-term claims. Repos constitute one example, but there are others. And, crucially, these short-term claims need not bedebtclaims. If relatively illiquid junk bonds or leveraged loans are held by open-end investment vehicles such as mutual funds or by exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and if investors in these vehicles seek to withdraw at the first sign of trouble, then this demandable equity will have the same fire-sale-generating properties as short-term debt.18One is naturally inclined to look at data on short-term debt like repo, given its prominence in the recent crisis. But precisely because it is being more closely monitored, there is the risk that next time around, the short-term claims may take another form. With this caveat in mind, it is worth noting the pattern of inflows into mutual funds and ETFs that hold high-yield bonds, shown inexhibit 6. Interestingly, the picture here is almost the reverse of that seen with dealer financing of corporate bonds. Assets under management in these vehicles were essentially flat in the years leading up to the crisis, but they have increased sharply in the past couple of years.19This observation suggests, albeit only loosely, that there may be some substitutability between different forms of demandable finance. And it underscores the importance of not focusing too narrowly on any one category. Continuing on with the theme of maturity transformation, the next brief stop on the tour is the agency mortgage real estate investment trust (REIT) sector. These agency REITs buy agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), fund them largely in the short-term repo market in what is essentially a levered carry trade, and are required to pass through at least 90 percent of the net interest to their investors as dividends. As shown inexhibit 7, they have grown rapidly in the past few years, from $152 billion at year-end 2010 to $398 billion at the end of the third quarter of 2012. One interesting aspect of this business model is that its economic viability is sensitive to conditions in both the MBS market and the repo market. If MBS yields decline, or the repo rate rises, the ability of mortgage REITs to generate current income based on the spread between the two is correspondingly reduced. Another place where the desire to generate yield can show up is in commercial banks' securities holdings. In recent work, Sam Hanson and I documented that the duration of banks' non-trading-account securities holdings tends to increase significantly when the short rate declines.20We hypothesized that this pattern was due to a particular form of agency behavior--namely, that given the conventions of generally accepted accounting principles, a bank can boost its reported income by replacing low-yielding short-duration securities with higher-yielding long-duration securities. Something along these lines seems to be happening today: The maturity of securities in banks' available-for-sale portfolios is near the upper end of its historical range. This finding is noteworthy on two counts. First, the added interest rate exposure may itself be a meaningful source of risk for the banking sector and should be monitored carefully--especially since existing capital regulation does not explicitly address interest rate risk. And, second, in the spirit of tips of icebergs, the possibility that banks may be reaching for yield in this manner suggests that the same pressure to boost income could be affecting behavior in other, less readily observable parts of their businesses. The final stop on the tour is something called collateral transformation. This activity has been around in some form for quite a while and does not currently appear to be of a scale that would raise serious concerns--though the available data on it are sketchy at this point. Nevertheless, it deserves to be highlighted because it is exactly the kind of activity where new regulation could create the potential for rapid growth and where we therefore need to be especially watchful. Collateral transformation is best explained with an example. Imagine an insurance company that wants to engage in a derivatives transaction. To do so, it is required to post collateral with a clearinghouse, and, because the clearinghouse has high standards, the collateral must be "pristine"--that is, it has to be in the form of Treasury securities. However, the insurance company doesn't have any unencumbered Treasury securities available--all it has in unencumbered form are some junk bonds. Here is where the collateral swap comes in. The insurance company might approach a broker-dealer and engage in what is effectively a two-way repo transaction, whereby it gives the dealer its junk bonds as collateral, borrows the Treasury securities, and agrees to unwind the transaction at some point in the future. Now the insurance company can go ahead and pledge the borrowed Treasury securities as collateral for its derivatives trade. Of course, the dealer may not have the spare Treasury securities on hand, and so, to obtain them, it may have to engage in the mirror-image transaction with a third party that does--say, a pension fund. Thus, the dealer would, in a second leg, use the junk bonds as collateral to borrow Treasury securities from the pension fund. And why would the pension fund see this transaction as beneficial? Tying back to the theme of reaching for yield, perhaps it is looking to goose its reported returns with the securities-lending income without changing the holdings it reports on its balance sheet. There are two points worth noting about these transactions. First, they reproduce some of the same unwind risks that would exist had the clearinghouse lowered its own collateral standards in the first place. To see this point, observe that if the junk bonds fall in value, the insurance company will face a margin call on its collateral swap with the dealer. It will therefore have to scale back this swap, which in turn will force it to partially unwind its derivatives trade--just as would happen if it had posted the junk bonds directly to the clearinghouse. Second, the transaction creates additional counterparty exposures--the exposures between the insurance company and the dealer, and between the dealer and the pension fund. As I said, we don't have evidence to suggest that the volume of such transactions is currently large. But with a variety of new regulatory and institutional initiatives on the horizon that will likely increase the demand for pristine collateral--from the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio, to centralized clearing, to heightened margin requirements for noncleared swaps--there appears to be the potential for rapid growth in this area. Some evidence suggestive of this growth potential is shown inexhibit 8, which is based on responses by a range of dealer firms to the Federal Reserve's Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms.21As can be seen, while only a modest fraction of those surveyed reported that they were currently engaged in collateral transformation transactions, a much larger share reported that they had been involved in discussions of prospective transactions with their clients. Policy ImplicationsLet me turn now to policy implications. The question of how policymakers should respond to different manifestations of credit market overheating is a big and difficult one, and I won't attempt to deliver a set of specific prescriptions here. However, I would like to provoke some discussion around one specific aspect of the question--namely, what are the respective roles of traditional supervisory and regulatory tools, on the one hand, versus monetary policy, on the other, in addressing the sorts of market-overheating phenomena that we have been talking about? To lend a little concreteness and urgency to this issue, imagine that it is 18 months from now, and that with interest rates still very low, each of the trends that I identified earlier has continued to build--to the point where we believe that there could be meaningful systemic implications. What, if any, policy measures should be contemplated? It is sometimes argued that in such circumstances, policymakers should follow what might be called a decoupling approach. That is, monetary policy should restrict its attention to the dual mandate goals of price stability and maximum employment, while the full battery of supervisory and regulatory tools should be used to safeguard financial stability. There are several arguments in favor of this approach. First, monetary policy can be a blunt tool for dealing with financial stability concerns. Even if we stipulate that low interest rates are part of the reason for, say, a worrisome boom in one segment of credit markets, they are unlikely to be the whole story. So, would one really want to raise rates, and risk choking off economic activity, in an effort to rein in that one part of the market? Wouldn't it be better to use a more narrowly focused supervisory or regulatory approach, with less potential for damage to the economy? A related concern is that monetary policy already has its hands full with the dual mandate, and that if it is also made partially responsible for financial stability, it will have more objectives than instruments at its disposal and won't do as well with any of its tasks.22These are important points to bear in mind. In some cases, supervisory and regulatory tools are clearly better targeted and more likely to be effective than monetary policy could be. For example, the Federal Reserve's supervisory responsibilities for the banking sector put it in the right position to carefully monitor duration risk in banks' securities portfolios and to take corrective action if necessary. Nevertheless, as we move forward, I believe it will be important to keep an open mind and avoid adhering to the decoupling philosophy too rigidly. In spite of the caveats I just described, I can imagine situations where it might make sense to enlist monetary policy tools in the pursuit of financial stability. Let me offer three observations in support of this perspective. First, despite much recent progress, supervisory and regulatory tools remain imperfect in their ability to promptly address many sorts of financial stability concerns. If the underlying economic environment creates a strong incentive for financial institutions to, say, take on more credit risk in a reach for yield, it is unlikely that regulatory tools can completely contain this behavior. This, of course, is not to say that we should not try to do our best with these tools--we absolutely should. But we should also be realistic about their limitations. These limitations arise because of the inherent fallibility of the tools in a world of regulatory arbitrage; because the scope of our regulatory authority does not extend equally to all parts of the financial system; and because risk-taking naturally tends to be structured in a nontransparent way that can make it hard to recognize. In some cases, regulatory tools may also be difficult to adjust on a timely basis--if, for example, doing so requires extended interagency negotiation. Second, while monetary policy may not be quite the right tool for the job, it has one important advantage relative to supervision and regulation--namely that it gets in all of the cracks. The one thing that a commercial bank, a broker-dealer, an offshore hedge fund, and a special purpose ABCP vehicle have in common is that they all face the same set of market interest rates. To the extent that market rates exert an influence on risk appetite, or on the incentives to engage in maturity transformation, changes in rates may reach into corners of the market that supervision and regulation cannot.23 Third, in response to concerns about numbers of instruments, we have seen in recent years that the monetary policy toolkit consists of more than just a single instrument. We can do more than adjust the federal funds rate. By changing the composition of our asset holdings, as in our recently completed maturity extension program (MEP), we can influence not just the expected path of short rates, but also term premiums and the shape of the yield curve. Once we move away from the zero lower bound, this second instrument might continue to be helpful, not simply in providing accommodation, but also as a complement to other efforts on the financial stability front. To see why, recall the central role that maturity transformation--the funding of long-term assets with short-term, run-prone liabilities--can play in propagating systemic instabilities. Moreover, as illustrated by the mortgage REIT sector that I described earlier, the economic appeal of maturity transformation hinges on the shape of the yield curve--in that particular case, on the spread between the yield on agency MBS and the so-called general collateral (GC) repo rate at which these securities can be funded on a short-term basis. And it would appear that our policies have at times put pressure on this spread from both sides. Our purchases of long-term Treasury securities and agency MBS have clearly helped reduce long-term yields, and a number of observers have suggested that an unintended byproduct of our MEP--and the associated sales of short-term Treasury securities--was to exert an upward influence on GC repo rates. This sort of compression of term spreads is the twist in Operation Twist. And you can see the financial stability angle as well as a possible response to concerns over numbers of instruments. Suppose that, at some point in the future, once we are away from the zero lower bound, our dual mandate objectives call for an easing in policy. Also suppose that, at the same time, there is a general concern about excessive maturity transformation in various parts of the financial system, and that we are having a hard time reining in this activity with conventional regulatory tools. It might be that the right combination of policies would be to lower the path of the federal funds rate--thereby effectuating the needed easing--while at the same time engaging in MEP-like asset swaps to flatten the yield curve and reduce the appeal of maturity transformation. ConclusionI hope you will take this last example in the spirit in which it was intended--not as a currently actionable policy proposal, but as an extended hypothetical meant to give some tangible substance to a broader theme. That broader theme is as follows: One of the most difficult jobs that central banks face is in dealing with episodes of credit market overheating that pose a potential threat to financial stability. As compared with inflation or unemployment, measurement is much harder, so even recognizing the extent of the problem in real time is a major challenge. Moreover, the supervisory and regulatory tools that we have, while helpful, are far from perfect. These observations suggest two principles. First, decisions will inevitably have to be made in an environment of significant uncertainty, and standards of evidence should be calibrated accordingly. Waiting for decisive proof of market overheating may amount to an implicit policy of inaction on this dimension. And, second, we ought to be open-minded in thinking about how to best use the full array of instruments at our disposal. Indeed, in some cases, it may be that the only way to achieve a meaningfully macroprudential approach to financial stability is by allowing for some greater overlap in the goals of monetary policy and regulation. Thank you very much. References Amromin, Gene, and Steve Sharpe (2012). "From the Horse's Mouth: How do Investor Expectations of Risk and Return Vary with Economic Conditions? (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper 2012-08. Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1989). "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,"American Economic Review, vol. 79 (March), pp. 14-31. Borio, Claudio, and Mathias Drehmann (2009). "Financial Instability and Macroeconomics: Bridging the Gulf," paper prepared for the Twelfth Annual International Banking Conference, "The International Financial Crisis: Have the Rules of Finance Changed?" held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, September 24-25. Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane (1999). "By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,"Journal of Political Economy, vol.107 (April), pp. 205-51. Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek, and Erik Stafford (2009). "The Economics of Structured Finance,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 23 (Winter), pp. 3-25. DeMarzo, Peter M. (2005). "The Pooling and Tranching of Securities: A Model of Informed Intermediation,"Review of Financial Studies, vol. 18 (Spring), pp. 1-35. DeMarzo, Peter, and Darrell Duffie (1999). "A Liquidity-Based Model of Security Design,"Econometrica, vol. 67 (January), pp. 65-99. Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (2012). "Neglected Risks, Financial Innovation, and Financial Fragility,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 104 (June), pp.452‑68. Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi (1990). "Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,"Journal of Finance, vol. 45 (March), pp. 49-71. Greenwood , Robin, and Samuel G. Hanson (2012). "Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns (PDF)," unpublished paper, Harvard University, September. Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer (2012). "Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns (PDF)," unpublished paper, Harvard University, October. Griffin, John M., Jeffrey H. Harris, Tao Shu, and Selim Topaloglu (2011). "Who Drove and Burst the Tech Bubble?"Journal of Finance, vol. 66 (August), pp. 1251-90. Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein (2012). "Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-46. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling (1976). "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 3 (October), pp. 305-60. Jurek, Jakub W., and Erik Stafford (2011). "The Cost of Capital for Alternative Investments (PDF)," Working Paper Series 12-013. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School, September. Kacperczyk, Marcin, and Philipp Schnabl (2012). "How Safe Are Money Market Funds? (PDF)" unpublished paper, New York University, June. Kaplan, Steven, and Jeremy C. Stein (1993). "The Evolution of Buyout Pricing and Financial Structure in the 1980s,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108 (May), pp.313-57. Merton, Robert C. (1974). "On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates,"Journal of Finance, vol. 29 (May), pp. 449-70. Rajan, Raghuram G. (2006). "Has Finance Made the World Riskier?"European Financial Management, vol. 12 (September), pp. 499-533. Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny (1997). "The Limits of Arbitrage,"Journal of Finance, vol. 52 (March), pp. 35-55. Tinbergen, Jan (1952).Contributions to Economic Analysis, vol. 1:On the Theory of Economic Policy(Amsterdam: North-Holland). 1.The thoughts that follow are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful toBurcu Duygan-Bump, Matt Eichner,Jon Faust,Michael Kiley,Nellie Liang,Fabio Natalucci, andBill Nelsonfor numerous helpful conversations and suggestions.Return to text 2.I am using the term "overheating" in an asset-pricing sense, so when I say that the market for a particular class of credit instruments is overheated, I mean that forecasted returns on this class of instruments, in excess of those on riskless Treasury bills, are abnormally low, or even negative, over some horizon. This usage contrasts with models in the genre pioneered by Bernanke and Gertler (1989), where time-variation in collateral values can lead to large changes in the supply of certain types of credit but where expected returns on credit are constant over time.Return to text 3.Habit-formation models have this property. See, for example, Campbell and Cochrane (1999).Return to text 4.See Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012).Return to text 5.For example, Griffin and others (2011) document that during the run-up of the Internet bubble, from January 1997 to March 2000, individual investors were substantial net buyers of tech stocks, via both direct purchases as well as investments in tech-sector-specific mutual funds.Return to text 6.See Amromin and Sharpe (2012), and Greenwood and Shleifer (2012).Return to text 7.Jurek and Stafford (2012) argue that implicit put-writing of this sort accounts for much of the apparent measured alpha in hedge funds.Return to text 8.To be clear on terminology: A subprime CDO is a securitization where the collateral is composed of the mezzanine tranches of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), as opposed to a collection of the underlying mortgages. Thus, in this case, the RMBS is the first-generation securitization, and the CDO, which takes as its input a specific tranche of the RMBS, is the second-generation product. See Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009) for an analysis of the relative risks and modeling uncertainties of first and second-generation securitizations.Return to text 9.See Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2012).Return to text 10.To be clear, I do not intend this critique to apply to first-generation securitizations, such as RMBS, asset-backed securities collateralized by auto and credit card loans, or collateralized loan obligations (where the collateral pool is composed of bank loans). As a number of academic studies have emphasized, the basic pooling-and-tranching structure of these securitizations can help reduce adverse selection problems in markets, and thereby increase liquidity and reduce financing costs. See, for example, Gorton, and Pennacchi (1990), DeMarzo and Duffie (1999), and DeMarzo (2005).Return to text 11.See Rajan (2006) for an early exposition of the reach-for-yield phenomenon.Return to text 12.This mechanism is the classic risk-shifting effect described by Jensen and Meckling (1976).Return to text 13.See Kaplan and Stein (1993).Return to text 14.See Greenwood and Hanson (2012).Return to text 15.To be precise, the spread was at 397 basis points as of January 28, 2013, as compared to a median value of 388 basis points over the period January 1997 to July 2007, and a mean of 447 basis points over the same period.Return to text 16.See Greenwood and Hanson (2012).Return to text 17.One factor that complicates the interpretation is that, in late 2012, one might have expected an increase in dividend-recap loans even absent any change in investor risk appetite, based on the anticipation of future dividend tax increases.Return to text 18.Indeed, Shleifer and Vishny's (1997) classic treatment of fire sales is based not on a leverage mechanism, but on rapid performance-based flows out of open-end funds.Return to text 19.Some observers point to the significant increase in collateralized loan obligation (CLO) issuance in 2012 as a further symptom of "leverage" in the market. While demand for leveraged loans from CLOs may play a role in driving loan issuance, pricing and loan structure, it should be noted that CLO equity does not represent a form of demandable short-term financing and hence does not have the potential to contribute to fire-sale dynamics in the same way as, say, repo financing.Return to text 20.See Hanson and Stein (2012).Return to text 21.TheSenior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Termsis available on the Federal Reserve's website.Return to text 22.This concern is sometimes related to the "Tinbergen principle" (Tinbergen (1952)), which states that if the number of policy targets exceeds the number of instruments, then some targets may not be hit. However in a world with multiple instruments, the Tinbergen principle does not imply anything about decoupling. That is, it does not imply that each instrument must be dedicated to a single target.Return to text 23.A similar argument is made by Borio and Drehmann (2009), who write: "But in sophisticated and open financial systems, in which the scope for regulatory arbitrage is high, the interest rate has the merit of setting the universal price of leverage. It reaches parts that other instruments cannot reach."Return to text
Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin At the 2013 Banking Outlook Conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia Good afternoon. I want to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta for inviting me to join you for today's 2013 banking outlook discussion. There are a number of interesting and very relevant topics on your agenda, most of which are rightly focused on the financial and regulatory environment. I would like to share some thoughts this afternoon on a broader topic, however, that may be due for a refreshed look: the relevance of a bank's reputation. Let's start in an elementary way in constructing a concept of reputation: We know that reputation is not entirely a moral trait. We understand that there is a distinction between character and reputation. When we say that someone shows good character, we are usually referring to something at the core of their being or personality. On the other hand, when we refer to a person's reputation, we recognize that reputation is our perception of the person, that it is externally derived and not necessarily intrinsic to that individual. In other words, we understand that a person may not have complete control over the perception that has been created. Reputation, through no fault of one's own, can be tarnished. In the same way, one's reputation can be golden, even though nothing was done to earn it. But like the notion of character, reputation can be earned and it can be a type of stored value for when challenges to one's own reputation come later. Now let's bring this distinction into the context of banks: Many bankers have a sterling character, and they operate financial institutions with sterling reputations that reflect that basic character. At the same time, there are bankers who, regardless of their personal character, manage financial institutions with reputations that have been tarnished. Their banks' reputations could have been tarnished by almost anything, but likely most tarnish is attributable to the subprime mortgage meltdown and the ensuing financial crisis that cost the economy trillions of dollars; left millions of Americans bankrupted, jobless, underemployed, or homeless; triggered massive litigation; and shook the confidence of our nation to the core. Many of the darkest manifestations of the financial crisis have finally begun to diminish: the boarded-up homes with overgrown lawns, the half-built skyscrapers, the "We Buy Houses Cheap" signs planted at exit ramps, the eviction notices nailed to front doors. But even as the economy comes back to life, our memory of these events is still sharp and the reputational damage suffered by U.S. financial institutions during the crisis endures. To be blunt, a lot of people have negative feelings about banks, which they distrust and blame for the huge infusions of taxpayer money into the financial system that were deemed necessary during the crisis. These reputational consequences--whether justified or not--are to be expected. Sociologists and economists have long remarked upon the central role that social trust plays in healthy markets. Market transactions depend on a whole series of assumptions that people must be able to rely on, including the soundness of money, the enforceability of contracts, the good will of their partners, the integrity of the legal system, and the common meanings of language. Social trust is the glue that holds markets and societies together. In the context of banking, social trust and reputation are related concepts. Banks themselves--in crisis or not--are particularly vulnerable to reputational consequences because of their public role. The principal social value of financial institutions is their ability to facilitate the efficient deployment of funds held by investors (and entities that pool these funds) to productive uses.1This value is maximized when the cost to the entity putting capital to work is close to the price demanded by the entity that seeks a return on its investment. In traditional banking, this means that financial intermediation occurs most effectively when the interest rate charged for use of funds in lending is close to the interest rate paid for deposits. As the difference between the two grows (which would be attributable to amounts extracted by intermediaries as compensation for essential intermediation), the costs of borrowing for the purposes of creating productive projects become higher than they should be, with arguably negative reputational consequences. Given these particular reputational dimensions associated with financial institutions, might financial regulators have an interest in considering reputational harms analytically? Could there be benefits to understanding the ways that an individual financial institution's reputation--or that of the financial industry as a whole--might have particular effects on, for example, safety and soundness, financial inclusion, or financial innovation? In my remarks today, I want to consider various aspects of how reputational harm manifests itself in banks and begin a dialogue with you about how we might refresh our thinking about this category of risk. I will start with a description of some factors that can affect a bank's reputation, especially in the wake of the financial crisis. Next, I will talk about ways in which reputation matters, including how supervisors can use their unique ability to see inside the institutions that they examine to uncover some early indicators of reputational problems. I will then turn to other reasons why policymakers may want to think about reputation. One reason involves possible consequences regarding financial inclusion; that is, a customer's ability to have a relationship with his or her bank that puts them in the position to save, access credit in a sustainable way, and understand the nature of the financial transactions in which they participate. Reputation also may help or hinder a bank's ability to innovate, so I will introduce this topic next. Finally, I want to frame a discussion around the recent cybersecurity threats that banks are facing and place them in the context of reputational risk so that they too can be discussed constructively. Of course, I preface these remarks with the admonition that these views are my own and may not be representative of those of the Federal Reserve Board. The Financial Crisis and the Reputation of Financial InstitutionsIt has been more than five years since this country began experiencing a financial crisis that reverberated well beyond Wall Street. This crisis was unique, and many of its marks on individuals and communities remain. It was a crisis in which significant numbers of both subprime and prime mortgage defaults quickly spread across whole cities and regions until the impact was felt throughout the country. The devastation was magnified by waves of foreclosures, significant drops in house values, job losses, and, ultimately, significant reductions in household wealth, which have been responsible, in part, for the slow recovery we confront today. The causes of the crisis and the subsequent devastation are myriad, but to large swaths of the American public who have experienced the devastation, the causes rest squarely on the shoulders of financial institutions, especially the largest institutions. Further, many Americans direct their anger at not only banks, but policymakers as well. Because the economy pulled back from the brink of depression only through a massive and unprecedented infusion of public dollars, American taxpayers feel that they were forced into a position of accepting that the government had to put a lot on the line to save the financial system from ruin. And many of those taxpayers are still unhappy about such a massive government intervention that seemed to aid banks that were not held to account, while distressed households were left to pay the price.2 Unfortunately, in the public's view, little has happened to restore their trust and confidence in financial institutions. Since the crisis, the public's views of banks have been informed--for better or worse--by their experiences and those of their families and neighbors, who may have lost their homes, their jobs, or their household wealth. Many attempted unsuccessfully to modify their underwater mortgages, even when they were current on their payments. Against this backdrop, the public's lack of trust and confidence has been magnified by, among other things, the Occupy Wall Street movement, payday loans, overdraft fees, rate-rigging settlements in London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) cases, executive compensation and bonuses that seem to bear no relationship to performance or risk, failures in the foreclosure process, and a drumbeat of civil litigation. In the Internet age, the impact of consumer distrust is amplified: anyone can easily, cheaply, and anonymously create, organize, and participate in a protest. Participants do not have to gather physically to make their action felt. A recent survey found that Take, for example, the impact of the consumer backlash that erupted in late 2011 when one of the nation's largest banks attempted to charge a $5 monthly fee for its debit card. A California woman, frustrated with the bank's decision to impose the fee, created a Facebook event, dubbed "Bank Transfer Day," and invited her friends to join her in transferring their money from large banks to credit unions on that day. In the five weeks leading up to Bank Transfer Day, this Facebook event received extensive press coverage and resulted in billions of dollars in deposits reportedly shifting out of large banks. The bank targeted by the Facebook protest ultimately reversed itself and declined to assess the monthly fee. How Reputational Risk May Be RelevantFinancial institutions of all sizes have shared in the fall-out--fairly or unfairly--from a general decline in their industry's reputation among the public. Moreover, the steady stream of litigation against financial institutions since the crisis has further harmed the reputations of specific firms among their customers. Consider that in today's financial institution sector, a substantial portion of a bank's enterprise value comes from intangible assets such as brand recognition and customer loyalty that may not appear on the balance sheet but are nevertheless critical to the bank's success. Also consider that at the end of 2012, deposits at commercial banks reached a record $10 trillion. At the same time, the share of each deposit dollar that banks lent out hit a post-financial crisis low in the third quarter, which means that banks' net interest margins have fallen sharply. Across the industry, loan-to-deposit ratios are going down. In 2007, banks' aggregate loan-to-deposit ratio was 91 percent. This ratio currently stands at 70 percent. In such a context, achieving higher earnings is a challenge. If bank profitability is going to improve in a context of low interest rates and higher compliance costs, lending income may remain low. Profits will need to come from elsewhere. One source of profits would be products that are not interest-rate dependent, but fee-dependent. In other words, compressed net interest margins mean that many banks may look to new fee-generating products and trading activity to enhance profits. The pressure to generate enhanced profits through high fees is palpable, and banks may choose to move aggressively down these paths. But when a bank already suffers from a poor reputation--either deservedly or as a knock-on effect of broader discontent with the financial industry--it likely will face difficulties in introducing new fee-generating products or activities without inviting further criticism and damage to its reputation. So an evaluation of the effects of the new product or activity on the bank's reputation prior to launch is arguably necessary. Reputational Risk and SupervisionThe effects of the financial crisis, combined with the power of the Internet to broadly and quickly publicize information--whether factually accurate or not--should alert banks to how they are managing their reputations. And supervisors have a duty to see that all risks are fully understood, even those risks that, like reputational risk, are unquantifiable or have not fully emerged. I believe this is an area where supervision can add value. To the extent possible, supervision can unveil hidden loss exposures that may be building up through the accumulation of reputational risk elements. If we were better able to identify and monitor such free-floating risk, and in so doing, to push bank boards of directors and senior management to pay more attention to reputational risk, we could help reduce the underpricing of these risks. Many have argued, and I think it's a compelling argument, that ineffective supervision and enforcement of existing laws and regulations contributed to the financial crisis. By tolerating reduced transparency of risk in balance sheets and in complex institutional portfolios, as well as arbitrage around capital requirements and other prudential measures, supervision may have encouraged the underpricing of risk. And the sudden correction of this underpricing of risk,4in turn, accelerated the crisis. The crisis punished investors who accepted more risk than they thought they had taken on, it punished consumers who overleveraged themselves, it punished Americans who lost their jobs and homes, and it contributed to the decline of once-vibrant neighborhoods and towns. To mitigate the chances of such a crisis occurring again, supervisors need to redouble their efforts toward promoting greater transparency of risks and early confrontation of potential loss exposures. We should view these efforts as a set of responsibilities for both banks and regulators that are aligned to assure the public and markets that risks can be fully understood and accurately estimated and priced. In some ways, this perspective is not new territory for bank regulators. The Federal Reserve, for example, issued supervisory guidance in 1995 that identified the six primary risks that remain the focus of its supervisory program, and reputational risk is among them.5Having said that, it is still a risk that both banks and supervisors should learn how to identify ex ante rather than ex post.6 So, while reputational risk is not a new concept by any means, it is an area that is ripe for additional work. For example, the enterprise risk management framework of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission--the so-called "COSO standard"--does not address reputational risk. Likewise, the Basel capital frameworks exclude reputational risks from regulatory capital requirements.7 Accordingly, the current approach to managing reputational risk is largely reactive rather than proactive. Banks and examiners tend to focus their energies on handling the threats to their reputations that have already surfaced. This is not risk management; it is crisis management--a reactive approach aimed at limiting the damage. Instead, we should think about a supervisory approach that incentivizes bank managers to sufficiently contemplate, quantify if necessary, and control the factors that affect the level of such risks before they fully emerge in an unmitigated form. The way that the Federal Reserve supervises banking organizations may help identify risks sooner. For all banking organizations, the supervisory program here does not simply rely on an annual onsite examination. The Federal Reserve supplements its regular examination activities with a program of continuous monitoring between examinations. One of the key objectives of this program is to identify emerging risks and communicate with other regulators and the banks an updated risk assessment and supervisory strategy based on these risks. When we contemplate a supervisory approach that illuminates reputational risk, we might be able to more fully uncover the interconnection of risks that certain activities could impose on investors, creditors, counterparties, and taxpayers. In this approach, we would first and foremost need to encourage banks to assess the potential riskiness of particular operations, investments, products, and decisions to their reputations and, ultimately, to their enterprise value. As supervisors, one objective as we work with financial institutions to extract such information would be to try to develop ways of measuring the value of the risks that banks shift onto the financial safety net. Reputation and Financial InclusionThere is also a relationship between reputation and financial inclusion, by which I mean the extent to which consumers can participate in a financial marketplace that consists of competitive providers of credit, savings vehicles, and sources of enabling financial information. As policymakers, we must address the perceived trustworthiness of those financial institutions that interact with the public and move the millions of Americans lingering in the margins of the financial marketplace into relationships that provide them with sustainable access to banking and credit, an understanding of how mortgages and credit work, and an understanding of how to create savings. Data from the Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's survey of the unbanked and underbanked show that the percentage of families earning $15,000 per year or less who reported that they have no bank account has been increasing steadily for the past five years, resulting in more than 28 percent of these families being unbanked as of 2011.8Families slightly further up the income distribution scale, earning between $15,000 and $30,000 per year, are also financially marginalized: 12 percent reported being unbanked and almost 26 percent reported being underbanked in 2011.9 There are several potential reasons for these impediments to inclusion. When we examine barriers that individual consumers face in becoming financially included, we uncover trustworthiness and reputation. A Federal Reserve analysis of the most recent Survey of Consumer Finances suggests that the primary reason individuals do not have a transaction account is a simple dislike of dealing with financial institutions.10If that dislike emanates from the reputation of the particular bank, or the reputation of the banking industry as a whole, policymakers and financial institutions will not be able to enhance financial inclusion without addressing the reputational context. Reputation and InnovationI'd like to imagine how the public's sense of well-being might be enhanced by their interactions with financial institutions. If we paid attention to the experiences of consumers as they interact with various segments of the financial marketplace, what could we learn? If we see rigidities or imperfections in that interactive experience, what innovation might we imagine that would not only reduce reputational risk but create something new and potentially advantageous? Technological innovation was the subject of a recent award ceremony in San Francisco. The winners were companies with names like SoundCloud, GitHub, MakerBot, Techmeme, and Snapchat, all of which presumably do amazing things, although I don't understand exactly what.11But, evidently, the real buzz at the ceremony was over something much more mundane that I for one have no problem understanding. That buzz was around a pedestrian item--a new and improved coffee cup lid.12This lid, called FoamAroma, reportedly provides exactly the right set of openings to maximize aroma and recyclability, while minimizing the effects of coffee spurting out too fast. The point here is that the innovator noticed something simple that others had not: many coffee shop employees don't drink their coffee from cups with plastic lids like their customers do, so there was a market need that had not been recognized and then addressed. Here I am not just talking about the mixed miracle of mobile banking and mobile payments or being able to take a picture of a check with a smart phone and it appearing in my checking account. That's a topic that is amazing in its own right and worthy of a separate speech. I am talking about encouraging banks to pay attention to the banking experiences of their customers and finding process improvements or service elements that may lead to something seemingly mundane but valuable nonetheless. Some innovators see reputation itself as not just something to be managed, but as a product in and of itself. With buyers and sellers repeatedly and constantly interacting on the Internet, there are "reputation trails" that are being created that, when compiled, give an alternative set of markers about how trustworthy a particular buyer or seller may be. These reputation trails--gathered when you evaluate a product you've bought online or when you deliver the product that you've promised--create a picture of trust that some have argued has value that can be shaped.13 Reputational Risks and CybersecurityPerhaps reputation will one day transform commerce. But in the meantime, I would like to mention one set of reputational issues that the banking industry is confronting as we speak. As is the case for reputation trails, it too involves the Internet, but this use of the Internet is not being done in the spirit of cooperation and enhancement of public trust. This set of reputational issues comes in response to the recent substantial increase in cyberattacks, all of which have the potential to undermine the fundamental trust that the public puts into financial institutions. Cyberattacks on banks are occurring with increasing frequency, and concerted cooperative work between government and financial institutions is underway. Customers are increasingly being affected by the cybersecurity threats that banks face. Recently, distributed denial-of-service attacks have caused temporary disruptions of some web services. In September, the websites of several large banks were rendered inaccessible for several hours from attacks now attributed to possible foreign state-sponsored hackers. One of the greatest threats facing not just banks but many businesses and government agencies is hacking--and the possible theft of proprietary data and personal information about customers. This cybersecurity threat is increasing at a time when more and more bank customers depend on electronic and mobile banking. Workers are using their own laptops and smart phones or working remotely from home computers, and this increases the entry points to the systems that need to be protected. In addition, customers and vendors are linking their systems, enhancing efficiency, but also creating more opportunities for potential intrusions. But even beyond the potential theft of data and disruption of service, cyberattacks can represent significant reputational risk because they have the potential to create dissatisfaction among many customers or, even more chilling, total loss of consumer confidence. Cooperative work between government and industry is underway. Through the Department of the Treasury, many of the affected institutions have requested and received technical assistance from the Department of Homeland Security, which has been helpful in mitigating the attacks. Some institutions are researching new technologies for defense against cyberattacks through their Internet service providers or security vendors, and others are reviewing their incident response processes to better manage recovery time and communications among information technology, employees, vendors, media, and customers. The Financial and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee, the Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center, and the Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council are serving as the forum through which the financial services sector shares important information and develops critical infrastructure protection policies. Through their coordination, affected institutions and law enforcement agencies can share threat information and mitigation techniques. In addition, a recent Executive Order issued by the President represents a continued commitment to enhancing the security and resiliency of the nation's critical infrastructure to meet future threats.14 ConclusionIn closing, these have been some of my reflections on reputation as it applies to the business of banks. The concept of trust is relevant to how bankers engage in a business that is of benefit to the public and provides meaningful innovation to the core function of financial intermediation, as well as to how we as supervisors can engage in a process of observation that is forward-looking and of benefit to both the public and the institutions that we regulate. Thank you for your attention today. I look forward to taking your questions. 1.See Sarah Bloom Raskin, Federal Reserve Board Governor (2012), "How Well is our Financial System Serving Us? Working Together to Find the High Road," speech delivered at the Graduate School of Banking at Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, July 23. See also Wallace C. Turbeville (2012), "Cracks in the Pipeline: Restoring Efficiency to Wall Street and Value to Main Street," Demos, Financial Pipeline Series, December 5.Return to text 2.The public also remains angry at policymakers for actions taken since the crisis. The erosion of public trust extends beyond financial institutions to the government officials that oversee them. For example, anAmerican Bankerreader poll conducted from December 17–23, 2012, found that a mere 8 percent of readers who responded thought authorities took the right course in the case of enforcement against HSBC for money laundering violations. As many as 47 percent said the Justice Department should have prosecuted the bank, while another 45 percent said authorities should have gone after the individuals responsible for the violations.Return to text 3.See Lee Rainie, Aaron Smith, Kay Lehman Schlozman, Henry Brady, and Sidney Verba (2012), "Social Media and Political Engagement (PDF)," Pew Internet & American Life Project (Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, October 19).Return to text 4.The reasons for ineffective supervision can be explored separately; they are beyond the scope of my remarks today. It is worth considering, however, whether the reputation of large banks would be enhanced by a belief that "regulatory capture" and other manifestations of ineffective supervision could be minimized.Return to text 5.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (1995), "Rating the Adequacy of Risk Management Processes and Internal Controls at State Member Banks and Bank Holding Companies," Supervision and Regulation Letter 95-51 (SUP) (November 14).Return to text 6.Other regulators consider reputation risk as part of their supervisory programs. The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) has integrated reputational risk into its guidance on how an auditor should evaluate a company's internal controls and corporate governance environment. Other PCAOB standards include reputational risk as it relates to executive compensation structures.Return to text 7.Pillar 2 of the Basel II capital framework, however, does note that internationally active banks are expected to hold sufficient capital to address all significant risks, including reputational risk, as part of their internal capital adequacy assessment processes.Return to text 8.See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2012),2011 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households (PDF). See also Brian K. Bucks, Arthur B. Kennickell, Traci L. Mach, and Kevin B. Moore (2009), "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, v. 95 (February), pp. A1–A55.Return to text 9.See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2012).Return to text 10.See Jesse Bricker, Arthur B. Kennickell, Kevin B. Moore, and John Sabelhaus (2012), "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2007 to 2010: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, v. 98 (June), pp. 1-80.Return to text 11.See http://techcrunch.com/events/crunchies-2012/winners/.Return to text 12.See Holly Finn (2013), "Modest Miracles of Invention,"Wall Street Journal, February 8, available at http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323807004578285943330078754.html.Return to text 13.See Rachel Botsman (2012), "The currency of the new economy is trust," speech delivered at TEDGlobal 2012 in Edinburgh, Scotland, June, available at http://www.ted.com/talks/rachel_botsman_the_currency_of_the_new_economy_is_trust.html.Return to text 14.Executive Office of the President (2013), "Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Executive Order 13636,"Federal Register, vol. 78 (February 19), pp.11737-44.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Crapo, and other members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on implementation of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act). In today's testimony, I will provide an update on the Federal Reserve's recent activities pertinent to the Dodd-Frank Act and describe our regulatory and supervisory priorities for 2013. The Federal Reserve, in many cases jointly with other regulatory agencies, has made steady and considerable progress in implementing the Congressional mandates in the Dodd-Frank Act, though obviously some work remains. Throughout this effort, the Federal Reserve has maintained a focus on financial stability. In the process of rule development, we have placed particular emphasis on mitigating systemic risks. Thus, among other things, we have proposed varying the application of the Dodd-Frank Act's special prudential rules based on the relative size and complexity of regulated financial firms. This focus on systemic risk is also reflected in our increasingly systematic supervision of the largest banking firms. Recent Regulatory Reform MilestonesStrong bank capital requirements, while not alone sufficient to guarantee the safety and soundness of our banking system, are central to promoting the resiliency of banking firms and the financial sector as a whole. Capital provides a cushion to absorb a firm's expected and unexpected losses, helping to ensure that those losses are borne by shareholders rather than taxpayers. The financial crisis revealed, however, that the regulatory capital requirements for banking firms were not sufficiently robust. It also confirmed that no single capital measure adequately captures a banking firm's risks of credit and trading losses. A good bit of progress has now been made in strengthening and updating traditional capital requirements, as well as devising some complementary measures for larger firms. As you know, in December 2010 the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee) issued the Basel III package of reforms to its framework for minimum capital requirements, supplementing an earlier set of changes that increased requirements for important classes of traded assets. Last summer, the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) issued for comment a set of proposals to implement the Basel III capital standards for all large, internationally active U.S. banking firms. In addition, the proposals would apply risk-based and leverage capital requirements to savings and loan holding companies for the first time. The proposals also would modernize and harmonize the existing regulatory capital standards for all U.S. banking firms, which have not been comprehensively updated since their introduction twenty-five years ago, and incorporate certain new legislative provisions, including elements of sections 171 and 939A of the Dodd-Frank Act. To help ensure that all U.S. banking firms maintain strong capital positions, the Basel III proposals would introduce a new common equity capital requirement, raise the existing tier 1 capital minimum requirement, implement a capital conservation buffer on top of the regulatory minimums, and introduce a more risk-sensitive standardized approach for calculating risk-weighted assets. Large, internationally active banking firms also would be subject to a supplementary leverage ratio and a countercyclical capital buffer and would face higher capital requirements for derivatives and certain other capital markets exposures they hold. Taken together, these proposals should materially reduce the probability of failure of U.S. banking firms--particularly the probability of failure of the largest, most complex U.S. banking firms. In October 2012, the Federal Reserve finalized rules implementing stress testing requirements under section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act. Consistent with the statute, the rules require annual supervisory stress tests for bank holding companies with $50 billion or more in assets and any nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (Council). The rules also require company-run stress tests for a broader set of regulated financial firms that have $10 billion or more in assets. The new Dodd-Frank Act supervisory stress test requirements are generally consistent with the stress tests that the Federal Reserve has been conducting on the largest U.S. bank holding companies since the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program in the spring of 2009. The stress tests allow supervisors to assess whether firms have enough capital to weather a severe economic downturn and contribute to the Federal Reserve's ability to make assessments of the resilience of the U.S. banking system under adverse economic scenarios. The stress tests are an integral part of our capital plan requirement, which provides a structured way to make horizontal evaluations of the capital planning abilities of large banking firms. The Federal Reserve also issued in December of last year a proposal to implement enhanced prudential standards and early remediation requirements for foreign banks under sections 165 and 166 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The proposal is generally consistent with the set of standards previously proposed for large U.S. bank holding companies. The proposal generally would require foreign banks with a large U.S. presence to organize their U.S. subsidiaries under a single intermediate holding company that would serve as a platform for consistent supervision and regulation. The U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banks would be subject to the same risk-based capital and leverage requirements as U.S. bank holding companies. In addition, U.S. intermediate holding companies and the U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks with a large U.S. presence would be required to meet liquidity requirements similar to those applicable to large U.S. bank holding companies. The proposals respond to fundamental changes in the scope and scale of foreign bank activities in the United States in the last fifteen years. They would increase the resiliency and resolvability of the U.S. operations of foreign banks, help protect U.S. financial stability, and promote competitive equity for all large banking firms operating in the United States. The comment period for this proposal closes at the end of March. Priorities for 2013The Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory program in 2013 will concentrate on four tasks: (1) continuing key Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III regulatory implementation work; (2) further developing systematic supervision of large banking firms; (3) improving the resolvability of large banking firms; and (4) reducing systemic risk in the shadow banking system. Carrying Forward the Key Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III Regulatory Implementation WorkCapital, Liquidity, and Other Prudential Requirements for Large Banking Firms.Given the centrality of strong capital standards, a top priority this year will be to update the bank regulatory capital framework with a final rule implementing Basel III and the updated rules for standardized risk-weighted capital requirements. The banking agencies have received more than 2,000 comments on the Basel III capital proposal. Many of the comments have been directed at certain features of the proposed rule considered especially troubling by community and smaller regional banks, such as the new standardized risk weights for mortgages and the treatment of unrealized gains and losses on certain debt securities. These criticisms underscore the difficulty in fashioning standardized requirements applicable to all banks that balance risk sensitivity with the need to avoid excessive complexity. Here, though, I think there is a widespread view that the proposed rule erred on the side of too much complexity. The three banking agencies are carefully considering these and all comments received on the proposal and hope to finalize the rulemaking this spring. The Federal Reserve also intends to work this year toward finalization of its proposals to implement the enhanced prudential standards and early remediation requirements for large banking firms under sections 165 and 166 of the Dodd-Frank Act. As part of this process, we intend to conduct shortly a quantitative impact study of the single-counterparty credit limits element of the proposal. Once finalized, these comprehensive standards will represent a core part of the new regulatory framework that mitigates risks posed by systemically important financial firms and offsets any benefits that these firms may gain from being perceived as "too big to fail." We also anticipate issuing notices of some important proposed rulemakings this year. The Federal Reserve will be working to propose a risk-based capital surcharge applicable to systemically important banking firms. This rulemaking will implement for U.S. firms the approach to a systemic surcharge developed by the Basel Committee, which varies in magnitude based on the measure of each firm's systemic footprint. Following the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, which called for enhanced capital standards for systemically important firms, the Federal Reserve joined with some other key regulators from around the world in successfully urging the Basel Committee to adopt a requirement of this sort for all firms of global systemic importance. Another proposed rulemaking will cover implementation by the three federal banking agencies of the recently completed Basel III quantitative liquidity requirements for large global banks. The financial crisis exposed defects in the liquidity risk management of large financial firms, especially those which relied heavily on short-term wholesale funding. These new requirements include the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR), which is designed to ensure that a firm has a sufficient amount of high quality liquid assets to withstand a severe standardized liquidity shock over a 30-day period. The Federal Reserve expects that the U.S. banking agencies will issue a proposal in 2013 to implement the LCR for large U.S. banking firms. The Basel III liquidity standards should materially improve the liquidity risk profiles of internationally active banks and will serve as a key element of the enhanced liquidity standards required under the Dodd-Frank Act. Volcker Rule, Swaps Push-out, and Risk Retention.Section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Act, known as the "Volcker rule," generally prohibits a banking entity from engaging in proprietary trading or acquiring an ownership interest in, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with a hedge fund or private equity fund. In October 2011, the federal banking agencies and the Securities and Exchange Commission sought public comment on a proposal to implement the Volcker rule. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission subsequently issued a substantially similar proposal. The rulemaking agencies have spent the past year carefully analyzing the nearly 19,000 public comments on the proposal and have made significant progress in crafting a final rule that is faithful to the language of the statute and maximizes bank safety and soundness and financial stability at the least cost to the liquidity of the financial markets, credit availability, and economic growth. Section 716 of the Dodd-Frank Act generally prohibits the provision of federal assistance, such as FDIC deposit insurance or Federal Reserve discount window credit, to swap dealers and major swap participants. The Federal Reserve is currently working with the OCC and the FDIC to develop a proposed rule that would provide clarity on how and when the section 716 requirements would apply to U.S. insured depository institutions and their affiliates and to U.S. branches of foreign banks. We expect to issue guidance on the implementation of section 716 before the July 21, 2013, effective date of the provision. To implement the risk retention requirements in section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve, along with other federal regulatory agencies, issued in March 2011 a proposal that generally would force securitization sponsors to retain at least 5 percent of the credit risk of the assets underlying a securitization. The agencies have reviewed the substantial volume of comments on the proposal and the definition of a qualified mortgage in the recent final "ability-to-pay" rule of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). As you know, the CFPB's definition of qualified mortgage serves as the floor for the definition of exempt qualified residential mortgages in the risk retention framework. The agencies are working closely together to determine next steps in the risk retention rulemaking process, with a view toward crafting a definition of a qualified residential mortgage that is consistent with the language and purposes of the statute and helps ensure a resilient market for private-label mortgage-backed securities. Improving Systematic Supervision of Large Banking FirmsGiven the risks to financial stability exposed by the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has reoriented its supervisory focus to look more broadly at systemic risks and has strengthened its micro-prudential supervision of large, complex banking firms. Within the Federal Reserve, the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) was set up to centralize the supervision of large banking firms and to facilitate the execution of horizontal, cross-firm analysis of such firms on a consistent basis. The LISCC includes senior staff from various divisions of the Board and from the Reserve Banks. It fosters interdisciplinary coordination, using quantitative methods to evaluate each firm individually, relative to other large firms, and as part of the financial system as a whole. One major supervisory exercise conducted by the LISCC each year is a Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) of the largest U.S. banking firms.1Building on supervisory work coming out of the crisis, CCAR was established to ensure that each of the largest U.S. bank holding companies (1) has rigorous, forward-looking capital planning processes that effectively account for the unique risks of the firm and (2) maintains sufficient capital to continue operations throughout times of economic and financial stress. CCAR, which uses the annual stress test as a key input, enables the Federal Reserve to make a coordinated, horizontal assessment of the resilience and capital planning abilities of the largest banking firms and, in doing so, creates closer linkage between micro-prudential and macro-prudential supervision. Large bank supervision at the Federal Reserve will include more of these systematic, horizontal exercises. Improving the Resolvability of Large Banking FirmsOne important goal of post-crisis financial reform has been to counter too-big-to-fail perceptions by reducing the anticipated damage to the financial system and economy from the failure of a major financial firm. To this end, the Dodd-Frank Act created the Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA), a mechanism designed to improve the prospects for an orderly resolution of a systemic financial firm, and required all large bank holding companies to develop, and submit to supervisors, resolution plans. Certain other countries that are home to large, globally active banking firms are working along roughly parallel lines. The Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board have devoted considerable attention to the orderly resolution objective by developing new standards for statutory resolution frameworks, firm-specific resolution planning, and cross-border cooperation. Although much work remains to be done by all countries, the Dodd-Frank Act reforms have generally put the United States ahead of its global peers on the resolution front. Since the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, the FDIC has been developing a single-point-of-entry strategy for resolving systemic financial firms under the OLA. As explained by the FDIC, this strategy is intended to effect a creditor-funded holding company recapitalization of the failed financial firm, in which the critical operations of the firm continue, but shareholders and unsecured creditors absorb the losses, culpable management is removed, and taxpayers are protected. Key to the ability of the FDIC to execute this approach is the availability of sufficient amounts of unsecured long-term debt to supplement equity in providing loss absorption in a failed firm. In consultation with the FDIC, the Federal Reserve is considering the merits of a regulatory requirement that the largest, most complex U.S. banking firms maintain a minimum amount of long-term unsecured debt. A minimum long-term debt requirement could lend greater confidence that the combination of equity owners and long-term debt holders would be sufficient to bear all losses at the consolidated firm, thereby counteracting the moral hazard associated with taxpayer bailouts while avoiding disorderly failures. Reducing Systemic Risk in the Shadow Banking SystemMost of the reforms I have discussed are aimed at addressing systemic risk posed by regulated banking organizations, and all involve action the Federal Reserve can take under its current authorities. Important as these measures are, however, it is worth recalling that the trigger for the acute phase of the financial crisis was the rapid unwinding of large amounts of short-term funding that had been made available to firms not subject to consolidated prudential supervision. Today, although some of the most fragile investment vehicles and instruments that were involved in the pre-crisis shadow banking system have disappeared, non-deposit short-term funding remains significant. In some instances it involves prudentially regulated firms, directly or indirectly. In others it does not. The key condition of the so-called "shadow banking system" that makes it of systemic concern is its susceptibility to destabilizing funding runs, something that is more likely when the recipients of the short-term funding are highly leveraged, engage in substantial maturity transformation, or both. Many of the key issues related to shadow banking and their potential solutions are still being debated domestically and internationally. U.S. and global regulators need to take a hard, comprehensive look at the systemic risks present in wholesale short-term funding markets. Analysis of the appropriate ways to address these vulnerabilities continues as a priority this year for the Federal Reserve. In the short term, though, there are several key steps that should be taken with respect to shadow banking to improve the resilience of our financial system. First, the regulatory and public transparency of shadow banking markets, especially securities financing transactions, should be increased. Second, additional measures should be taken to reduce the risk of runs on money market mutual funds. The Council recently proposed a set of serious reform options to address the structural vulnerabilities in money market mutual funds. Third, we should continue to push the private sector to reduce the risks in the settlement process for tri-party repurchase agreements. Although an industry-led task force made some progress on these issues, the Federal Reserve concluded that important problems were not likely to be successfully addressed in this process and has been using supervisory authority over the past year to press for further and faster action by the clearing banks and the dealer affiliates of bank holding companies.2The amount of intraday credit being provided by the clearing banks in the tri-party repo market has been reduced and is scheduled to be reduced much further in the coming years as a result of these efforts. But vulnerabilities in this market remain a concern, and addressing these vulnerabilities will require the cooperation of the broad array of participants in this market and their federal regulators. The Federal Reserve will continue to report to Congress and publicly on progress made to address the risks in the tri-party repo market. In addition to these concrete steps to address concrete problems, regulators must continue to closely monitor the shadow banking sector and be wary of signs that excessive leverage and maturity transformation are developing outside of the banking system. ConclusionThe financial regulatory architecture is stronger today than it was in the years leading up to the crisis, but considerable work remains to complete implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act and the post-crisis global financial reform program. Over the coming year, the Federal Reserve will be working with other U.S. financial regulatory agencies, and with foreign central banks and regulators, to propose and finalize a number of ongoing initiatives. In this endeavor, our goal is to preserve financial stability at the least cost to credit availability and economic growth. We are focused on the monitoring of emerging systemic risks, reducing the probability of failure of systemic financial firms, improving the resolvability of systemic financial firms, and building up buffers throughout the financial system to enable the system to absorb shocks. As we take this work forward, it is important to remember that preventing a financial crisis is not an end in itself. Financial crises are profoundly debilitating to the economic well-being of the nation. Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have. 1. For more information, seewww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/ccar.htm.Return to text 2. For additional information, seewww.newyorkfed.org/banking/tpr_infr_reform.html.Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Southeastern Bank Management and Directors Conference, University of Georgia, Terry College of Business, Duluth, Georgia I would like to thank the Terry College of Business at the University of Georgia for the opportunity to discuss the future of community banking at this annual conference for bank officers and directors. Community banks play an important role in our nation's financial system, and I believe that the future of community banking is bright. But that is not to say that it will be easy. Success, as always, will require energetic and engaged managers and board members who are sensitive to the financial needs of their communities, vigilant to economic conditions, and adaptive to changing regulatory requirements. I hear from a lot of community bankers who are concerned that the community banking model might not survive. Many paint a picture so bleak that they see only personal retirement or sale of the bank as viable strategies. I completely understand how tiring it is to fight a financial crisis and survive a deep recession followed by a weak recovery only to confront what seems to be a tsunami of new regulations. I felt all of those same emotions in 1991. I was a community banker then. We had survived the savings and loan crisis with some bruises, but we were still standing. The Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA) had been followed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) in 1991. I had more new regulations stacked on my desk than I had employees in the bank. My bank had just reached the $100 million mark in total assets through the purchase of two branches from a failing thrift. Even more daunting for me personally, was the sudden death of my bank's chief executive officer (CEO), leaving me as the new CEO. Frankly, I didn't know how I was going to tackle all that lay in front of us. But those dark days in 1991 were followed by 15 years of exceptionally strong performance for all banks, including my own. And those experiences--the good and the bad--give me confidence in predicting a bright future for community banking today. Just as the seeds of a crisis are often sown in earlier boom times, strength can be forged during the tough times that follow a crisis. As we did in the early 1990s, bankers and regulators today have learned from the lessons of the crisis and are determined not to repeat the mistakes of the past. Credit metrics are now improving in most banks as problem loans have been addressed and resolved and new credit underwriting has been quite restrictive for a number of years. Deposit growth has outpaced loan demand and reliance on wholesale funding has been reduced. Capital positions are stronger. The interest margin pressure banks face today is partly due to low interest rates and partly due to weak loan demand, both of which are consequences of a sluggish economy. As the economic recovery gains momentum, however, both of these conditions should reverse and give bankers the opportunity to deploy the liquidity and capital they have amassed to the benefit of their shareholders and their local economies. Community Bankers Are Being HeardEven as they anticipate economic recovery, however, community bankers worry that the burden of new regulations may inhibit their ability to lend in their communities or prohibitively increase the costs of such lending. We certainly understand this concern. Federal Reserve research over the years has confirmed that the burden of regulations falls disproportionately on smaller banks. Supervisors at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis have recently tried to quantify this effect. To do so, they used survey data to estimate the relative number of new employees that banks of different sizes might need to hire in response to the same regulatory requirement. Using Call Report data from 2011, they estimated in their preliminary analysis that hiring one additional employee would reduce the return on assets by 23 basis points for the median bank in the group of smallest banks, those with total assets of $50 million or less. To put this estimate in perspective, such a decline could cause about 13 percent of the banks of that size to go from profitable to unprofitable. As a comparison, given the same increase in regulation, they assume banks between $500 million and $1 billion would hire three employees and experience a decline of about 4 basis points in return on assets for the median bank. While this is still a significant effect, very few banks in this group would go from being profitable to unprofitable as a result of the regulatory burden. Regulatory overreaction to a crisis is always a risk. But this time, I think community bankers have been more successful than they realize in making the case against "one-size-fits-all" regulation. I can't remember a time when I have seen more regulatory proposals drafted that differentiate between banks based on size or complexity. I urge you to continue to identify the regulatory requirements that are the most onerous to your business model, and continue to suggest alternatives to achieve those regulatory objectives in a less intrusive way. In fact, most of the regulations required by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (the Dodd-Frank Act) are directed primarily at larger, systemically important banks, and many of the Act's provisions specifically exempt community banks. For example, banks with less than $10 billion in total assets were exempted from a number of the debit interchange restrictions, and early studies indicate that those exemptions are working. In addition, formal stress testing was required only for banks with total assets of $10 billion or more. In implementing these requirements for the larger banks, the bank regulatory agencies specifically indicated that capital stress testing would not be required for community banks.1This does not mean that community banks are exempted from prudent risk management, but rather that smaller banks should think about the negative shocks that could affect their business in the future and tailor their risk-management procedures to the risks and complexities of their individual business models. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) recently released final rules defining "qualified mortgages" that include safe harbors for mortgages that meet specific loan term and pricing criteria, including certain balloon loans made by community banks in rural or underserved areas.2At the same time, they issued a new proposal that contains additional community bank exceptions, as well as a question about the treatment of loans to refinance balloon payments on mortgages that community banks may already have on their books.3Noting that smaller institutions have already demonstrated that they generally do a good job of servicing the loans they originate and that the investments necessary to meet the requirements would be unduly onerous for institutions that service a small number of loans, the CFPB also exempted most community banks from many of the provisions of new servicing requirements.4I think such exceptions are especially important because, as I discussed in a recent speech and will touch upon later in my remarks, Federal Reserve research has shown that (1) community banks are important lenders in the mortgage market, (2) those mortgage loans represent a significant portion of community bank lending, and (3) community banks are quite responsible in their practices.5 At the Federal Reserve, we have formalized our process for considering the unique characteristics of community banks as we craft regulatory and supervisory policies. A few years ago, we created a subcommittee of the Board, which I chair, that makes recommendations about matters related to community bank supervision and regulation. This subcommittee reviews all regulatory proposals and supervisory guidance with an eye toward the possible effects on community banks. Remembering the days when I had to find time to read all those new regulations stacked up on my desk, I have insisted that all new proposals and rules start with a clear statement of their applicability to community banks so that bankers can spend their time on the rules and guidance that apply to them. This approach was put into practice in a different way last year, when the banking agencies issued proposals for capital regulations that incorporated requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act and the Basel agreement.6To help community banks identify the provisions that affected them and submit their comments more easily, the proposal included a short summary of the provisions that were most likely to affect community banks. We received more than 2,000 comments, many from community banks, and we are reviewing them. It's too early in the process to know how we and the other agencies are going to address the issues raised, or when final rules may be released. But what I can promise is that before we issue final capital rules, we will do everything possible to address the concerns that have been expressed by community bankers and still achieve the goal of having strong levels of high-quality capital--built up over a reasonable and realistic transitional period--in banks of all sizes, including community banks. Community Bank ResearchTo help us better understand community bank issues, our subcommittee established an informal working group of economists from both the research and supervision functions in the Federal Reserve System. The group is focused on understanding the factors that influence the viability and performance of community banks including, importantly, the effect of regulatory changes and their associated costs and benefits. Members of this working group are exploring a number of interesting topics that I hope will help us to better understand the issues that affect community banks and, where appropriate, have a practical impact on how we supervise these banks. Determinants of Community Bank ProfitabilityFor example, a recent study undertaken by two Federal Reserve Board economists explores the determinants of community bank profitability from 1992 through 2010.7The findings indicate that a number of bank characteristics are strongly correlated with performance, including relative bank size, portfolio composition, and management quality. Within the group of banks with less than $1 billion in total consolidated assets included in this study, larger bank size is associated with significantly higher profitability. Community banks with higher portfolio shares of real estate loans earn significantly lower profits, while those with higher portfolio shares of construction loans earn higher profits through most of the study period. But, perhaps not surprisingly, the latter relationship does not hold for 2008 through 2010, when greater reliance on construction lending is associated with lower profitability. Managerial quality, as measured by the management component of the banks' regulatory ratings, is strongly related to bank profitability. Moreover, the strength of the relationship increases during and immediately after the financial crisis, confirming that management quality is particularly important during times of economic stress. Factors outside the control of bank management, however, are also importantly related to profitability, particularly over the past several years. For instance, it is not surprising that community banks operating in markets experiencing high unemployment rates have been less profitable since the financial crisis. Perhaps less obvious is that in urban markets, community bank profitability tends to decrease as the size of the market increases. One might suspect that this relationship derives from a more competitive landscape in larger urban areas; however, no relationship between market concentration and profits is evident in urban markets. In contrast, in rural areas, higher market concentration is associated with higher community bank profitability throughout most of the study period. In addition, the study finds that community banks operating in rural markets consistently earn higher average rates of return than do community banks operating in urban markets. In a separate analysis of deposit market competition that may form the basis for a new research paper, one researcher has documented the competitive strength of community banks, especially in rural markets. Although the nationwide share of total deposits held by banks with assets less than $10 billion has declined over the past decade, in rural markets, their deposit market share has increased slightly. Moreover, banks with assets less than $10 billion retained their share of rural market deposits throughout the recent recession and recovery. At a more micro level, banks with assets less than $10 billion gained market share in more than two-thirds of rural banking markets and in nearly half of urban markets between 2003 and 2012. Expansion of deposit insurance during the crisis likely helped all banks retain deposits and may have changed competition somewhat. Deposit insurance has now been permanently increased from $100,000 to $250,000 per depositor, but the unlimited deposit insurance for noninterest-bearing transaction accounts was allowed to expire at the end of 2012. We are watching deposit movement carefully, but so far have seen little evidence of deposits moving out of the banking system or, as some had feared, moving from smaller banks to larger banks perceived as "too big to fail." My own expectation is that, given all of the enhanced regulatory requirements that apply to larger banks, those larger banks will focus their efforts on large urban markets and that community banks will be even more competitive and more vital to the economic well-being of rural, suburban, and small urban markets. Characteristics of Thriving Community BanksResearchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis took a different approach to measuring community bank success.8Studying banks with total assets less than $10 billion, the researchers attempted to identify the differences between banks that they classified as "thriving" and those that they classified as "surviving." Banks were identified as "thriving" if they maintained the highest supervisory rating, a composite CAMELS "1," continuously from 2006 through the end of 2011.9Approximately 700 banks met this condition. The roughly 4,500 banks in the study that did not qualify as thriving and did not fail or merge out of existence during the period were classified as "surviving." After categorizing the banks, the first phase of analysis looked at the location and size of the thriving banks. Thriving banks were found in 40 of the 50 states but were concentrated in states with larger economic contributions from agriculture and energy, which held up relatively well during the downturn. The fewest thriving banks were found on the West Coast and in the Southeast, where real estate values fell the most. This pattern is consistent with previous Federal Reserve studies, which found that bank performance is heavily affected by the local economy, but I think it is important to note that even in states with high unemployment rates or sharp declines in property values, some community banks were able to thrive. The St. Louis study did not find the thriving banks to be concentrated in any particular size range. Many had total assets less than $50 million as of December 2011, but others had total assets between $1 billion and $10 billion. And thriving banks did more than just rate well with supervisors--the thriving banks outperformed the surviving banks on a wide range of performance indicators, including return on assets, return on equity, loan losses, provision expense, efficiency ratio, asset growth, net interest margin, and net noninterest margin. Looking at balance sheet structure, when the researchers compared the characteristics of thriving banks with surviving banks, they found that the thriving banks had lower levels of loans-to-total-assets and were more reliant on core deposits. Thriving banks also had lower concentrations in commercial real estate (CRE) lending and much lower concentrations in construction and land development loans. Instead, thriving banks were slightly more concentrated in one- to four-family mortgage loans held in portfolio, as well as consumer loans. Despite these overall balance sheet findings, the researchers also noted the wide diversity of business models that they found among the thriving banks. Recognizing that a large part of good performance comes from factors that are more difficult to measure statistically, the researchers examined a sample of comments in examination reports and found that thriving banks benefited from a strong and localized customer service focus with high visibility in the community, conservative underwriting, and products that were profitable and met customer needs. They supplemented their review of examination reports by interviewing management at some of the thriving banks. The bankers they interviewed attributed their success to strong ties to the community, relationship banking, conservative underwriting, and a focus on products and markets they understood. These results were strikingly similar to the results of interviews in separate studies at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City10and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.11 These studies confirm what experience has already taught me: Community banks that have deep ties to the community, engaged managers and directors, conservative underwriting, and strong risk management can not only survive, but thrive, even in adverse conditions. Using Research to Shape Supervisory Guidance on LendingWhile much of our regulatory work recently has involved implementing the requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act, we are also continuing to review the lessons we learned during the crisis and the results of our recent research. In most cases, this work is more likely to result in supervisory guidance than regulation. Supervisory guidance is commonly viewed as a means to restrict activity but, in fact, during the crisis much of the guidance we issued actually directed bankers and bank examiners to take a balanced approach. For example, we issued guidance urging banks to continue to make loans to all qualified borrowers and, in particular, to continue lending to creditworthy small businesses.12We also issued detailed guidance about commercial real estate workouts to encourage prudent modifications of real estate loans.13 Lending is the primary source of income for most community banks and also the greatest source of risk. As you develop your business plans, some of the most important decisions you will make relate to lending. In the planning process, banks should define the portion of the lending portfolio they plan to allocate to different loan categories, the investments they are willing to make to develop expertise and to manage credit and compliance risk, and the levels of credit and interest rate risk they are willing to assume. So I thought it might be helpful to review some recent developments in loan types that are at the core of community bank lending. Residential Mortgage LendingResidential mortgage lending was at the heart of the financial crisis and has been the target of extensive new regulation and supervisory attention, including the rules issued by the CFPB that I discussed earlier. I think community banks are in an especially difficult position with respect to residential mortgage lending. On the one hand, community banks do not appear to have engaged in many of the more problematic practices that led to the crisis. And their rate of seriously delinquent residential mortgage loans is significantly lower than the overall rate of serious delinquencies on such loans made to prime borrowers, indicating that community banks largely have managed their existing portfolios responsibly. On the other hand, residential mortgage loans made by community banks do frequently share some characteristics, such as higher rates and balloon payments, with the subprime lending that proved to be so disastrous. At the same time, mortgage lending, which averages about one-fourth of community bank loan portfolios, is an important product line for community banks. Further, Federal Reserve research indicates that the residential mortgage loans made by community banks make up a small but vital part of credit availability in the housing market. The challenge for regulators is to design mortgage regulations to address practices that have proved harmful to consumers or financial stability without inhibiting lending to creditworthy borrowers. The challenge for community bankers is to review the full body of new regulations covering mortgage lending and to develop the expertise and control systems necessary to comply with these regulations while remaining active in this important market. I think it is unfortunate when I hear some bankers say that they will stop offering mortgages if they can't make them the same way that they always have. While I certainly understand their frustration, I still believe that community bankers can respond within the new environment by creating products that are profitable and meet the needs of their customers, while still managing their interest rate and funding risks. Even with some regulatory exceptions, compliance with new mortgage regulations likely will require changes to processing systems and extensive staff training. But it is also possible that the systems and expertise necessary to make qualified mortgages for the bank's books could also be used to originate loans for sale. For many community banks, this could represent a new revenue opportunity and a new alternative to offer the bank's customers. Commercial Real Estate LendingFor community banks, it was CRE lending--in particular, lending for construction and land development--that caused the most problems during the crisis. As you may know, in 2006 the federal banking agencies issued supervisory guidance that set forth screening criteria based on certain types of CRE concentrations and rapid growth of CRE portfolios.14These guidelines contained specific numerical thresholds for the ratios of construction and total CRE lending to an institution's total capital, as well as for identifying rapid growth of such lending.15These criteria were never intended to result in hard caps, but were instead meant to trigger conversations between a bank and its supervisors about the bank's ability to manage the risks arising from these concentrations. After our experience in the financial crisis, especially considering the severe problems in commercial real estate markets, we were interested in understanding how community banks were affected by the guidance and whether the screening criteria set forth in the guidance were effective indicators of risk. In that regard, Federal Reserve staff has worked with our counterparts at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to analyze how banks' holdings of CRE loans have evolved since the guidance was issued.16 We have learned a few interesting things based on the findings of this research. For example, the number of institutions that exceed at least one of the two screening criteria has declined substantially from 2006 to the present. While much of this decline seems to have resulted from the contraction of construction portfolios in the wake of the crisis, banks that exceeded the criteria when the guidance was issued appear to have experienced a bigger decline in total CRE loans than can be explained by the adverse economic environment alone. This finding could indicate that the thresholds are indeed being interpreted as hard caps. Moreover, it was apparent that banks that exceeded the criterion for construction and land development were far more likely to have failed over the period from 2007 to 2011 than were those banks that exceeded the criterion for overall CRE exposures and portfolio growth. We now recognize the importance of the rapid growth criterion, which may have received less attention than the criteria for construction and overall CRE lending concentrations. We intend to use the findings of this research to help clarify our communication and training for examiners and bankers around CRE lending concentrations. Small Business Lending There is probably no loan category in which community bankers' local knowledge and deep ties to the community are more important than small business lending. The Federal Reserve System has a project under way to try to improve our understanding of small business credit markets, which would of course include community banks. One challenge we have faced is that it is difficult to measure lending to small businesses precisely. For one thing, small business owners frequently tap their personal home equity, credit cards, or loans secured by commercial real estate that they own to finance their business operations,17which means such borrowing is not reported as small business lending. But there is also no definition of small business borrowers for the reporting of small business lending as a loan category. However, small loans to businesses--commercial and industrial loans and CRE loans with original principal amounts of less than $1 million--are reported separately and can be used as a proxy for small business lending. Using this measure, we can estimate the importance of small business lending to community banks and the importance of community banks to small businesses. As of September 2012, banks with $10 billion or less in assets accounted for more than 98 percent of all commercial banking institutions, but they held less than 20 percent of banking industry assets. However, they held more than half of outstanding small loans to businesses. For such institutions, these small loans to businesses represent nearly 20 percent of their total domestic lending and slightly more than 40 percent of their total commercial lending. Small business lending is likely even more important to smaller banks than these statistics show because these loans are identified by the size of the loan rather than the size of the borrower. I believe it is probable that many of the larger business loans made by these smaller banks were also made to small business borrowers. At the other end of the spectrum, banking organizations with more than $50 billion in assets accounted for less than one percent of institutions, but held 75 percent of the assets. Holding almost 40 percent of outstanding small loans to businesses, these large banks are important small business lenders, but small loans to businesses were not a significant segment of large bank loan portfolios. They represented less than five percent of these banks' total domestic lending. These statistics demonstrate the importance of community banks to small business and the corresponding importance of small business lending to the community banking business model. In developing policies for small business lending, I think it is critically important for bank boards of directors to insist on appropriate risk management that retains the flexibility to use the bankers' knowledge of their customers' business to their best advantage. And it is equally critical that supervisors develop tools to measure the overall effectiveness of risk management in small business lending without being overly prescriptive for individual loans. ConclusionI would like to end where I began. I think the future for community banking is bright. I recognize that the regulatory changes underway are not without cost to community banks. But I also know that we at the Federal Reserve are doing our best to avoid adding to regulatory burden wherever possible as we respond to the worst excesses of the financial crisis and make the U.S. financial system more resilient. Research is helpful in this effort but it is also important to maintain an ongoing dialogue with community bankers and to actively solicit comment on regulatory proposals. So I urge you to continue to communicate about the challenges that regulations pose for community banks. More importantly, I know that the natural advantages found in community banks--deep community ties, daily interaction between senior managers of banks and their customers, and the dexterity to customize financial solutions--have not been diminished in any way. Yes, the regulatory environment is challenging and the economy remains weak in many areas. But all our research shows that with creative, engaged bankers and strong risk-management processes, community banks can continue to not only survive but to thrive. Thank you very much for your attention, and I would be interested in hearing your thoughts. 1.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2012), "Agencies Clarify Supervisory Expectations for Stress Testing by Community Banks," press release, May 14.Return to text 2.See Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2013), "Ability-to-Repay and Qualified Mortgage Standards Under the Truth in Lending Act (Regulation Z)," final rule,Federal Register, vol. 78 (January 30), pp. 6408-6620.Return to text 3.See CFPB (2013), "Ability to Repay Standards Under the Truth in Lending Act (Regulation Z)," notice of proposed rulemaking,Federal Register, vol. 78 (January 30), pp. 6622-6672.Return to text 4.See CFPB (2013), "Mortgage Servicing Rules under the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (Regulation X), final rule; and CFPB (2013), "Mortgage Servicing Rules under the Truth in Lending Act (Regulation Z), " final rule (accessed January 31, 2013).Return to text 5.See Elizabeth A. Duke (2012), "Community Banks and Mortgage Lending," speech delivered at the Community Bankers Symposium, Chicago, IL, November 9.Return to text 6.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2012), "Agencies Seek Comment on Regulatory Capital Rules and Finalize Market Risk Rule," press release, June 12.Return to text 7.Dean F. Amel and Robin A. Prager (2010), "Performance of Community Banks in Good Times and Bad Times," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics, May. The study defines community banks as those with total organizational banking assets less than $1 billion in constant 2005 dollars and at least 70 percent of deposits derived from a single metropolitan area or rural county.Return to text 8.See R. Alton Gilbert, Andrew P. Meyer, and James W. Fuchs (2013), "The Future of Community Banks: Lessons from the Banks that Thrived during the Recent Financial Crisis," unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, January.Return to text 9.CAMELS is the supervisory rating system for banks and other depository institutions, used by federal and state banking agencies to communicate to financial institutions their assessment of the institution and to identify institutions that raise concern or require special attention. CAMELS is an acronym for the six components of the rating system that examiners evaluate and take into account when assigning an overall composite rating:capital adequacy,asset quality,management,earnings,liquidity, andsensitivity to market risk. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1996), Supervision and Regulation Letter 96-38, "Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System," December 27.Return to text 10.See Forest Myers and Kenneth Spong (2003), "Community Bank Performance in Slower Growing Markets: Finding Sound Strategies for Success (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Financial Industry Perspectives.Return to text 11.See Ray Brastow, Bob Carpenter, Susan Maxey, and Mike Riddle (2012), "Weathering the Storm: A Case Study of Healthy Fifth District State Member Banks Over the Recent Downturn," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,S&R Perspectives, Summer. See alsoCommunity Banking Connections(2012), Federal Reserve System, Fourth Quarter.Return to text 12.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," press release, November 12; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2010), "Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small Businesses" press release, February 5.Return to text 13.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), Supervision and Regulation letter 09-7, "Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workouts," October 30.Return to text 14.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2006), "Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate Lending, Sound Risk Management Practices,"final guidance,Federal Register, vol. 71 (December 12), pp 74580-88. See also Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007), Supervision and Regulation Letter 07-1, "Interagency Guidance on Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate," January 4.Return to text 15.Specifically, the guidance indicated that examiners would give heightened supervisory scrutiny to banks where (1) total construction and land development loans represented 100 percent or more of the institution's total capital, or (2) total CRE loans represented 300 percent or more of the institution's total capital and the institution's CRE loan portfolio had increased by 50 percent or more during the prior 36 months. This second criteria is calculated excluding holdings of owner-occupied CRE loans.Return to text 16.Keith Friend, Harry Glenos, and Joseph B. Nichols (2013), "An Analysis of the Impact of the Commercial Real Estate Concentration Guidance," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, January; and William Bassett and W. Blake Marsh (2012), "Cause or Effect: Supervisory Guidance and the Collapse of Commercial Real Estate," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Division of Monetary Affairs, October.Return to text 17.In the Federal Reserve's 2010 Survey of Consumer Finances, 18 percent of households reported personally guaranteeing or collateralizing loans to their family businesses, and 15 percent of households reported lending money to their family businesses. See Jesse Bricker, Arthur B. Kennickell, Kevin B. Moore, and John Sabelhaus (2012), "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2007 to 2010: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 98, no. 2 (June). See also the Federal Reserve public website for theSurvey of Consumer Finances.Return to text