Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemDepartment of Housing and Urban DevelopmentFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Housing Finance AgencyOffice of Comptroller of the CurrencySecurities and Exchange Commission Six federal agencies on Wednesday issued a notice revising a proposed rule requiring sponsors of securitization transactions to retain risk in those transactions. The new proposal revises a proposed rule the agencies issued in 2011 to implement the risk retention requirement in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). This proposal is being issued jointly by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. As provided under the statute, the Secretary of the Treasury, as Chairperson of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, played a coordinating role in the rulemaking. The rule would provide asset-backed securities (ABS) sponsors with several options to satisfy the risk retention requirements. The original proposal generally measured compliance with the risk retention requirements based on the par value of securities issued in a securitization transaction and included a so-called premium capture provision. The agencies are now proposing that risk retention generally be based on fair value measurements without a premium capture provision. As required by the Dodd-Frank Act, the proposal would define "qualified residential mortgage" (QRM) and exempt securitizations of QRMs from risk retention. The new proposal would define QRMs to have the same meaning as the term qualified mortgages as defined by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The new proposal also requests comment on an alternative definition of QRM that would include certain underwriting standards in addition to the qualified mortgage criteria. Similar to the original proposal, under the new proposal, securitizations of commercial loans, commercial mortgages, or automobile loans of low credit risk would not be subject to risk retention. Further, the rule would recognize the full guarantee on payments of principal and interest provided by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac for their residential mortgage-backed securities as meeting the risk retention requirements while Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are in conservatorship or receivership and have capital support from the U.S. government. This provision also is unchanged from the original proposal. The agencies are requesting comment on the revised proposed rule by October 30, 2013. Comments on this proposal:Submit|View Board Votes
The Federal Reserve on Friday announced it has not objected to a re-submitted capital plan from BB&T Corporation. Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve objected to BB&T’s 2013 capital plan based on a qualitative assessment conducted during the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. BB&T was required to submit a new capital plan under the Federal Reserve’s regulation. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of an application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Hana Financial Group Inc., Seoul, Republic of Korea, to acquire up to 71.4 percent of the voting shares of BNB Financial Services Corporation, New York, N.Y. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Live Oak Bancshares, Inc., Wilmington, N.C., to engage in certain nonbanking activities through the acquisition of Government Loan Solutions, Inc., Cleveland. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) and the president and vice president of the council for 2014. CDIAC advises the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues. Members are selected from representatives of commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils serves on CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. Drake Mills, president and chief executive officer of Community Trust Bank, Ruston, La., will serve as president in 2014. John B. Dicus, chairman, president, and chief executive officer of Capital Federal Savings Bank, Topeka, Kan., will serve as vice president. The other members of CDIAC in 2014 are: Glenn D. BarksPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFirst Community Credit UnionChesterfield, Mo. G. William BealeChief Executive OfficerUnion First Market Bankshares Corp.Richmond, Va. Michael J. CastellanaPresident and Chief Executive OfficerSEFCUAlbany, N.Y. Dennis D. CirucciPresident and Chief Executive OfficerAlliance BankBroomall, Pa. John V. Evans, Jr.Chief Executive OfficerD.L. Evans BankBurley, Idaho Chandler J. HowardPresident and Chief Executive OfficerLiberty BankMiddletown, Conn. Milton H. Jones, Jr.Executive ChairmanCertusBank, N.A.Atlanta Brian L. JohnsonChief Executive OfficerChoice Financial GroupGrand Forks, N.D. Timothy G. MarshallPresident and Chief Executive OfficerBank of Ann ArborAnn Arbor, Mich. Eddie SteinerPresident and Chief Executive OfficerThe Commercial and Savings Bank of Millersburg, OhioMillersburg, Ohio For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Belt Valley Bank, MontanaWritten Agreement dated June 30, 2011Terminated August 2, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Raton Capital Corporation, Raton, New MexicoWritten Agreement dated April 10, 2012Terminated August 26, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Fentura Financial, Inc. Fenton, MichiganWritten Agreement dated November 4, 2010Terminated July 31, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcementactions listed below: Bank of Virginia, Midlothian, VirginiaWritten Agreement dated January 14, 2010Terminated August 13, 2013 Marquette Financial Companies, Minneapolis, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated February 17, 2011Terminated August 8, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued a final rule establishing annual assessment fees for its supervision and regulation of large financial companies. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act directs the Board to collect assessment fees equal to the expenses it estimates are necessary or appropriate to supervise and regulate bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets and nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for supervision by the Federal Reserve. The final rule outlines how the Board determines which companies are charged, estimates the applicable expenses, determines each company’s assessment fee, and bills for and collects the assessment fees. Under the final rule, each calendar year is an assessment period. For the 2012 assessment period, the first year for which assessment fees will be collected, the Board will notify each company of the amount of its assessment when the rule becomes effective in late October. Payments for the 2012 assessment period will be due no later than December 15, 2013. The Board estimates it will collect about $440 million from 70 companies for the 2012 assessment period. Beginning with the 2013 assessment period, the Federal Reserve will notify each company of the amount of its assessment fee no later than June 30 of the year following the assessment period. Payments will be due by September 15. The Federal Reserve will transfer the assessment fees it collects to the U.S. Treasury. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: ABCT Holdings, Inc. (PDF), Waco, TexasWritten Agreement dated August 5, 2013 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: BANKWEST Financial, Inc., Rockford, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated July 22, 2011Terminated August 5, 2013 Community Pride Bank Corporation, Ham Lake, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated September 2, 2011Terminated August 5, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Blencoe State Bank, Blencoe, IowaOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated July 30, 2013 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Eastern Virginia Bankshares, Inc. and EVB, both of Tappahannock, VirginiaWritten Agreement dated February 17, 2011Terminated July 30, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Large bank holding companies have considerably improved their capital planning processes in recent years, but have more work to do to enhance their practices for assessing the capital they need to withstand stressful economic and financial conditions, the Federal Reserve said in a paper released on Monday. In the paper, the Federal Reserve discussed in detail its expectations for internal capital planning at large bank holding companies and described the range of practices it has observed at these companies during the past three Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) exercises. The Federal Reserve conducts the CCAR annually to help ensure that companies have forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks and result in sufficient capital to enable the institutions to continue lending to households and businesses during times of economic and financial stress. The paper,Capital Planning at Large Bank Holding Companies: Supervisory Expectations and Range of Current Practice, is intended to promote better capital planning at bank holding companies generally, and to provide greater clarity on the standards against which those practices are evaluated as part of the CCAR exercise. In particular, the Federal Reserve emphasized that bank holding companies, when considering their capital needs, should focus on the specific risks they could face under potentially stressful conditions. In its evaluation, the Federal Reserve found that firms needed to improve a number of aspects of their capital planning processes, including their accounting for risks most relevant to the specific business activities, their methods of projecting the effect of certain stresses on their capital needs, and their governance of the capital planning processes. The Federal Reserve will start the 2014 CCAR process in the fall. In addition to the 18 firms that participated in 2013, 12 firms with more than $50 billion in total assets that have not previously been part of the CCAR are expected to participate. Capital Planning at Large Bank Holding Companies (PDF)|HTML For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from July 1 through July 29, 2013. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 30-31, 2013. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 30-31, 2013:HTML|PDF