Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the "The First 100 Years of the Federal Reserve: The Policy Record, Lessons Learned, and Prospects for the Future," a conference sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts I'd like to thank the National Bureau of Economic Research for organizing this conference in recognition of the Federal Reserve's centennial, and I'm glad to have the opportunity to participate. In keeping with the spirit of the conference, my remarks today will take a historical perspective. I will leave discussion of current policy to today's question-and-answer session and, of course, to my congressional testimony next week. Today, I'll discuss the evolution over the past 100 years of three key aspects of Federal Reserve policymaking: the goals of policy, the policy framework, and accountability and communication. The changes over time in these three areas provide a useful perspective, I believe, on how the role and functioning of the Federal Reserve have changed since its founding in 1913, as well as some lessons for the present and for the future. I will pay particular attention to several key episodes of the Fed's history, all of which have been referred to in various contexts with the adjective "Great" attached to them: the Great Experiment of the Federal Reserve's founding, the Great Depression, the Great Inflation and subsequent disinflation, the Great Moderation, and the recent Great Recession. The Great ExperimentIn the words of one of the authors of the Federal Reserve Act, Robert Latham Owen, the Federal Reserve was established to "provide a means by which periodic panics which shake the American Republic and do it enormous injury shall be stopped."1In short, the original goal of the Great Experiment that was the founding of the Fed was the preservation of financial stability.2At the time, the standard view of panics was that they were triggered when the needs of business and agriculture for liquid funds outstripped the available supply--as when seasonal plantings or shipments of crops had to be financed, for example--and that panics were further exacerbated by the incentives of banks and private individuals to hoard liquidity during such times.3The new institution was intended to relieve such strains by providing an "elastic" currency--that is, by providing liquidity as needed to individual member banks through the discount window; commercial banks, in turn, would then be able to accommodate their customers. Interestingly, although congressional advocates hoped the creation of the Fed would help prevent future panics, they did not fully embrace the idea that the Fed should help end ongoing panics by serving as lender of last resort, as had been recommended by the British economist and writer Walter Bagehot.4Legislators imposed limits on the Federal Reserve's ability to lend in response to panics, for example, by denying nonmember banks access to the discount window and by restricting the types of collateral that the Fed could accept.5 The framework that the Federal Reserve employed in its early years to promote financial stability reflected in large measure the influence of the so-called real bills doctrine, as well as the fact that the United States was on the gold standard.6In the framework of the real bills doctrine, the Federal Reserve saw its function as meeting the needs of business for liquidity--consistent with the idea of providing an elastic currency--with the ultimate goal of supporting financial and economic stability.7When business activity was increasing, the Federal Reserve helped accommodate the need for credit by supplying liquidity to banks; when business was contracting and less credit was needed, the Fed reduced the liquidity in the system. As I mentioned, the Federal Reserve pursued this approach to policy in the context of the gold standard. Federal Reserve notes were redeemable in gold on demand, and the Fed was required to maintain a gold reserve equal to 40 percent of outstanding notes. However, contrary to the principles of an idealized gold standard, the Federal Reserve often took actions to prevent inflows and outflows of gold from being fully translated into changes in the domestic money supply.8This practice, together with the size of the U.S. economy, gave the Federal Reserve considerable autonomy in monetary policy and, in particular, allowed the Fed to conduct policy according to the real bills doctrine without much hindrance. The policy framework of the Fed's early years has been much criticized in retrospect. Although the gold standard did not appear to have greatly constrained U.S. monetary policy in the years after the Fed's founding, subsequent research has highlighted the extent to which the international gold standard served to destabilize the global economy in the late 1920s and early 1930s.9Likewise, economic historians have pointed out that, under the real bills doctrine, the Fed increased the money supply precisely at those times at which business activity and upward pressures on prices were strongest; that is, monetary policy was procyclical. Thus, the Fed's actions tended to increase rather than decrease the volatility in economic activity and prices.10 During this early period, the new central bank did make an important addition to its menu of policy tools. Initially, the Fed's main tools were the quantity of its lending through the discount window and the interest rate at which it lent, the discount rate. Early on, however, to generate earnings to finance its operations, the Federal Reserve began purchasing government securities in the open market--what came to be known as open market operations. In the early 1920s, Fed officials discovered that these operations affected the supply and cost of bank reserves and, consequently, the terms on which banks extended credit to their customers. Subsequently, of course, open market operations became a principal monetary policy tool, one that allowed the Fed to interact with the broader financial markets, not only with banks.11 I've discussed the original mandate and early policy framework of the Fed. What about its accountability to the public? As this audience knows, when the Federal Reserve was established, the question of whether it should be a private or a public institution was highly contentious. The compromise solution created a hybrid Federal Reserve System. The System was headed by a governmentally appointed Board, which initially included the Secretary of the Treasury and the Comptroller of the Currency. But the 12 regional Reserve Banks were placed under a mixture of public and private oversight, including board members drawn from the private sector, and they were given considerable scope to make policy decisions that applied to their own Districts. For example, Reserve Banks were permitted to set their own discount rates, subject to a minimum set by the Board. While the founders of the Federal Reserve hoped that this new institution would provide financial and hence economic stability, the policy framework and the institutional structure would prove inadequate to the challenges the Fed would soon face. The Great DepressionThe Great Depression was the Federal Reserve's most difficult test. Tragically, the Fed failed to meet its mandate to maintain financial stability. In particular, although the Fed provided substantial liquidity to the financial system following the 1929 stock market crash, its response to the subsequent banking panics was limited at best; the widespread bank failures and the collapse in money and credit that ensued were major sources of the economic downturn.12Bagehot's dictum to lend freely at a penalty rate in the face of panic appeared to have few adherents at the Federal Reserve of that era.13 Economists have also identified a number of instances from the late 1920s to the early 1930s when Federal Reserve officials, in the face of the sharp economic contraction and financial upheaval, either tightened monetary policy or chose inaction. Some historians trace these policy mistakes to the early death of Benjamin Strong, governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in 1928, which left the decentralized system without an effective leader.14Whether valid or not, this hypothesis raises the interesting question of what intellectual framework an effective leader would have drawn on at the time to develop and justify a more activist monetary policy. The degree to which the gold standard actually constrained U.S. monetary policy during the early 1930s is debated; but the gold standard philosophy clearly did not encourage the sort of highly expansionary policies that were needed.15The same can be said for the real bills doctrine, which apparently led policymakers to conclude, on the basis of low nominal interest rates and low borrowings from the Fed, that monetary policy was appropriately supportive and that further actions would be fruitless.16Historians have also noted the prevalence at the time of yet another counterproductive doctrine: the so-called liquidationist view, that depressions perform a necessary cleansing function.17It may be that the Federal Reserve suffered less from lack of leadership in the 1930s than from the lack of an intellectual framework for understanding what was happening and what needed to be done. The Fed's inadequate policy frameworks ultimately collapsed under the weight of economic failures, new ideas, and political developments. The international gold standard was abandoned during the 1930s. The real bills doctrine likewise lost prestige after the disaster of the 1930s; for example, the Banking Act of 1935 instructed the Federal Reserve to use open market operations with consideration of "the general credit situation of the country," not just to focus narrowly on short-term liquidity needs.18The Congress also expanded the Fed's ability to provide credit through the discount window, allowing loans to a broader array of counterparties, secured by a broader variety of collateral.19 The experience of the Great Depression had major ramifications for all three aspects of the Federal Reserve I am discussing here: its goals, its policy framework, and its accountability to the public. With respect to goals, the high unemployment of the Depression--and the fear that high unemployment would return after World War II--elevated the maintenance of full employment as a goal of macroeconomic policy. The Employment Act of 1946 made the promotion of employment a general objective for the federal government. Although the Fed did not have a formal employment goal until the Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977 codified "maximum employment," along with "stable prices," as part of the Fed's so-called dual mandate, earlier legislation nudged the central bank in that direction.20For example, legislators described the intent of the Banking Act of 1935 as follows: "To increase the ability of the banking system to promote stability of employment and business, insofar as this is possible within the scope of monetary action and credit administration."21 The policy framework to support this new approach reflected the development of macroeconomic theories--including the work of Knut Wicksell, Irving Fisher, Ralph Hawtrey, Dennis Robertson, and John Maynard Keynes--that laid the foundations for understanding how monetary policy could affect real activity and employment and help reduce cyclical fluctuations. At the same time, the Federal Reserve became less focused on its original mandate of preserving financial stability, perhaps in part because it felt superseded by the creation during the 1930s of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Securities and Exchange Commission, along with other reforms intended to make the financial system more stable. In the area of governance and accountability to the public, policymakers also recognized the need for reforms to improve the Federal Reserve's structure and decisionmaking. The Banking Act of 1935 simultaneously bolstered the legal independence of the Federal Reserve and provided for stronger central control by the Federal Reserve Board. In particular, the act created the modern configuration of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), giving the Board the majority of votes on the Committee, while removing the Secretary of the Treasury and the Comptroller of the Currency from the Board. In practice, however, the Treasury continued to have considerable sway over monetary policy after 1933, with one economic historian describing the Fed as "in the back seat."22During World War II, the Federal Reserve used its tools to support the war financing efforts. However, even after the war, Federal Reserve policy remained subject to considerable Treasury influence. It was not until the 1951 Accord with the Treasury that the Federal Reserve began to recover genuine independence in setting monetary policy. The Great Inflation and DisinflationOnce the Federal Reserve regained its policy independence, its goals centered on the price stability and employment objectives laid out in the Employment Act of 1946. In the early postwar decades, the Fed used open market operations and the discount rate to influence short-term market interest rates, and the federal funds rate gradually emerged as the preferred operating target. Low and stable inflation was achieved for most of the 1950s and the early 1960s. However, beginning in the mid-1960s, inflation began a long climb upward, partly because policymakers proved to be too optimistic about the economy's ability to sustain rapid growth without inflation.23 Two mechanisms might have mitigated the damage from that mistaken optimism. First, a stronger policy response to inflation--more like that observed in the 1950s--certainly would have helped.24Second, Fed policymakers could have reacted to continued high readings on inflation by adopting a more realistic assessment of the economy's productive potential.25Instead, policymakers chose to emphasize so-called cost-push and structural factors as sources of inflation and saw wage- and price-setting as having become insensitive to economic slack.26This perspective, which contrasted sharply with Milton Friedman's famous dictum that "inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon," led to Fed support for measures such as wage and price controls rather than monetary solutions to address inflation.27A further obstacle was the view among many economists that the gains from low inflation did not justify the costs of achieving it.28 The consequence of the monetary framework of the 1970s was two bouts of double-digit inflation. Moreover, by the end of the decade, lack of commitment to controlling inflation had clearly resulted in inflation expectations becoming "unanchored," with high estimates of trend inflation embedded in longer-term interest rates. As you know, under the leadership of Chairman Paul Volcker, the Federal Reserve in 1979 fundamentally changed its approach to the issue of ensuring price stability. This change involved an important rethinking on the part of policymakers. By the end of the 1970s, Federal Reserve officials increasingly accepted the view that inflation is a monetary phenomenon, at least in the medium and longer term; they became more alert to the risks of excessive optimism about the economy's potential output; and they placed renewed emphasis on the distinction between real‑‑that is, inflation-adjusted‑‑and nominal interest rates.29The change in policy framework was initially tied to a change in operating procedures that put greater focus on growth in bank reserves, but the critical change‑‑the willingness to respond more vigorously to inflation--endured even after the Federal Reserve resumed its traditional use of the federal funds rate as the policy instrument.30The new regime also reflected an improved understanding of the importance of providing a firm anchor, secured by the credibility of the central bank, for the private sector's inflation expectations.31Finally, it entailed a changed view about the dual mandate, in which policymakers regarded achievement of price stability as helping to provide the conditions necessary for sustained maximum employment.32 The Great ModerationVolcker's successful battle against inflation set the stage for the so-called Great Moderation of 1984 to 2007, during which the Fed enjoyed considerable success in achieving both objectives of its dual mandate. Financial stability remained a goal, of course. The Federal Reserve monitored threats to financial stability and responded when the financial system was upset by events such as the 1987 stock market crash and the terrorist attacks of 2001. More routinely, it shared supervisory duties with other banking agencies. Nevertheless, for the most part, financial stability did not figure prominently in monetary policy discussions during these years. In retrospect, it is clear that macroeconomists--both inside and outside central banks--relied too heavily during that period on variants of the so-called Modigliani-Miller theorem, an implication of which is that the details of the structure of the financial system can be ignored when analyzing the behavior of the broader economy. An important development of the Great Moderation was the increasing emphasis that central banks around the world put on communication and transparency, as economists and policymakers reached consensus on the value of communication in attaining monetary policy objectives.33Federal Reserve officials, like those at other central banks, had traditionally been highly guarded in their public pronouncements. They believed, for example, that the ability to take markets by surprise was important for influencing financial conditions.34Thus, although Fed policymakers of the 1980s and early 1990s had become somewhat more explicit about policy objectives and strategy, the same degree of transparency was not forthcoming on monetary policy decisions and operations.35The release of a postmeeting statement by the FOMC, a practice that began in 1994, was, therefore, an important watershed. Over time, the statement was expanded to include more detailed information about the reason for the policy decision and an indication of the balance of risks.36 In addition to improving the effectiveness of monetary policy, these developments in communications also enhanced the public accountability of the Federal Reserve. Accountability is, of course, essential for policy independence in a democracy. During this period, economists found considerable evidence that central banks that are afforded policy independence in the pursuit of their mandated objectives deliver better economic outcomes.37 One cannot look back at the Great Moderation today without asking whether the sustained economic stability of the period somehow promoted the excessive risk-taking that followed. The idea that this long period of calm lulled investors, financial firms, and financial regulators into paying insufficient attention to building risks must have some truth in it. I don't think we should conclude, though, that we therefore should not strive to achieve economic stability. Rather, the right conclusion is that, even in (or perhaps, especially in) stable and prosperous times, monetary policymakers and financial regulators should regard safeguarding financial stability to be of equal importance as--indeed, a necessary prerequisite for--maintaining macroeconomic stability. Macroeconomists and historians will continue to debate the sources of the remarkable economic performance during the Great Moderation.38My own view is that the improvements in the monetary policy framework and in monetary policy communication, including, of course, the better management of inflation and the anchoring of inflation expectations, were important reasons for that strong performance. However, we have learned in recent years that while well-managed monetary policy may be necessary for economic stability, it is not sufficient. The Financial Crisis, the Great Recession, and TodayIt has been about six years since the first signs of the financial crisis appeared in the United States, and we are still working to achieve a full recovery from its effects. What lessons should we take for the future from this experience, particularly in the context of a century of Federal Reserve history? The financial crisis and the ensuing Great Recession reminded us of a lesson that we learned both in the 19th century and during the Depression but had forgotten to some extent, which is that severe financial instability can do grave damage to the broader economy. The implication is that a central bank must take into account risks to financial stability if it is to help achieve good macroeconomic performance. Today, the Federal Reserve sees its responsibilities for the maintenance of financial stability as coequal with its responsibilities for the management of monetary policy, and we have made substantial institutional changes in recognition of this change in goals. In a sense, we have come full circle, back to the original goal of the Federal Reserve of preventing financial panics.39 How should a central bank enhance financial stability? One means is by assuming the lender-of-last-resort function that Bagehot understood and described 140 years ago, under which the central bank uses its power to provide liquidity to ease market conditions during periods of panic or incipient panic. The Fed's many liquidity programs played a central role in containing the crisis of 2008 to 2009. However, putting out the fire is not enough; it is also important to foster a financial system that is sufficiently resilient to withstand large financial shocks. Toward that end, the Federal Reserve, together with other regulatory agencies and the Financial Stability Oversight Council, is actively engaged in monitoring financial developments and working to strengthen financial institutions and markets. The reliance on stronger regulation is informed by the success of New Deal regulatory reforms, but current reform efforts go even further by working to identify and defuse risks not only to individual firms but to the financial system as a whole, an approach known as macroprudential regulation. Financial stability is also linked to monetary policy, though these links are not yet fully understood. Here the Fed's evolving strategy is to make monitoring, supervision, and regulation the first line of defense against systemic risks; to the extent that risks remain, however, the FOMC strives to incorporate these risks in the cost-benefit analysis applied to all monetary policy actions.40 What about the monetary policy framework? In general, the Federal Reserve's policy framework inherits many of the elements put in place during the Great Moderation. These features include the emphasis on preserving the Fed's inflation credibility, which is critical for anchoring inflation expectations, and a balanced approach in pursuing both parts of the Fed's dual mandate in the medium term. We have also continued to increase the transparency of monetary policy. For example, the Committee's communications framework now includes a statement of its longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy.41In that statement, the Committee indicated that it judged that inflation at a rate of 2 percent (as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures) is most consistent over the longer run with the FOMC's dual mandate. FOMC participants also regularly provide estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment; those estimates currently have a central tendency of 5.2 to 6.0 percent. By helping to anchor longer-term expectations, this transparency gives the Federal Reserve greater flexibility to respond to short-run developments. This framework, which combines short-run policy flexibility with the discipline provided by the announced targets, has been described as constrained discretion.42Other communication innovations include early publication of the minutes of FOMC meetings and quarterly postmeeting press conferences by the Chairman. The framework for implementing monetary policy has evolved further in recent years, reflecting both advances in economic thinking and a changing policy environment. Notably, following the ideas of Lars Svensson and others, the FOMC has moved toward a framework that ties policy settings more directly to the economic outlook, a so-called forecast-based approach.43In particular, the FOMC has released more detailed statements following its meetings that have related the outlook for policy to prospective economic developments and has introduced regular summaries of the individual economic projections of FOMC participants (including for the target federal funds rate). The provision of additional information about policy plans has helped Fed policymakers deal with the constraint posed by the effective lower bound on short-term interest rates; in particular, by offering guidance about how policy will respond to economic developments, the Committee has been able to increase policy accommodation, even when the short-term interest rate is near zero and cannot be meaningfully reduced further.44The Committee has also sought to influence interest rates further out on the yield curve, notably through its securities purchases. Other central banks in advanced economies, also confronted with the effective lower bound on short-term interest rates, have taken similar measures. In short, the recent crisis has underscored the need both to strengthen our monetary policy and financial stability frameworks and to better integrate the two. We have made progress on both counts, but more needs to be done. In particular, the complementarities among regulatory and supervisory policies (including macroprudential policy), lender-of-last-resort policy, and standard monetary policy are increasingly evident. Both research and experience are needed to help the Fed and other central banks develop comprehensive frameworks that incorporate all of these elements. The broader conclusion is what might be described as the overriding lesson of the Federal Reserve's history: that central banking doctrine and practice are never static. We and other central banks around the world will have to continue to work hard to adapt to events, new ideas, and changes in the economic and financial environment. ReferencesAhmed, Shaghil, Andrew Levin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2004). "Recent U.S. Macroeconomic Stability: Good Policies, Good Practices, or Good Luck?"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 86 (August), pp. 824-32. Alesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers (1993). "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62. Axilrod, Stephen H. (1982). "Monetary Policy, Money Supply, and the Federal Reserve's Operating Procedures" in Paul Meek, ed.,Central Bank Views on Monetary Targeting. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, pp. 32-41. Bagehot, Walter ([1873] 1897).Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market.New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. Bernanke, Ben S. (2002). "Asset-Price ‘Bubbles' and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the New York Chapter of the National Association for Business Economics, New York, October 15. -------- (2004). "The Great Moderation," speech delivered at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, February 20. -------- (2011). "The Effects of the Great Recession on Central Bank Doctrine and Practice," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 56th Economic Conference, Boston, October 18. Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997). "Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11 (Spring), pp. 97-116. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1924).Tenth Annual Report of the Federal Reserve Board, Covering Operations for the Year 1923. Washington: Government Printing Office. Bordo, Michael D., and David C. Wheelock (2013). "The Promise and Performance of the Federal Reserve as Lender of Last Resort 1914-1933," in Michael D. Bordo and William Roberds, eds.,A Return to Jekylll Island: The Origins, History, and Future of the Federal Reserve.New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 59‑98. Bordo, Michael D., Ehsan U. Choudhri, and Anna J. Schwartz (2002). "Was Expansionary Monetary Policy Feasible during the Great Contraction? An Examination of the Gold Standard Constraint,"Explorations in Economic History, vol. 39 (January), pp. 1-28. Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983)."Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 12 (September), pp. 383-98. Carlson, Mark A., and David C. Wheelock (2012). "The Lender of Last Resort: Lessons from the Fed's First 100 Years," Working Paper Series 2012-056B. St. Louis, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, November. Clarida, Richard,Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115 (February), pp. 147-80. Cukierman, Alex, and Allan H. Meltzer (1986). "A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility, and Inflation under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,"Econometrica, vol. 54 (September), pp. 1099-128. Davis, Steven J., and James A. Kahn (2008). "Interpreting the Great Moderation: Changes in the Volatility of Economic Activity at the Macro and Micro Levels,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 22 (Fall), pp. 155-80. Debelle, Guy, and Stanley Fischer (1994). "How Independent Should a Central Bank Be? (PDF)" in Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, ed.,Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers, proceedings of the Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers conference held in North Falmouth, Mass., June. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 195-221. DeLong, J. Bradford (1990). "‘Liquidation' Cycles: Old-Fashioned Real Business Cycle Theory and the Great Depression," NBER Working Paper Series 3546. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, December. -------- (1997), "America's Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s," in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 247-76. Dynan, Karen E., Douglas W. Elmendorf, and Daniel E. Sichel (2006). "Can Financial Innovation Help to Explain the Reduced Volatility of Economic Activity?"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 53 (January), pp. 123-50. Eichengreen, Barry (1992).Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939. New York: Oxford University Press. Fischer, Stanley (1977). "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (February), pp. 191‑205. Friedman, Milton (1963). Inflation: Causes and Consequences. New York: Asia Publishing House. Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1963).A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Goodfriend, Marvin (1986). "Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 17 (January), pp. 63-92. Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Christina D. Romer (2006). "Was the Federal Reserve Constrained by the Gold Standard during the Great Depression? Evidence from the 1932 Open Market Purchase Program,"Journal of Economic History,vol. 66 (March), pp. 140-76. Humphrey, Thomas M. (1982). "The Real Bills Doctrine (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,Economic Review,vol. 19 (September/October), pp. 3-13. Judd, John P., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (1998). "Taylor's Rule and the Fed: 1970‑1997 (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,Economic Review, vol. 3, pp. 3-16. Lindsey, David E. (2003).A Modern History of FOMC Communication: 1975-2002(PDF), unpublished report, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, June. Lindsey, David E., Athanasios Orphanides, and Robert H. Rasche (2005). "The Reform of October 1979: How It Happened and Why (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review, vol. 87 (March/April), pp. 187-236. McCallum, Bennett T. (1981). "Price Level Determinacy with an Interest Rate Policy Rule and Rational Expectations,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 8 (November), pp. 319-29. Meltzer, Allan H. (2003).A History of the Federal Reserve,Volume 1: 1913-1951. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. -------- (2009a).A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 2, Book 1: 1951‑1969. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. -------- (2009b).A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 2, Book 2: 1970‑1986. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007). "Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. Nelson, Edward (2005). "The Great Inflation of the Seventies: What Really Happened?"Advances in Macroeconomics,vol. 5 (1), pp. 1-48. Noyes, Alexander D. (1929), "Wall Street's Controversy with the Reserve Board: Professor Lawrence Takes the Side of the Stock Market in the Quarrel of the Past Year," a review ofWall Street and Washington,by Joseph Stagg Lawrence,New York Times, Book Review, August 25. Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). "The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 633-63. -------- (2006). "The Road to Price Stability,"American EconomicReview, vol. 96 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 178-81. Owen, Robert L. (1919).The Federal Reserve Act: Its Origin and Principles. New York: Century Company. Poole, William (1979). "Burnsian Monetary Policy: Eight Years of Progress?"Journal of Finance, vol. 34 (May), pp. 473-84. Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (2002a). "The Evolution of Economic Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy (PDF)," in proceedings ofRethinking Stabilization Policy, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Kansas City, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 11-78. -------- (2002b). "A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy in the 1950s,"American Economic Review, vol. 92 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 121-27. -------- (2013), "The Most Dangerous Idea in Federal Reserve History: Monetary Policy Doesn't Matter,"American Economic Review, vol. 103 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 55-60. Rotemberg,JulioJ. (1982). "Sticky Prices in the United States,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 90 (December), pp. 1187-211. Sargent, Thomas J. (1982). "The Ends of Four Big Inflations," in Robert E. Hall, ed.,Inflation: Causes and Consequences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 41-97. Sargent,Thomas J., and NeilA. Wallace (1975)."‘Rational' Expectations, the Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 83 (April), pp. 241-54. Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2003). "Has the Business Cycle Changed? Evidence and Explanations (PDF)," in proceedings ofMonetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Kansas City, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 9-56. Stokey, Nancy L. (2002). " ‘Rules vs. Discretion' after Twenty-Five Years," in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 17, pp. 62-64. Strong, Benjamin (1926). "Open Market Operations," inhearing before the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Banking and Currency, April. Reprinted in W. Randolph Burgess, ed. (1930),Interpretations of Federal Reserve Policy in the Speeches and Writings of Benjamin Strong. New York: Harper and Brothers. Svensson, Lars E. O. (2003). "What Is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in Monetary Policy through Targeting Rules,"Journal ofEconomic Literature, vol. 41 (June), 426‑77. Taylor, John B. (1980). "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 88 (February), pp. 1-23. -------- (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. -------- (1997). "Comment on ‘America's Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s,' " in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation:Motivation and Strategy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 276-80. -------- (1999a). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41. --------, ed. (1999b).Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Temin, Peter (1989).Lessons from the Great Depression.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. U.S. Congress, House Committee on Banking and Currency (1935). "Banking Act of 1935, Report No. 742 to Accompany H.R. 7617." 74 Cong. Washington: Government Printing Office. Warburg, Paul M. (1914). "A United Reserve Bank of the United States,"Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science in the City of New York, vol. 4 (July), pp. 75‑115. Wicker, Elmus R. (1965). "Federal Reserve Monetary Policy, 1922-33: A Reinterpretation,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 73 (August), pp. 325-43. Willis, H. Parker (1923).The Federal Reserve System: Legislation, Organization, and Operation.New York: Ronald Press Company. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton: Princeton University Press. -------- (2005). "Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness (PDF)," in proceedings of The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Kansas City, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 399-474. Yellen, Janet (2012). "Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications," speech delivered at the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, November 13. 1.See Owen (1919, p. 24). The Treasury carried out some central banking functions before the creation of the Federal Reserve. In addition, the United States had experimented with central banking before, with the First and Second Banks of the United States. By 1913, however, it had been about 75 years since the latter institution had ceased fulfilling that purpose. Moreover, the Federal Reserve operated somewhat differently from the prior institutions, and, in that respect, its creation amounted to an experiment.Return to text 2.Per a review of the 1929 bookWall Street and Washingtonin theNew York Times, "The Federal Reserve System has from the first necessarily been a great experiment, bound to adjust its general policies to the requirements of such novel and varying situations as should arise in the course of our financial history and which could not possibly be foreseen" (Noyes, 1929).Return to text 3.Friedman and Schwartz (1963) describe the debate about the elastic currency. Warburg (1914) discusses hoarding and the panic dynamics that the Federal Reserve was established to prevent.Return to text 4.See Willis (1923, p. 1407), Carlson and Wheelock (2012), and Bordo and Wheelock (2013). Bagehot ([1873] 1897) is the source of the classic dictum that a panic should be addressed by the central bank, by lending freely at a penalty rate.Return to text 5.The Monetary Control Act of 1980 gave all depository institutions access to the discount window. The collateral acceptable to be pledged to the discount window has been expanded significantly over time; in particular, various pieces of banking legislation in the early 1930s enabled the Federal Reserve to make advances to member banks so long as the loans were "secured to the satisfaction" of the Federal Reserve Bank extending the loan.Return to text 6.See Humphrey (1982) for a discussion of the historical evolution of the real bills doctrine.Return to text 7.This interpretation follows from the discussion in theTenth Annual Report of the Federal Reserve Board(Board of Governors, 1924). Soon after the Federal Reserve was founded, its mission shifted to supporting the war effort and then to managing the unwinding of that support. The year 1923 was thus one of the first in which the Federal Reserve confronted normal peacetime financial conditions, and it took the opportunity to articulate its views on the appropriate conduct of policy in such conditions.Return to text 8.The Federal Reserve could undo the effects of gold inflows on the domestic money supply through open market operations, discussed later.Return to text 9.See, for example, Eichengreen (1992).Return to text 10.See Friedman and Schwartz (1963), Humphrey (1982), and Meltzer (2003).Return to text 11.See Strong (1926).Return to text 12.See Friedman and Schwartz (1963).Return to text 13.Meltzer (2003, pp. 282, 729-30) notes that Board members discussed Bagehot's ideas but nevertheless did not integrate them fully into their approach to policy.Return to text 14.See Friedman and Schwartz (1963, chapter 7).Return to text 15.Wicker (1965), Temin (1989), and Eichengreen (1992) suggest that U.S. policymakers felt constrained by the gold standard. In contrast, Hsieh and Romer (2006), as well as Bordo, Choudhri, and Schwartz (2002), focus on the short-lived monetary expansion in 1932 as evidence against the existence of important constraints on the Federal Reserve.Return to text 16.See Meltzer (2003) and Romer and Romer (2013).Return to text 17.See, for example, DeLong (1990).Return to text 18.This language amended section 12A(c) of the Federal Reserve Act.Return to text 19.For example, section 10B enhanced the powers of the Federal Reserve to lend to member banks, and sections 13(3) and 13(13) enabled the Federal Reserve to provide short-term credit to a wide range of potential borrowers in specific circumstances.Return to text 20.More precisely, the three statutory objectives for monetary policy set forth in the Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977 are maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The dual mandate refers to the first two goals, and the long-term interest rate goal is viewed as likely to emerge from the macroeconomic environment associated with achievement of the employment and price stability goals (Mishkin, 2007). Thus, the interest rate goal of the Federal Reserve Reform Act can be regarded as subsumed within the dual mandate.Return to text 21.See U.S. Congress (1935).Return to text 22.See Meltzer (2003).Return to text 23.See, for example, Orphanides (2003) and Meltzer (2009a).Return to text 24.See Romer and Romer (2002b).Return to text 25.See Lars Svensson's remarks in Stokey (2002, p. 63).Return to text 26.See, for example, Poole (1979), Romer and Romer (2002a, 2013), Bernanke (2004), and Nelson (2005).Return to text 27.Estimates of the response of the federal funds rate to inflation for the 1970s generally show only a weak reaction. See Judd and Rudebusch (1998); Taylor (1999a); and Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000). For the quotation, see Friedman (1963, p.17).Return to text 28.See DeLong (1997) and Taylor (1997) for a discussion of views during the 1970s on the costs of inflation.Return to text 29.For discussion of these points, see Meltzer (2009b).Return to text 30.See, for example, Axilrod (1982).Return to text 31.Central banks' emphasis on expectations management partly reflected lessons from the rational expectations literature of the 1970s. Monetary policy implications of the rational expectations literature were further clarified by later research. For example, Sargent (1982) brought out dramatically the dependence of inflation expectations on the monetary policy regime in his study of major disinflations, while rational expectations models were extended to include sticky prices (Fischer, 1977; Taylor, 1980; Rotemberg, 1982; Calvo, 1983) and interest rate rules (Sargent and Wallace, 1975; McCallum, 1981; Taylor, 1993, 1999b; Woodford, 2003).Return to text 32.See Lindsey, Orphanides, and Rasche (2005).Return to text 33.See Woodford (2005). Many of these principles were codified in the emerging doctrine of inflation targeting, the practice of which was greatly advanced by central banks in other countries. One of the most notable examples is New Zealand's introduction of inflation targeting in 1990.Return to text 34.See, for example, Goodfriend (1986) and Cukierman and Meltzer (1986).Return to text 35.See Orphanides (2006) for a discussion of the Federal Reserve's move during the 1980s and 1990s to increased clarity about policy objectives.Return to text 36.See Lindsey (2003).Return to text 37.See Alesina and Summers (1993) and Debelle and Fischer (1994).Return to text 38.For a sampling of the debate, see Stock and Watson (2003); Ahmed, Levin, and Wilson (2004); Dynan, Elmendorf, and Sichel (2006); and Davis and Kahn (2008).Return to text 39.See Bernanke (2011).Return to text 40.See Bernanke (2002).Return to text 41.The statement can be found atwww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20120125c.htm.Return to text 42.See Bernanke and Mishkin (1997).Return to text 43.In a forecast-based approach, monetary policymakers inform the public of their medium-term targets--say, a specific value for the inflation rate--and attempt to vary the instruments of policy as needed to meet that target over time. In contrast, an instrument-based approach involves providing the public information about how the monetary policy committee plans to vary its policy instrument--typically, a short-term interest rate, like the federal funds rate--in response to economic conditions. See Svensson (2003).Return to text 44.See Yellen (2012) for an elaboration of this point.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) on Tuesday proposed a rule to strengthen the leverage ratio standards for the largest, most systemically significant U.S. banking organizations. Under the proposed rule, bank holding companies with more than $700 billion in consolidated total assets or $10 trillion in assets under custody (covered BHCs) would be required to maintain a tier 1 capital leverage buffer of at least 2 percent above the minimum supplementary leverage ratio requirement of 3 percent, for a total of 5 percent. Failure to exceed the 5 percent ratio would subject covered BHCs to restrictions on discretionary bonus payments and capital distributions. In addition to the leverage buffer for covered BHCs, the proposed rule would require insured depository institutions of covered BHCs to meet a 6 percent supplementary leverage ratio to be considered "well capitalized" for prompt corrective action purposes. The proposed rule would currently apply to the eight largest, most systemically significant U.S. banking organizations. Also on Tuesday, the FDIC Board approved a capital interim final rule and the OCC approved a final capital rule identical in substance to the final rules issued by the Federal Reserve Board on July 2, 2013. A strong capital base at the largest, most systemically significant U.S. banking organizations is particularly important because capital shortfalls at these institutions have the potential to result in significant adverse economic consequences and contribute to systemic distress both domestically and internationally. Higher capital standards for these institutions will place additional private capital at risk before the federal deposit insurance fund and the federal government's resolution mechanisms would be called upon, and reduce the likelihood of economic disruptions caused by problems at these institutions. The agencies are proposing a substantial phase-in period for the rule with an effective date of January 1, 2018. The NPR will be published in theFederal Registerwith a 60 day public comment period. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Submit|View Board Votes
Federal Deposit Insurance CorporationBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today issued a statement encouraging financial institutions to work constructively with private student loan borrowers experiencing financial difficulties. Prudent workout arrangements are consistent with safe and sound lending practices and are generally in the long-term best interest of both the financial institution and the borrower. Student loan borrowers who are unemployed or underemployed may face hardship in making payments on their private student loan debts after separation from school or during periods of economic difficulty. Current interagency guidance permits prudent workout and modification programs for retail loans, including student loans,and provides that extensions, deferrals, renewals, and rewrites may be used to help borrowers overcome temporary financial difficulties. Institutions that have private student loan workout programs should provide borrowers with information that clearly explains the programs, including eligibility criteria and the process for requesting a modification. The statement is being issued by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Reserve Board, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemConsumer Financial Protection BureauFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Housing Finance AgencyNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Six federal financial regulatory agencies today issued a proposed rule that would create exemptions from certain appraisal requirements for a subset of higher-priced mortgage loans. The proposed exemptions are intended to save borrowers time and money and to promote the safety and soundness of creditors. The appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgages were imposed by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). Under the Dodd-Frank Act, mortgage loans are considered to be higher-priced if they are secured by a consumer's home and have interest rates above a certain threshold. The proposed rule would provide that the following three types of higher-priced mortgage loans would be exempt from the Dodd-Frank Act appraisal requirements: loans of $25,000 or less; certain "streamlined" refinancings; and certain loans secured by manufactured housing. In January 2013, a final rule implementing the new Dodd-Frank Act appraisal requirements was issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Compliance with the final rule will become mandatory on January 18, 2014. These same agencies are jointly issuing the proposed rule on additional exemptions in response to public comments previously received. The Federal Register notice is attached. The agencies are seeking comments from the public on all aspects of the proposal. The public will have until September 9, 2013, to review and comment on most of the proposal. However, comments related to the proposed Paperwork Reduction Act analysis will be due 60 days after the rule is published in the Federal Register. Publication of the proposal in the Federal Register is expected shortly. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday made available the public portions of resolution plans for four firms with U.S. nonbank assets between $100 billion and $250 billion. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires that bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council submit resolution plans to the FDIC and Federal Reserve. Each plan must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. Firms are required to file their initial resolution plans on a staggered schedule. The firms whose resolution plans were due on July 1, 2013 are BNP Paribas SA, HSBC Holdings plc, Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc, and Wells Fargo & Company. Larger firms with $250 billion or more in total U.S. nonbank assets first submitted plans last year and must submit their second plans by October 1, 2013. Firms with more than $50 billion but less than $100 billion in total U.S. nonbank assets must submit their initial resolution plans by December 31, 2013. By regulation, resolution plans must be divided into a public section and a confidential section. The public sections of the plans are available on theFDICandFederal Reservewebsites. Following submission of the resolution plans, the FDIC and Federal Reserve will preliminarily review the plan for informational completeness within 60 days and then review each plan for its compliance with the requirements of the rule.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Three federal bank regulatory agencies are seeking comment on proposed guidance describing supervisory expectations for stress tests conducted by financial companies with total consolidated assets between $10 billion and $50 billion. These medium-sized companies are required to conduct annual company-run stress tests beginning this fall under rules the agencies issued in October 2012 to implement a provision in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). To help these companies conduct stress tests appropriately scaled to their size, complexity, risk profile, business mix, and market footprint, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency are proposing guidance to provide additional details tailored to these companies. The stress test rules allow flexibility to accommodate different approaches by different companies in the $10 billion to $50 billion asset range. Consistent with this flexibility, the proposed guidance describes general supervisory expectations for Dodd-Frank Act stress tests, and, where appropriate, provides examples of practices that would be consistent with those expectations. The public comment period on the proposed supervisory guidance will be open until September 25, 2013. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Comments on this proposal:Submit|View
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencyFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that the banking agencies will use to determine compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. These ratios update data released on June 29, 2012. In general, section 109 prohibits a bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 also prohibits branches of banks controlled by out-of-state bank holding companies from operating primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 provides a process to test compliance with the statutory requirements. The first step in the process involves a loan-to-deposit ratio screen that compares a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio to the host state loan-to-deposit ratio for banks in a particular state. A second step is conducted if a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio is less than one-half of the published ratio for that state or if data are not available at the bank to conduct the first step. The second step requires the appropriate banking agency to determine whether the bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the bank's interstate branches. A bank that fails both steps is in violation of section 109 and is subject to sanctions by the appropriate banking agency. The updated host state loan-to-deposit ratios are attached.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Bernanke presented identical remarks before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate on July 18, 2013. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress. I will discuss current economic conditions and the outlook and then turn to monetary policy. I'll finish with a short summary of our ongoing work on regulatory reform. The Economic OutlookThe economic recovery has continued at a moderate pace in recent quarters despite the strong headwinds created by federal fiscal policy. Housing has contributed significantly to recent gains in economic activity. Home sales, house prices, and residential construction have moved up over the past year, supported by low mortgage rates and improved confidence in both the housing market and the economy. Rising housing construction and home sales are adding to job growth, and substantial increases in home prices are bolstering household finances and consumer spending while reducing the number of homeowners with underwater mortgages. Housing activity and prices seem likely to continue to recover, notwithstanding the recent increases in mortgage rates, but it will be important to monitor developments in this sector carefully. Conditions in the labor market are improving gradually. The unemployment rate stood at 7.6 percent in June, about a half percentage point lower than in the months before the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) initiated its current asset purchase program in September. Nonfarm payroll employment has increased by an average of about 200,000 jobs per month so far this year. Despite these gains, the jobs situation is far from satisfactory, as the unemployment rate remains well above its longer-run normal level, and rates of underemployment and long-term unemployment are still much too high. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation has been running below the Committee's longer-run objective of 2 percent. The price index for personal consumption expenditures rose only 1 percent over the year ending in May. This softness reflects in part some factors that are likely to be transitory. Moreover, measures of longer-term inflation expectations have generally remained stable, which should help move inflation back up toward 2 percent. However, the Committee is certainly aware that very low inflation poses risks to economic performance--for example, by raising the real cost of capital investment--and increases the risk of outright deflation. Consequently, we will monitor this situation closely as well, and we will act as needed to ensure that inflation moves back toward our 2 percent objective over time. At the June FOMC meeting, my colleagues and I projected that economic growth would pick up in coming quarters, resulting in gradual progress toward the levels of unemployment and inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate to foster maximum employment and price stability. Specifically, most participants saw real GDP growth beginning to step up during the second half of this year, eventually reaching a pace between 2.9 and 3.6 percent in 2015. They projected the unemployment rate to decline to between 5.8 and 6.2 percent by the final quarter of 2015. And they saw inflation gradually increasing toward the Committee's 2 percent objective.1 The pickup in economic growth projected by most Committee participants partly reflects their view that federal fiscal policy will exert somewhat less drag over time, as the effects of the tax increases and the spending sequestration diminish. The Committee also believes that risks to the economy have diminished since the fall, reflecting some easing of financial stresses in Europe, the gains in housing and labor markets that I mentioned earlier, the better budgetary positions of state and local governments, and stronger household and business balance sheets. That said, the risks remain that tight federal fiscal policy will restrain economic growth over the next few quarters by more than we currently expect, or that the debate concerning other fiscal policy issues, such as the status of the debt ceiling, will evolve in a way that could hamper the recovery. More generally, with the recovery still proceeding at only a moderate pace, the economy remains vulnerable to unanticipated shocks, including the possibility that global economic growth may be slower than currently anticipated. Monetary PolicyWith unemployment still high and declining only gradually, and with inflation running below the Committee's longer-run objective, a highly accommodative monetary policy will remain appropriate for the foreseeable future. In normal circumstances, the Committee's basic tool for providing monetary accommodation is its target for the federal funds rate. However, the target range for the federal funds rate has been close to zero since late 2008 and cannot be reduced meaningfully further. Instead, we are providing additional policy accommodation through two distinct yet complementary policy tools. The first tool is expanding the Federal Reserve's portfolio of longer-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS); we are currently purchasing $40 billion per month in agency MBS and $45 billion per month in Treasuries. The second tool is "forward guidance" about the Committee's plans for setting the federal funds rate target over the medium term. Within our overall policy framework, we think of these two tools as having somewhat different roles. We are using asset purchases and the resulting expansion of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet primarily to increase the near-term momentum of the economy, with the specific goal of achieving a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market in a context of price stability. We have made some progress toward this goal, and, with inflation subdued, we intend to continue our purchases until a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook has been realized. In addition, even after purchases end, the Federal Reserve will be holding its stock of Treasury and agency securities off the market and reinvesting the proceeds from maturing securities, which will continue to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. We are relying on near-zero short-term interest rates, together with our forward guidance that rates will continue to be exceptionally low--our second tool--to help maintain a high degree of monetary accommodation for an extended period after asset purchases end, even as the economic recovery strengthens and unemployment declines toward more-normal levels. In appropriate combination, these two tools can provide the high level of policy accommodation needed to promote a stronger economic recovery with price stability. In the interest of transparency, Committee participants agreed in June that it would be helpful to lay out more details about our thinking regarding the asset purchase program--specifically, to provide additional information on our assessment of progress to date, as well as of the likely trajectory of the program if the economy evolves as projected. This agreement to provide additional information did not reflect a change in policy. The Committee's decisions regarding the asset purchase program (and the overall stance of monetary policy) depend on our assessment of the economic outlook and of the cumulative progress toward our objectives. Of course, economic forecasts must be revised when new information arrives and are thus necessarily provisional. As I noted, the economic outcomes that Committee participants saw as most likely in their June projections involved continuing gains in labor markets, supported by moderate growth that picks up over the next several quarters as the restraint from fiscal policy diminishes. Committee participants also saw inflation moving back toward our 2 percent objective over time. If the incoming data were to be broadly consistent with these projections, we anticipated that it would be appropriate to begin to moderate the monthly pace of purchases later this year. And if the subsequent data continued to confirm this pattern of ongoing economic improvement and normalizing inflation, we expected to continue to reduce the pace of purchases in measured steps through the first half of next year, ending them around midyear. At that point, if the economy had evolved along the lines we anticipated, the recovery would have gained further momentum, unemployment would be in the vicinity of 7 percent, and inflation would be moving toward our 2 percent objective. Such outcomes would be fully consistent with the goals of the asset purchase program that we established in September. I emphasize that, because our asset purchases depend on economic and financial developments, they are by no means on a preset course. On the one hand, if economic conditions were to improve faster than expected, and inflation appeared to be rising decisively back toward our objective, the pace of asset purchases could be reduced somewhat more quickly. On the other hand, if the outlook for employment were to become relatively less favorable, if inflation did not appear to be moving back toward 2 percent, or if financial conditions--which have tightened recently--were judged to be insufficiently accommodative to allow us to attain our mandated objectives, the current pace of purchases could be maintained for longer. Indeed, if needed, the Committee would be prepared to employ all of its tools, including an increase the pace of purchases for a time, to promote a return to maximum employment in a context of price stability. As I noted, the second tool the Committee is using to support the recovery is forward guidance regarding the path of the federal funds rate. The Committee has said it intends to maintain a high degree of monetary accommodation for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee anticipates that its current exceptionally low target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6â1/2 percent and inflation and inflation expectations remain well behaved in the sense described in the FOMC's statement. As I have observed on several occasions, the phrase "at least as long as" is a key component of the policy rate guidance. These words indicate that the specific numbers for unemployment and inflation in the guidance are thresholds, not triggers. Reaching one of the thresholds would not automatically result in an increase in the federal funds rate target; rather, it would lead the Committee to consider whether the outlook for the labor market, inflation, and the broader economy justified such an increase. For example, if a substantial part of the reductions in measured unemployment were judged to reflect cyclical declines in labor force participation rather than gains in employment, the Committee would be unlikely to view a decline in unemployment to 6-1/2 percent as a sufficient reason to raise its target for the federal funds rate. Likewise, the Committee would be unlikely to raise the funds rate if inflation remained persistently below our longer-run objective. Moreover, so long as the economy remains short of maximum employment, inflation remains near our longer-run objective, and inflation expectations remain well anchored, increases in the target for the federal funds rate, once they begin, are likely to be gradual. Regulatory ReformI will finish by providing you with a brief update on progress on reforms to reduce the systemic risk of the largest financial firms. As Governor Tarullo discussed in his testimony last week before the Senate Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Committee, the Federal Reserve, with the other federal banking agencies, adopted a final rule earlier this month to implement the Basel III capital reforms.2The final rule increases the quantity and quality of required regulatory capital by establishing a new minimum common equity tier 1 capital ratio and implementing a capital conservation buffer. The rule also contains a supplementary leverage ratio and a countercyclical capital buffer that apply only to large and internationally active banking organizations, consistent with their systemic importance. In addition, the Federal Reserve will propose capital surcharges on firms that pose the greatest systemic risk and will issue a proposal to implement the Basel III quantitative liquidity requirements as they are phased in over the next few years. The Federal Reserve is considering further measures to strengthen the capital positions of large, internationally active banks, including the proposed rule issued last week that would increase the required leverage ratios for such firms.3 The Fed also is working to finalize the enhanced prudential standards set out in sections 165 and 166 of the Dodd-Frank Act. Among these standards, rules relating to stress testing and resolution planning already are in place, and we have been actively engaged in stress tests and reviewing the "first-wave" resolution plans. In coordination with other agencies, we have made significant progress on the key substantive issues relating to the Volcker rule and are hoping to complete it by year-end. Finally, the Federal Reserve is preparing to regulate and supervise systemically important nonbank financial firms. Last week, the Financial Stability Oversight Council designated two nonbank financial firms; it has proposed the designation of a third firm, which has requested a hearing before the council.4We are developing a supervisory and regulatory framework that can be tailored to each firm's business mix, risk profile, and systemic footprint, consistent with the Collins amendment and other legal requirements under the Dodd-Frank Act. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 1.These projections reflect FOMC participants' assessments based on their individual judgments regarding appropriate monetary policy.Return to text 2.See Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), "Dodd-Frank Implementation," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, July 11; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Federal Reserve Board Approves Final Rule to Help Ensure Banks Maintain Strong Capital Positions," press release, July 2.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2013), "Agencies Adopt Supplementary Leverage Ratio Notice of Proposed Rulemaking," joint press release, July 9.Return to text 4.U.S. Department of the Treasury (2013), "Financial Stability Oversight Council Makes First Nonbank Financial Company Designations to Address Potential Threats to Financial Stability," press release, July 9.Return to text
Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin At the The Exchequer Club Luncheon, Washington, D.C. Thank you for inviting me to speak to you this afternoon.1I'm honored to have the chance to be with so many former colleagues and friends. As I look around this room, I'm reminded of your efforts and the variety of perspectives that you have brought, over the years, to the endeavor of financial regulation. I'm reminded of the contributions you have made to the richness of these debates and tasks. There has been a flurry of pronouncements lately regarding regulations, rules, and guidance, and today's meeting of the Exchequer Club seems like an opportune moment to pause and offer a perspective that lifts us above the many details.2Newly adopted capital rules, and those newly proposed, in particular, have received the most attention, and I believe that these rules and proposed rules are a big step forward. There is no question but that a higher quantity and quality of bank capital will strengthen the banking system. Today, I want to discuss regulatory policies in the context of the growth and inevitable collapse of asset bubbles, with a focus on the role of credit.Regulatory policies, when well crafted, can lean against credit excesses that result in asset bubbles. In so doing, they can lean against vulnerabilities in the financial system that encourage the growth of excess credit. Well-crafted regulatory policies can also build resilience for banks after asset bubbles have burst. Many such regulatory policies are already in use, but there are others at the frontiers of regulation that haven't been widely employed. Significantly, both sets of regulatory policies--those that lean against excesses and those that build resilience--need to be understood in the context of a comprehensive system of prudential supervision for all financial institutions. In my remarks, first, I will briefly review how asset bubbles form, and I'll highlight certain features of asset bubbles so we can discern how regulatory policy might respond to them. Second, I'll assert that regulatory tools, including those related to capital, only work if part of a system of prudential supervision for all financial institutions. Third, I'll ask whether capital and other regulatory requirements have meaning without a prescriptive and individualized analysis of risk for individual financial institutions. In this regard, I'll suggest several other considerations that financial institutions and regulators should consider in the regulatory context. Asset BubblesIn order to think about regulatory policy from the perspective of leaning against excesses and vulnerabilities created by asset bubbles, or from the perspective of strengthening resilience to asset bubbles, we need to understand how financial institutions participate in the creation of bubbles. The story of asset bubbles, for me, is one in which there is usually explicit and purposeful financial institution involvement. It used to be believed that asset bubbles emerged spontaneously, or perhaps came from sunspots or other mysterious causes. Now we know more and we know better, and, while we may not be able to predict bubbles, we understand them to be a product of particular actions and choices by financial institutions and their regulators. Here is one way a bubble might start. And, to approximate current economic conditions, we'll assume an environment of interest rates that have been low, and continue to be low, for a long time. To start, retail investors may become dissatisfied with their low yields and begin to seek higher yields by purchasing some specific higher-yielding asset. If investors have access to credit, they might try to raise the return on their money by funding a greater portion of their purchases with debt. The asset purchased could serve to collateralize their loan. If many investors employ this strategy and they borrow to invest in the same asset, the price of that asset, and perhaps the prices of closely related assets as well, will increase noticeably faster than the historical trend. At the same time, increased demand for credit to finance these asset purchases could lead lenders to increase their reliance on less expensive, unstable short-term funding, such as uninsured deposits, commercial paper, or repo transactions, in order to fund the loans. Besides meeting customers' growing demands for credit, financial intermediaries may themselves decide to "reach for yield" and take on additional risk in a low interest-rate environment. Banks suffering compressed net interest margins because of low long-term interest rates, money market funds facing an earnings squeeze, insurance companies that had promised minimum rates of return on their products, and others may all begin to take on higher interest rate risk, market risk, liquidity risk, or credit risk in search of higher returns. If these conditions seem likely to continue, an initial rise in the asset's price leads to expectations of further increases, which adds to investor demand, spurring further borrowing and credit growth and increased household and financial sector leverage, which, in turn, could drive asset prices still higher. Rising asset prices, in turn, would increase the value of borrowers' collateral, allowing still further borrowing. For loans collateralized by an asset whose price is rising, lenders believe they can rely for repayment more on the appreciation of the asset and collateral and less on the borrower's repayment ability. Lenders relax their underwriting standards, such as minimum requirements for borrower down payments, credit scores and credit history, or required maximum debt-to-income ratios. To compete for loans to buy or to hold the appreciating asset, or financial assets related to it, financial institutions could also decrease the margins and haircuts that usually protect them from asset price declines. Financial institution decisions to relax underwriting and impose less-stringent margins and haircuts will further increase the pool of potential borrowers and their borrowing capacity, further increasing credit growth and supporting still higher asset prices, but, at the same time, will also increase lenders' credit risks and exposure--as secured creditors--to a decline in the asset's price. Ultimately, the asset becomes severely overvalued, with its price untethered from economic fundamentals. We would then have on our hands a full-blown, credit-fueled asset bubble. And, as we experienced in the financial crisis, when a bubble involving a widely-held asset bursts, the consequent plunge in asset prices can seriously impair the balance sheets of households and firms. Indeed, a dramatic decline in the price of a significant asset can reduce household wealth, spending, and aggregate demand. When such effects on wealth, credit availability, and aggregate demand are large enough, the real economy can suffer a significant recession. And, of course, lower employment and incomes further depress asset prices and borrowers' ability to repay loans, with further adverse effects on financial institutions and their ability to extend credit. At this point, some financial institutions may have become nearly insolvent. And this, coupled with their increased reliance on potentially unstable short-term funding, could make them more vulnerable to sudden losses of public confidence. Such a loss of confidence, in turn, makes it impossible for affected institutions to roll over existing debts or extend new credit, and may force deleveraging that requires selling illiquid assets quickly and cheaply in asset fire sales, resulting in further declines in asset prices. Such developments further threaten the solvency of financial institutions and intensify credit contraction, depriving households and businesses of financing. A loss of confidence that is institution-specific could spread, causing other institutions to experience their own heightened solvency risks, liquidity problems, and need to de-lever through asset sales. Something like what I've just described happened during and after the recent housing boom and bust. Home prices rose dramatically for a decade, and then plunged more than 30 percent, throwing the financial system into chaos, severely contracting credit, and triggering the most severe recession in modern memory. We are still living with the consequences. In short, there are common features to asset bubbles. All asset bubbles implicate different segments and participants in financial transactions--lenders, borrowers, and even participants that are connected by virtue of the benefits they derive from the appreciation in the value of the asset in question. The linkages transcend banks. Bubbles are characterized by increased leverage among the various types of lending institutions and by increased maturity transformation on and off the balance sheets of various lenders. Illiquid loans are funded increasingly by unstable short-term funding. At the same time, asset bubbles are accompanied by weakening underwriting standards, and less-stringent margins and smaller haircuts. And asset bubbles are characterized by many investors chasing the same asset, and so there is generally wide-spread participation in the growth and nurturing of the bubble. Perhaps our recent asset bubble was the result of a perfect storm, one that will not recur for decades. But it is my view that asset bubbles are a feature of our financial landscape; that what happened before could happen again; and that the growth and after-effects of asset bubbles reflect particular financial institution decisions and particular regulatory policy choices or lapses. In my view, their emergence is usually neither intentional nor accidental. Responding to Asset Price BubblesThe good news is that I believe that regulatory policy, when part of a system of effective prudential supervision, has the potential to address asset price bubbles and their consequences. Regulatory policies canlean against emerging asset bubbles and the vulnerabilities that attend themby restraining financial institutions from excessively extending credit. In addition, such policies canbuild resiliencein the financial system, enhancing its ability to absorb and shrug off unexpected losses from any source, including sharp asset price declines. Of course, monetary policy also has the power to lean against the growth of asset bubbles. While there could be situations in which monetary policy might be needed to try to limit the growth of a bubble, in my opinion such use would represent a failure of regulatory policy, which represents a more tailored response than the flattening out of aggregate demand that would likely result from contractionary monetary policy. Regulatory ToolsSome of the significant regulatory tools for addressing asset bubbles--both those in widespread use and those on the frontier of regulatory thought--are capital regulation, liquidity regulation, regulation of margins and haircuts in securities funding transactions, and restrictions on credit underwriting. Without plumbing the depths of each type of tool, I'll say a few words about each as it relates to the curbing of excess credit growth that fuels asset bubbles and to mitigating the effects of a bubble's collapse. Capital RegulationCapital regulation--in particular, the imposition of minimum capital requirements-- increases capital and thereby improves the ability of regulated financial institutions to absorb losses and maintain lending after a bubble has burst. More capital reduces the probability of institutions' failure, with the added benefit of reducing the chance of funding runs due to loss of confidence. But because higher required capital also generally increases the cost of funding assets--by increasing the role of capital in the funding mix--it also raises the possibility of reducing the supply of credit from regulated institutions, making credit more expensive. Thus, higher capital requirements, to some degree, also lean against excessive credit growth that can fuel asset bubbles. Relevant capital regulation tools include a higher amount and quality of capital, such as is required under Basel III; leverage ratios, particularly the supplementary leverage ratio, if regulators increase it; the Basel III countercyclical capital buffer, which is designed to build resilience and lean against credit-fueled asset bubbles in a countercyclical manner; and capital surcharges. Supervisory stress testing and capital planningare related regulatory capital-focused tools. They not only increase resilience, but, by including assumed asset bubbles in their scenarios, they can also focus attention on specific assets, causing banking firms to build capital against unexpected losses in those assets. By focusing management attention on the downside risk posed by certain assets, and by increasing the share of capital in the funding mix, they can also lean against bank lending that supports inflated asset values. In addition, higher"sector-specific" risk weights and capital charges,applied to specific assets such as mortgages, potentially could be a more targeted way of addressing particular asset bubbles; however, these more targeted capital tools require an early understanding of the particular asset class that may be involved in a potential bubble. Whether financial regulators would be capable of spotting such specific asset bubbles early, and then of acting in a timely enough way to address such bubbles is, in my view, unlikely. Liquidity RegulationA second class of policies that addresses asset bubbles and their consequences is liquidity regulation. An example is the new Basel III liquidity coverage ratio. As I discussed earlier, an aspect of credit-driven asset bubbles is financial institutions' increased reliance on unstable short-term wholesale funding, a reliance that makes them vulnerable to heightened rollover risk, sudden losses of confidence, and funding runs. Liquidity regulation increases the stock of cash or easily marketable securities available to institutions in the event of a funding run or margin call. Liquidity regulation also discourages use of unstable short-term wholesale funding of illiquid longer-term assets in the first place.Truly liquid assets, such as cash or Treasury securities, are low-yielding, and being required to hold them means lower earnings. Therefore, minimum liquidity requirements raise the cost, and so reduce the amount of, liquidity risk taking, reducing the chances of a liquidity crisis and asset fire sales. In that sense, minimum liquidity requirements also lean against building vulnerabilities that could accompany the growth of an asset bubble. Indeed, regulators might vary liquidity requirements in a countercyclical way, with greater liquidity required during the development of credit-fueled asset bubbles, in order to regulate the amount of allowable maturity transformation. Margins and HaircutsA third class of policies that could be helpful in addressing credit-fueled asset bubbles ismargins and haircuts on securities financing transactions. Such transactions could include, for example, bilateral repurchase transactions in which a broker–dealer, in order to fund its holdings of some security, borrows short-term from a money market mutual fund, while pledging a security of greater value as collateral. The excess of the value of the security over the amount borrowed at the time of the transaction is the "haircut." Haircuts protect the cash lender, since, if the borrower cannot repay, or chooses not to because collateral values have fallen, the lender can take and sell the collateral to satisfy its loan. The larger the haircut is at the time of the transaction, the greater the lender's protection; that is, the greater the likelihood that that the value of the security, when sold, will exceed the amount owed plus interest. Presumably, lenders assess their borrowers' riskiness and calibrate the amount of the appropriate haircut. Regulators should require them to do this consistently and prudently across the credit cycle. Haircuts tend to be cyclical: falling in good times, which adds to the growth of credit, and rising in busts, which contracts credit. A regulator could mitigate the cyclical behavior of haircuts and its consequences by establishing minimum haircuts that apply in both good and bad times. Calibrating minimum haircuts to the risks and volatility expected during bad times would make lenders more secure, increasing their resilience to losses. It could also make it more expensive to fund the purchase of the securities, and so could limit the amount of borrowing that could be supported by an asset of given value; this, in turn, might limit credit-fueled increases in the asset's price. In other words, by requiring increased margin, the growth of credit can be slowed and resiliency can be strengthened. Regulators can also simply require margin requirements to be increased in good times. This would lean against the growth of bubbles even if regulators had not yet discerned the particular type of asset bubble growing. Underwriting RestrictionsThe final class of policies that I'll discuss involves underwriting restrictions that can directly address asset bubbles and their consequences. When assets like houses are largely financed with borrowed money, it is possible to use tighter underwriting requirements to lean against credit extension and growing leverage. This could be done, for example, through regulatory actions that raise lenders' minimum down payment requirements or reduce borrowers' maximum permissible debt-to-income ratios. Such measures can be taken either on a one-time basis or as part of an explicitly countercyclical regime that "switches on" during a building asset bubble. In particular, regulators might imposeminimum down payment requirements for property loansor their functional equivalent--maximum loan-to-value ratios. Such policies could both build resilience in the financial system and lean against developing credit excesses. They would build resilience in two ways. First, other things the same, higher minimum down payment requirementsreduce the probability of defaulton loans. And second, higher requirements also imply alower loss given default.Both effects implygreater resiliencefor the bank or other entity that made the loan or has an interest in it. Even a structural one-time upward adjustment in minimum down payment requirements--to a prudent level, above industry norms in buoyant times--could have a countercyclical effect in building resilience. Such a requirement could also moderate lender adjustments in minimum down payment requirements over the credit cycle: Minimum requirements would fall less in boom times, implying lower future loan losses than otherwise, and so would increase less in reaction during busts. In addition, by leaning against excessive credit expansion, such a policy could lean against developing asset bubbles and growing financial vulnerabilities. In a dynamic variant of this policy, minimum down payments prescribed by regulators could be implemented and would automatically vary over the credit cycle, tightening in booms and relaxing in busts. Tighter minimum down payment requirements in good times would likely reduce defaults and build lender resilience to later losses due to asset price declines. At the same time, by actively leaning progressively harder against property-related credit expansion, they may restrain excessive credit growth and property price appreciation, and reduce the chances--and magnitude--of a sharp price bust. There has been some experience with this type of policy in Hong Kong, Korea, Malaysia, and Singapore. In Hong Kong, for example, tighter down payment rules reduce household leverage and the sensitivity of defaults to changes in property prices, and have been shown to slow property appreciation. Prudential Supervision for All Financial InstitutionsI don't mean to suggest that all asset bubbles can be addressed by merely implementing some set of regulatory policies. Indeed, how easy our jobs would then be! In practice, such policies work best if they are part of a system of prudential supervision for all financial institutions. Of course, in the U.S. economy, savers and borrowers are linked not only through intermediaries like banks, but also through nonbanks, such as money market mutual funds and hedge funds, and through the capital markets and securitization. Regulation can only build resilience in, and affect intermediation and lending by, the parts of the system that are, in fact, regulated. Regulatory policies that aim to increase the resilience of regulated institutions, and lean against asset bubbles by restraining the growth of lending by such institutions, can be circumvented when financial activities migrate into less regulated parts of the financial system, parts likely farther from the protections of deposit insurance and the lender of last resort. Consequently, credit extension and associated vulnerabilities can increase outside of the heavily regulated banking system. In our current system of financial regulation--one that is diffuse and without a single, central regulator --the antidote to such differences in regulatory approach is to put a premium on a high level of cooperation and coordination among relevant financial regulators. Comprehensive financial regulation is required, but comprehensive financial regulation is not the same as unified financial regulation. Looking around this audience today, I see evidence of the fragmented American financial regulatory system. For example, we have representatives of banks regulated by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Federal Reserve, many in tandem with state bank regulators; we have bank holding companies regulated by the Fed; we have broker-dealers regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, we have exchanges regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission; we have consumer financial products regulated by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; and we have insurance companies regulated by the state insurance commissioners. I could go on. Needless to say, it's a complicated regulatory system. And such a fragmented structure itself demands unusual and extensive degrees of coordination and cooperation among financial regulators so as to maximize the potential for comprehensive and harmonized regulation. Without such coordination and cooperation, there will be regulatory gaps and overlaps. From this perspective, it made sense to create yet another regulatory body--the Financial Stability Oversight Council--which is dedicated to the goal of coordination. The FSOC calls for agency head and senior-level staff participation of relevant financial regulatory bodies, requires regular meetings and reports on emerging risks to financial stability, and designates systemically important financial institutions. Making Regulatory Tools Work to Manage Emerging Risk and Create ResiliencyIndeed, the goal of coordination among regulators is to make the regulatory tools work across the entire financial system. This strikes me as an important goal and the ultimate challenge for policymakers. The challenge arises not only from the fact that the regulatory system is fragmented, but also from the fact that, in order to work--indeed, in order to instill trust in the resiliency of the financial system--regulations need to be complied with by financial system participants and enforced by supervisors. The recent attention being paid to capital regulation, in particular, shouldn't distract us from the broader context and importance of compliance with, and enforcement of, the various capital rules. From the perspective of the hammer, everything looks like a nail. Similarly, from the perspective of the financial regulator, everything might look like a problem of insufficient capital. Instead, capital might, in fact, be sufficient but appear insufficient because of circumvention of compliance, or because of absent or delayed enforcement. To make regulation--any financial regulation--work, there must be on-site opportunities for supervisors to look for risk factors that, if not addressed, can lead to failure. There must be strong governance that is practiced by smart management teams and overseen by informed and engaged boards of directors. Loan loss provisioning must be appropriate, and regulators need to enforce such appropriate provisioning, as well as assess the prudence of the institutions' underwriting standards. Examiners of any financial institution must be able to spot early risks and articulate to institutions' management and boards of directors why such risks are, in fact, risks. And the identification of risks should be true risks, and not just new business practices that examiners have never seen before. Addressing risks should not be tomorrow's problem; troubled financial institutions should not be "fixed" by permitting larger firms to buy them without commitments to address the risks presented by the combined firms. Finally, the public needs to have faith that regulation is meaningful. The public has an interest in a strong financial system, and this interest needs to be articulated when regulation is crafted, implemented, and enforced. Concluding ThoughtsEven within the regulated sector, crafting appropriate financial regulation to address asset bubbles is challenging. In reality, it is hard to know in real time when asset prices have deviated sharply from fundamentals. Asset price increases often initially reflect improving fundamentals and may only subtly and gradually change into reflections of speculative excess. Prior to the peak of housing prices, interest rates were low, making mortgage payments affordable; real incomes were rising; population was growing; and household formation was high--all "fundamental" determinants of the demand for housing and house prices. At some point, however, house prices were driven less by these fundamentals and more by speculation and weak underwriting. Ultimately, this drove house prices to unsustainably high levels. Regulatory intervention was much too late. The U.S. regulatory system is fragmented, and, hence, it takes time to choose and implement policies and calibrate them appropriately. It takes time to cooperate, coordinate, and harmonize responses. But such is today's imperative. We must complete in a timely fashion the post-Basel III and Dodd-Frank requirements. It is particularly important to increase the amount, and improve the quality, of required minimum capital; to continue stress testing and capital planning; and to reduce overreliance on unstable short-term wholesale funding. These reforms will build resilience to whatever shocks may come, and will reduce the potential for asset bubbles and excessive credit growth, leverage, maturity transformation, reliance on unstable short-term wholesale funding, and, thus, the potential for future financial crises. Still, if regulators become fixated on the tools at the expense of compliance and enforcement, the tools themselves will be meaningless. Only when such tools--be they capital-focused, liquidity-focused, margin--and haircut-focused, or underwriting-focused--are fully embedded into a comprehensive system of prudential regulation will they reach their potential in mitigating the growth of asset bubbles and providing resiliency against the awful consequences attendant to their destruction. Thank you for your time today. I'm interested in your comments and questions. 1.I want to thank Daniel Covitz, Andreas Lehnert, Rochelle Edge, Mark Van Der Weide, William Treacy, Karen Pence, Andrew Cohen, Sean Chu, Sean Campbell, Seth Carpenter, Ben McDonough, April Snyder and Winthrop Hambley for their assistance in the preparation of these remarks.Return to text 2.The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of the other members of the Federal Reserve Board or its staff.Return to text
Elizabeth A. Duke submitted her resignation Thursday as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, effective August 31, 2013. Duke, who has been a member of the Board since August 5, 2008, submitted her letter of resignation to President Obama. She has made no announcements about her future plans. "Betsy has made invaluable contributions to the Federal Reserve and to the country during her five years at the Board," said Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. "She brought fresh ideas grounded in her deep knowledge of the banking industry and the real-world dynamic between borrowers and lenders. I wish her the best in her future endeavors." Duke, 60, was appointed to the Board by President Bush to fill an unexpired term that ended January 31, 2012. During her time on the Board she served as Chairman of both the Committee on Consumer and Community Affairs and the Subcommittee on Supervision and Regulation of Community and Small Regional Banking Organizations. Before joining the Board, Duke was Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of TowneBank, a Virginia-based community bank. Prior to that, she served as an Executive Vice President at Wachovia Bank and as an Executive Vice President at SouthTrust Bank. Earlier in her career, Ms. Duke was President and Chief Executive Officer of Bank of Tidewater, based in Virginia Beach, Virginia. A copy of her resignation letter is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
On July 15, 2013, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits with full allotment of tenders through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered 28-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.26000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on July 18, 2013, and will mature on August 15, 2013. The interest rate of 0.26000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Ameri-National Corporation, Overland Park, KansasWritten Agreement dated April 14, 2010Terminated June 28, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Buckeye Bancshares, Inc and Buckeye Community Bank, both of Lorain, OhioWritten Agreement dated July 24, 2009Terminated July 2, 2013 Huntington Bancshares, Inc., Huntington, TexasWritten Agreement dated October 17, 2011Terminated June 27, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Cascade Bancorp, Bend, OregonWritten Agreement dated October 26, 2009Terminated July 10, 2013 Reliance Bancshares, Inc., Des Peres, MissouriWritten Agreement dated July 14, 2011Terminated July 10, 2013 Rocky Mountain Bank, Wilson, WyomingWritten Agreement dated January 20, 2011Terminated July 10, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: First Pryority Bank, Pryor, OklahomaWritten Agreement dated March 25, 2008Terminated July 15, 2013 Royal Bancshares of Pennsylvania, Inc., Narberth, PennsylvaniaWritten Agreement dated March 17, 2010Terminated July 17, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday approved a final rule to help ensure banks maintain strong capital positions that will enable them to continue lending to creditworthy households and businesses even after unforeseen losses and during severe economic downturns. The final rule minimizes burden on smaller, less complex financial institutions. It establishes an integrated regulatory capital framework that addresses shortcomings in capital requirements, particularly for larger, internationally active banking organizations, that became apparent during the recent financial crisis. The rule will implement in the United States the Basel III regulatory capital reforms from the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and certain changes required by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. "This framework requires banking organizations to hold more and higher quality capital, which acts as a financial cushion to absorb losses, while reducing the incentive for firms to take excessive risks," Chairman Ben Bernanke said. "With these revisions to our capital rules, banking organizations will be better able to withstand periods of financial stress, thus contributing to the overall health of the U.S. economy." Under the final rule, minimum requirements will increase for both the quantity and quality of capital held by banking organizations. Consistent with the international Basel framework, the rule includes a new minimum ratio of common equity tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets of 4.5 percent and a common equity tier 1 capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets that will apply to all supervised financial institutions. The rule also raises the minimum ratio of tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets from 4 percent to 6 percent and includes a minimum leverage ratio of 4 percent for all banking organizations. In addition, for the largest, most internationally active banking organizations, the final rule includes a new minimum supplementary leverage ratio that takes into account off-balance sheet exposures. On the quality of capital side, the final rule emphasizes common equity tier 1 capital, the most loss-absorbing form of capital, and implements strict eligibility criteria for regulatory capital instruments. The final rule also improves the methodology for calculating risk-weighted assets to enhance risk sensitivity. Banks and regulators use risk weighting to assign different levels of risk to different classes of assets--riskier assets require higher capital cushions and less risky assets require smaller capital cushions. "Adoption of the capital rules today is a milestone in our post-crisis efforts to make the financial system safer," Governor Daniel Tarullo said. "Along with the stress testing and capital review measures we have already implemented, and the additional rules for large institutions that are on the way, these new rules are an essential component of a set of mutually reinforcing capital requirements." The banking agencies carefully reviewed the comments received on the proposal and made a number of changes in the final rule, in particular to address concerns about regulatory burden on community banks. For example, the final rule is significantly different from the proposal in terms of risk weighting for residential mortgages and the regulatory capital treatment of certain unrealized gains and losses and trust preferred securities for community banking organizations. In total, for community banks, the changes from current regulations target a few areas that are higher risk, but are otherwise minimal. Indeed, nine out of 10 financial institutions with less than $10 billion in assets would meet the common equity tier 1 minimum plus buffer of 7 percent in the final rule, according to data from March 2013. As with all financial institutions subject to the final rule, community banks will have a significant transition period to meet the new requirements. The phase-in period for smaller, less complex banking organizations will not begin until January 2015 while the phase-in period for larger institutions begins in January 2014. In another change from the proposal, savings and loan holding companies with significant commercial or insurance underwriting activities will not be subject to the final rule at this time. The Federal Reserve will take additional time to evaluate the appropriate regulatory capital framework for these entities. The Federal Reserve coordinated the final rule with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which continue to review this matter. The FDIC has provided notice that it will consider the matter as an interim final rule on July 9, 2013. The OCC expects to review and consider the matter as a final rule by July 9, 2013. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Community Bank Guide (PDF) Board Votes For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Meeting Memoranda Open Board Meeting on July 2, 2013
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Minster Bank (PDF), Minster, OhioOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated July 16, 2013 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Citizens Bancshares Co., Chillicothe, MissouriWritten Agreement dated June 21, 2010Terminated July 15, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Port Byron State Bank (PDF), Port Byron, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated July 23, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released an amendment to the enforcement action against GMAC Mortgage requiring approximately $230 million in cash payments to mortgage borrowers. The amendment is similar to those announced in early 2013 between 13 mortgage servicing companies and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Reserve Board. Like the other institutions, GMAC Mortgage was subject to an enforcement action for deficient practices in mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. More than 232,000 borrowers whose homes were in any stage of foreclosure in 2009 and 2010 with GMAC Mortgage will receive cash compensation under the amendment. Information about payments to borrowers whose mortgages were serviced by GMAC Mortgage will be announced in the near future. The bankruptcy court that is overseeing the bankruptcy proceedings involving GMAC Mortgage approved GMAC Mortgage's entry into the amended enforcement action Friday. As a result of this amendment, the independent foreclosure reviews will conclude for GMAC Mortgage borrowers. Previously, the OCC and the Federal Reserve entered into amendments with Aurora, Bank of America, Citibank, Goldman Sachs, HSBC, JPMorgan Chase, MetLife Bank, Morgan Stanley, PNC, Sovereign, SunTrust, U.S. Bank, and Wells Fargo. With the addition of GMAC Mortgage, approximately 4.4 million borrowers will receive a total of more than $3.8 billion in cash compensation while an additional $5.8 billion will be provided by the servicers in commitments for loss-mitigation assistance, such as loan modifications and forgiveness of deficiency judgments. The $230 million to be paid by GMAC Mortgage includes $32 million that will satisfy GMAC Mortgage's obligation to provide loss-mitigation assistance. GMAC Mortgage will satisfy its requirement for loss-mitigation assistance with direct borrower payments because it no longer owns a significant residential mortgaging portfolio. As is the case with the previous amendments, borrowers whose mortgages were serviced by GMAC Mortgage who accept a payment will not be prevented from taking any action related to their foreclosure. Servicers are not permitted to ask borrowers to sign a waiver of any legal claims they may have against their servicer in connection with accepting these payments. In addition, the servicer's internal complaint process will remain available to borrowers. Federal Reserve examiners continue to closely monitor the servicers' implementation of plans required by the enforcement actions previously issued against the servicers to correct the unsafe and unsound mortgage servicing and foreclosure practices. Borrowers with all 14 servicers can call 1-888-952-9105 to update their contact information, verify that they are covered by the agreement, or to ask further questions.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June suggests that economic activity expanded at a modest pace during the first half of the year. Labor market conditions have shown further improvement in recent months, on balance, but the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending and business fixed investment advanced, and the housing sector has been strengthening, but mortgage rates have risen somewhat and fiscal policy is restraining economic growth. Partly reflecting transitory influences, inflation has been running below the Committee's longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic growth will pick up from its recent pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having diminished since the fall. The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, but it anticipates that inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee decided to continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per month and longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. Taken together, these actions should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months. The Committee will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. The Committee is prepared to increase or reduce the pace of its purchases to maintain appropriate policy accommodation as the outlook for the labor market or inflation changes. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will continue to take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases as well as the extent of progress toward its economic objectives. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; James Bullard; Elizabeth A. Duke; Charles L. Evans; Jerome H. Powell; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Eric S. Rosengren; Jeremy C. Stein; Daniel K. Tarullo; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the action was Esther L. George, who was concerned that the continued high level of monetary accommodation increased the risks of future economic and financial imbalances and, over time, could cause an increase in long-term inflation expectations.
On July 15, 2013, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits with full allotment of tenders through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer 28-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.26000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $1,250,000,000. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's April 26, 2013, release, this operation is part of ongoing small-value operations designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the operation is listed below; the operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Operation and Tender Parameters All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full at the interest rate shown above. The minimum tender amount is $10,000; the maximum amount is $1,250,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. All tenders must be submitted between the opening and closing time on the operation date. Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, summary results will be posted on the Term Deposit Facility Resource Center page of the Central Bank Central website (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html).
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Deutsche Bundesbank Reception, New York, New York Thank you so much for inviting me to speak today.1I join others in thanking Mr. Stephan for his service, and in welcoming Ms. Stirbock to her new role as Chief Representative of the Deutsche Bundesbank in the United States. I look forward to working with both of you, and with your colleagues, in the coming years. The Federal Reserve places great importance on our relations with the Bundesbank. Few such relationships have been as important, over the decades, in promoting financial stability and prosperity around the world. Governments, central bankers, and financial regulators labor today in the long shadow cast by the global financial crisis, and that likely will remain the case for many years. Against that background, I will touch briefly on fiscal and monetary policy here in the United States, before turning to financial regulatory issues. It has long been clear that, starting in this decade, the United States would begin to face longer-term fiscal challenges due to the aging of our population and our high and fast-rising per capita health-care costs. Over the next 20 years, it is projected that the ratio of our retired elderly to our working-age population will increase sharply from about 23 percent to about 36 percent. And, as you surely know, our per capita health care costs are far higher than those of other advanced economies, and have risen over time at a faster pace than per capita income. The combination of these two factors will put the U.S. federal budget on an unsustainable path if appropriate measures are not taken. At the end of 2007, just prior to the onset of the last recession, the United States had federal government debt equal to about 36 percent of the size of our annual gross domestic product (GDP)--a moderate level. Since 2007, and largely as a consequence of the recession and policy actions to help alleviate its effects, the U.S. federal government's debt-to-GDP ratio has increased to around 75 percent. It is projected to remain near this level for the remainder of the decade under current federal budget policies. This high level of federal government debt leaves U.S. policymakers with less "fiscal space" than may be required to deal with expected increases in retirement and health-care costs, or with unanticipated economic shocks. Over the last few years, the fiscal authorities have cut federal spending and raised taxes, and our Congressional Budget Office estimates that these fiscal headwinds will reduce real GDP growth by about 1.5 percentage points this year from what it otherwise would have been. Nevertheless, as a nation, we have not yet addressed in a fundamental way our longer-term budget challenges, particularly those associated with federal health-care programs. So I have no doubt that fiscal policy issues will retain an important and highly contentious place on the political agenda for many years here in the United States, as in Europe. I will turn for a moment to monetary policy. The Congress has tasked the Federal Reserve with conducting monetary policy to foster stable prices and full employment. Today, inflation is well below our 2 percent longer-term objective, as measured by prices for personal consumption expenditures. And although the unemployment rate has declined notably since its peak in 2010, it remains well above our estimate of a longer-run, more normal level. I expect that inflation will return gradually to our 2 percent objective, and that we will continue to make progress in reducing unemployment. In the meantime, the case for continued support for our economy from monetary policy remains strong. With these fiscal headwinds and the lingering effects of the recession, growth has remained in the range of 2 percent since 2009. But today, our private sector shows real signs of underlying improvement. Auto sales are strong, as is activity in our energy sector. Our housing market, which was at the heart of the crisis, is now recovering strongly. House prices are rising, and that is supporting improvement in household net worth and consumer attitudes. Homebuilders are responding to this price signal with rising housing starts, which will support job growth. Together, these and other factors give grounds to hope for the kind of self-reinforcing cycle of economic growth that we have been waiting to see. And as our economy has gradually improved, it has become possible, and appropriate, for the Federal Reserve to provide clearer guidance on the path of monetary policy. In all likelihood, this path will involve continued support from accommodative monetary policy for quite some time. Meanwhile, financial regulators around the world are engaged in a historic and sweeping renovation of the global financial architecture. The scope of this global regulatory project is enormous, and I will touch on only a few of its elements. One of the most important goals is to ensure that banks have adequate capital to withstand severe financial stress. I am pleased that, just this morning, the Federal Reserve Board finalized the Basel III capital requirements for bank holding companies and Federal Reserve state-chartered member banks. The other U.S. bank regulatory agencies are on track to adopt the same set of rules for the institutions they regulate over the next week or so. The Basel III capital reforms will substantially improve the resiliency of global banks and will serve as the cornerstone of the global regulatory effort to safeguard the stability of the world's financial system. Both in the United States and in Europe, some parts of the reform agenda will take longer to complete. For example, I note the ongoing progress toward achieving one of the most ambitious and important regulatory goals: the creation of a European banking union. It is clear that this challenging project will be the work of many years; indeed, it is not for an American to educate Europeans on the challenges of international cooperation. But the importance of this project for Europe's future is equally clear. The recent agreement on harmonizing national resolution regimes is an important achievement, and a milestone on the road to longer-term goals such as a single, centralized resolution authority. Another reform that will take time to complete is the establishment of a global framework for resolving large, systemically important banks. Work to enable resolution of such institutions with diverse cross-border operations is especially important, and especially daunting. The challenge is not so much to allow such institutions to fail, but rather to contain their failure so that it does not inflict enormous collateral damage on innocent bystanders and the broader economy. As many of you know, in the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is developing a preferred approach to resolution for such rare cases: the single-point-of-entry (SPOE) approach. This approach may be gaining some traction internationally. In my view, SPOE can be a classic "simplifier," making theoretically possible something that seemed impossibly complex. Under the SPOE approach, the home country resolution authority for a failing banking firm would effect a creditor-funded parent company recapitalization of the failed firm. To do so, the resolution authority would first use available parent company assets to recapitalize the firm's critical operating subsidiaries, and then would convert liabilities of the parent company into equity of a surviving entity. This approach would have the effect of concentrating the firm-wide losses on the parent company's private sector equity holders and creditors. The SPOE approach places a high priority on what your own President Weidmann recently described as "the principle of liability," meaning that those who benefit should also bear the costs. Perhaps the greatest challenge for the resolution of a systemic global bank is the possibility that public or private actors in different countries might take local actions that would cause the overall resolution to spin out of control. Creditors and counterparties of solvent operating subsidiaries might rush for the exit if they are unsure of their status. As a subsidiary comes under increasing stress, authorities might preemptively ring-fence local assets. The process of resolution will need to be fully worked out and understood beforehand by market participants, regulatory authorities, and the general public. It will be absolutely essential to build trust among all parties, and especially between regulatory authorities. Much remains to be done in eliminating "too-big-to-fail." The Federal Reserve is considering a requirement that systemic institutions maintain sufficient long-term debt at the parent company level to absorb losses and recapitalize operating subsidiaries in the event of failure. We expect to propose such a requirement later this year. I share the view expressed recently by several of my Board colleagues that the work of large bank resolution is not complete, and that further measures may be necessary. No one should doubt that the Federal Reserve is committed to completing this project. Reaching agreement on a cross-border resolution process will be challenging. Our financial services industries and our economies differ in many ways. But we have a shared interest in financial stability, in reducing moral hazard, and in protecting taxpayers. On that note, I will briefly discuss the Fed's proposal for oversight of foreign banks operating in the United States, which carries out a mandate from the Congress under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.2Our proposal represents a targeted set of adjustments aimed at reducing the risks posed by the U.S. operations of large foreign banks to U.S. financial stability that were revealed during, and in the aftermath of, the recent financial crisis. The proposal is not intended to create a disadvantage for foreign banks in the U.S. market. Rather, the proposal is part of a larger set of regulatory reforms that substantially raises standards for all banking organizations operating in the United States and aims to achieve the goals we share with Germany: vigorous and fair competition and a stable financial system. Indeed, in some sense it follows the lead of the European Union and its member states in ensuring that all large subsidiaries of globally active banks meet Basel capital rules. We believe that our foreign bank proposal, which would increase the strength and resiliency of the U.S. operations of these firms, would meaningfully reduce the likelihood of disruptive ring-fencing at the moment of crisis that could undermine an SPOE resolution of a large foreign bank. We are fully committed to the international efforts to address cross-border resolution issues and to maintaining strong cooperation between home and host supervisors during normal and crisis periods. I will close by observing that the international effort to strengthen financial regulation cannot succeed unless each nation understands the goals and challenges faced by its partners. The Federal Reserve and the Bundesbank have a long history. I believe there is a trust between us that is the basis for collaboration. I look forward to working with you to make the financial system safer and stronger. Thank you. 1.Views expressed in this speech are mine and may not represent those of the FOMC or any of its members.Return to text 2.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), “The Federal Reserve Board releases proposed rules to strengthen the oversight of U.S. operations of foreign banks,” press release, December 14.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from May 13 through June 17, 2013. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on June 18-19, 2013. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on a quarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJune 18-19, 2013:HTML|PDF
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Crapo, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's activities in mitigating systemic risk and implementing the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act). With the third anniversary of the Dodd-Frank Act upon us, it is a good time to reflect on what has been accomplished, what still needs to be done, and how the work on the Dodd-Frank Act fits with other regulatory reform projects. Indeed, the deliberate pace and multi-pronged nature of the implementation of the act--occasioned as it is by complicated issues and decisionmaking processes--may be obscuring what will be far-reaching changes in the regulation of financial firms and markets. Indeed, the Federal Reserve and other banking supervisors have already created a very different supervisory environment than what was prevalent just a few years ago. Today, I will review recent progress in key areas of financial regulatory reform, with special--though not exclusive--attention to implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act, including how that law affects the regulation of community banks. I will also highlight areas in which proposals are still outstanding and, in a few cases, in which we intend to make new proposals in the relatively near future. Implementation of Basel III Capital RulesLet me begin by noting the completion of our major rulemakings on capital regulation. Although most of the provisions in these rules do not directly implement provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, implementation of that law is occurring against the backdrop of implementation of the Basel III framework. This month, the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) approved final rules implementing the Basel III capital framework, as well as certain related changes required by the Dodd-Frank Act.1The rules establish an integrated regulatory capital framework designed to ensure that U.S. banking organizations maintain strong capital positions, enabling them to absorb substantial losses on a going-concern basis and to continue lending to creditworthy households and businesses even during economic downturns. The rules increase the quantity and improve the quality of regulatory capital of the U.S. banking system by setting strict eligibility criteria for regulatory capital instruments, by raising the minimum tier 1 capital ratio from 4 percent to 6 percent of risk-weighted assets, and by establishing a new minimum common equity tier 1 capital ratio of 4.5 percent of risk-weighted assets. The rules also require a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets to ensure that banking organizations build capital during benign economic periods so that they can withstand serious economic downturns and still remain above the minimum capital levels. In addition, the rules improve the methodology for calculating risk-weighted assets to enhance risk sensitivity and incorporate certain provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, such as sections 171 and 939A.2The rules also contain certain provisions, including a supplementary leverage ratio and a countercyclical capital buffer, that apply only to large and internationally active banking organizations, consistent with their systemic importance and their complexity. The rules will have several important consequences. First, they consolidate the progress made by banks and regulators over the past four years in improving the quality and quantity of capital held by banking organizations. Second, they remedy shortcomings in our existing generally applicable risk-weighted asset calculations that became apparent during the financial crisis. In so doing, they also enhance the effectiveness of the Collins Amendment, the scope of which we have extended through these rules by applying standardized floors to capital buffer, as well as minimum requirements. Third, adoption of these rules meets international expectations for U.S. implementation of the Basel III capital framework. This gives us a firm position from which to press our expectations that other countries implement Basel III fully and faithfully. In crafting these rules, the banking agencies made a number of changes to the 2012 proposals, mostly to address concerns by community banks. For example, the new rules maintain current practice on risk weighting residential mortgages and provide community banking organizations the option of maintaining existing standards on the regulatory capital treatment of "accumulated other comprehensive income" (AOCI) and pre-existing trust preferred securities. These changes from the proposed rule are meant to reduce the burden and complexity of the rules for community banks while preserving the benefits of more rigorous capital standards. Most banking organizations already meet the higher capital standards, and the rules will help preserve the benefits of the stronger capital positions banks have built under the oversight of regulators since the financial crisis. The capital rules also apply risk-based and leverage capital requirements to certain savings and loan holding companies for the first time. In another change from the proposal, savings and loan holding companies with significant commercial and insurance underwriting activities will not be subject to the final rules at this time. During the comment period, these firms raised significant concerns regarding the appropriateness of the proposed regulatory capital framework for their business models. To address these concerns, the Federal Reserve will take additional time to evaluate the appropriate regulatory capital framework for these entities. All financial institutions subject to the new rules will have a significant transition period to meet the requirements. The phase-in period for smaller, less complex banking organizations will not begin until January 2015, while the phase-in period for larger institutions begins in January 2014. Stress Testing and Capital Planning Requirements for Large Banking FirmsImportant as higher capital requirements and a better quality of capital are to the safety and soundness of financial institutions, conventional capital requirements are by their nature somewhat backward-looking. First, they reflect loss expectations based on past experience. Second, losses that actually reduce reported capital levels are often formally taken by institutions well after the likelihood of losses has become clear. Rigorous stress testing helps compensate for these shortcomings through a forward-looking assessment of the losses that would be suffered under stipulated adverse economic scenarios, so that capital can be built and maintained at levels high enough for the firms to withstand such losses and still remain viable financial intermediaries. In the middle of the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve created and applied a stress test to the nation's largest financial firms. The next year, Congress mandated stress tests for a larger group of firms in the Dodd-Frank Act. This fall, we will extend the full set of stress testing requirements to the dozen or so banking organizations with greater than $50 billion in assets covered in the Dodd-Frank Act but not fully covered in our previous stress tests. Regular, comprehensive stress testing, with published results, has already become a key part of both capital regulation and overall prudential supervision. In the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), the Federal Reserve requires each large bank holding company to demonstrate that it has rigorous, forward-looking capital planning processes that effectively account for the unique risks of the firm and maintains sufficient capital to continue to operate through times of extreme economic and financial stress. CCAR and Dodd-Frank Act stress tests have shown the significant supervisory value of conducting coordinated cross-firm analysis of the major risks facing large banks. The Federal Reserve has used stress testing and its broader supervisory authority to prompt a doubling over the past four years of the common equity capital of the nation's 18 largest bank holding companies, which collectively hold more than 70 percent of the total assets of all U.S. bank holding companies. Specifically, the aggregate tier 1 common equity ratio--which is based on the strongest form of loss-absorbing capital--at the 18 firms covered by the stress test has more than doubled, from 5.6 percent at the end of 2008 to 11.3 percent at the end of 2012. That reflects an increase in tier 1 common equity from $393 billion to $792 billion during the same period. Enhanced Prudential Requirements for Large Banking FirmsSections 165 and 166 of the Dodd-Frank Act require the Federal Reserve to establish a broad set of enhanced prudential standards, both for bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and for nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (Council) as systemically important. The required standards include capital requirements, liquidity requirements, stress testing, single-counterparty credit limits, an early remediation regime, and risk-management and resolution-planning requirements. The sections also require that these prudential standards become more stringent as the systemic footprint of a firm increases. The Federal Reserve has issued proposed rules to implement sections 165 and 166 for both large U.S. banking firms and foreign banks operating in the United States. In addition, earlier this week the federal banking agencies jointly issued a proposal to implement higher leverage ratio standards for the largest, most systemically important U.S. banking organizations. We have already finalized the rules on resolution planning and stress testing, and we are working diligently this year toward finalization of the remaining standards. On liquidity, we will also be implementing the Basel III quantitative liquidity requirements for large U.S. banking firms. We expect that the federal banking agencies will issue a proposal later this year to implement the Basel Committee's Liquidity Coverage Ratio for large U.S. banking firms. These quantitative liquidity requirements would complement the stricter set of qualitative liquidity standards that the Federal Reserve has already proposed pursuant to section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act. On capital, we will be proposing risk-based capital surcharges on the most systemically important U.S. banking firms. The proposal will be based on the risk-based capital surcharge framework developed by the Basel Committee for global systemically important banks, under which the size of the surcharge will increase with a banking firm's systemic importance. These surcharges are a critical element of the Federal Reserve's efforts to force the most systemic financial firms to internalize the externalities caused by their potential failure and to reduce any residual subsidies such firms may enjoy as a result of market perceptions that they may be too big to fail. We anticipate issuing a proposed regulation on these capital surcharges around the end of this year. With one exception, we expect to finalize the remaining proposed enhanced prudential standards around the end of the year as well. The one exception is single-counterparty credit limits. We are conducting a quantitative impact study (QIS) on the effects of the counterparty credit limits included in the proposed rule. Based on the comments received and ongoing internal staff analysis, we concluded that a QIS was needed to help us better assess the optimal structure of the rule. Moreover, since the Federal Reserve issued its single-counterparty credit limit proposal, the Basel Committee began developing a similar large exposure regime that would apply to all global banks. We are coordinating our single-counterparty credit limit rule with this effort. A core element of the Federal Reserve's proposed enhanced prudential standards for large banking firms is our December 2012 foreign bank proposal. The foreign bank proposal responds to fundamental changes over the last 15 years in the scope and scale of the U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations, many of which have moved beyond their traditional lending activities to engage in substantial capital markets activities and, in some cases, have become more reliant on short-term wholesale U.S. dollar funding. The proposed rule would increase the resiliency of the U.S. operations of foreign banks and help protect U.S. financial stability. The proposal would also promote competitive equality for all large banking firms--domestic and foreign--operating in the United States and would, in many respects, result in greater harmony between how the U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations and the foreign operations of U.S. bank holding companies are regulated. The foreign bank proposal generally would require foreign banks with a large U.S. presence to organize their U.S. subsidiaries under a single U.S. intermediate holding company that would serve as a platform for consistent supervision and regulation. The U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banks would be subject to the same risk-based capital and leverage requirements as U.S. bank holding companies. In addition, U.S. intermediate holding companies and the U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks with a large U.S. presence would be required to meet liquidity requirements similar to those applicable to large U.S. bank holding companies. Importantly, however, the foreign bank proposal does not entail full subsidiarization--foreign banks generally will continue to be allowed to directly branch into the United States on the basis of their consolidated capital. The comment period for this proposal closed at the end of April, and we are now carefully reviewing comments. Improving Resolvability of Large Banking FirmsAn important reform included in the Dodd-Frank Act was the creation of the Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA). Under OLA, the FDIC can resolve a systemic financial firm by imposing losses on the shareholders and creditors of the firm and replacing its management, while preserving the operations of the sound, functioning parts of the firm. This authority gives the government a real alternative to the Hobson's choice of bailout or disorderly bankruptcy that authorities faced in 2008. Similar resolution mechanisms are under development in other countries, and the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board have devoted considerable attention to developing new international standards for statutory resolution frameworks. Although much work remains to be done by all countries, the Dodd-Frank Act reforms have paved the way for the United States to be a leader in shaping the development of international policy on effective resolution regimes for systemic financial firms. In implementing OLA, the FDIC is developing the single-point-of-entry (SPOE) resolution approach. SPOE is designed to focus losses on the shareholders and long-term unsecured debt holders of the parent holding company of the failed firm. It aims to produce a well-capitalized bridge holding company in place of the failed parent by converting long-term debt holders of the parent into equity holders of the bridge. The critical operating subsidiaries of the failed firm would be re-capitalized by the parent, to the extent necessary, and would remain open for business. The SPOE approach should reduce incentives for creditors and customers of the operating subsidiaries to run and, as financial stress increases, for host-country regulators to engage in ring-fencing or other measures disruptive to an orderly, global resolution of the failed firm. Successful execution by the FDIC of its preferred SPOE approach in OLA depends on the availability of a sufficient combined amount of equity and loss-absorbing debt at the parent holding company of the failed firm. Accordingly, in consultation with the FDIC, the Federal Reserve is working on a regulatory proposal that requires the largest, most complex U.S. banking firms to maintain a minimum amount of outstanding long-term unsecured debt on top of their regulatory capital requirements. Such a requirement could have a number of public policy benefits. Most notably, it would increase the prospects for an orderly resolution under OLA by ensuring that shareholders and long-term debt holders of a systemic financial firm can bear potential future losses at the firm and sufficiently capitalize a bridge holding company in resolution. In addition, by increasing the credibility of OLA, a minimum long-term debt requirement could help counteract the moral hazard arising from taxpayer bailouts and improve market discipline of systemic firms. The Dodd-Frank Act also requires that all large bank holding companies develop, and submit to supervisors, resolution plans. The Federal Reserve has been working with the FDIC to review resolution plans submitted by the largest U.S. bank holding companies and foreign banks. The largest firms--generally those with $250 billion or more in total nonbank assets--submitted their first annual resolution plans to the Federal Reserve and the FDIC in the third quarter of 2012. These "first-wave" resolution plans yielded valuable information that is being used to identify, assess, and mitigate key challenges to resolvability under the Bankruptcy Code and to support the FDIC's development of backup resolution plans under OLA. These plans also are very useful supervisory tools that have helped the Federal Reserve and the subject firms focus on opportunities to simplify corporate structures and improve management systems in ways that will help the firms be more resilient and efficient, as well as easier to resolve. Further work is being done on resolution plans this year. On July 1, bank holding companies in the second group--generally those with between $100 billion and $250 billion in total nonbank assets--submitted their initial plans to the Federal Reserve. The public portions of these resolution plans were made available on the FDIC and Federal Reserve websites on July 2.3The first-wave filers will submit updated plans in October that reflect further guidance from the FDIC and the Federal Reserve. Structural Reform of Banking FirmsThe Dodd-Frank Act also includes provisions calling for structural reform of the U.S. banking system. Key elements are the Volcker Rule in section 619 of the act and the derivatives push-out provision in section 716 of the act. The Volcker Rule generally prohibits a banking entity from engaging in proprietary trading or acquiring an ownership interest in, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with a hedge fund or private equity fund. The federal banking agencies and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) jointly proposed a rule to implement the Volcker Rule in October 2011. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission issued a substantially similar proposal a few months later. The rulemaking agencies have carefully analyzed the nearly 19,000 public comments on the proposal and have made steady and significant progress toward crafting a final rule that attempts to maximize bank safety and soundness and financial stability while minimizing cost to the liquidity of the financial markets, credit availability, and economic growth. The implementation of the Volcker Rule has taken a significant amount of time for a variety of reasons--the interpretive and policy issues implicated by the rule are complex, the completion of the Volcker Rule requires negotiations among a variety of banking and market regulators, and the potential costs of getting the Volcker Rule wrong are high. But I think most observers would agree that the agencies need to provide firms, markets, and the public with the product of all this work, so that they can begin to adjust their plans and expectations accordingly. During this Committee's last oversight hearing in February, I expressed the hope that we would complete the Volcker Rule by the end of this year. Since that time, there has been good interagency progress, and I maintain both the hope and expectation of five months ago. The derivatives push-out provision in section 716 of the Dodd-Frank Act generally prohibits the provision of federal assistance, such as FDIC deposit insurance or Federal Reserve discount window credit, to swap dealers and major swap participants. The provision becomes effective on July 16, 2013, although the statute provides insured depository institutions the right to request a two-year extension from their primary federal supervisor. Last month, the Federal Reserve issued an interim final rule that clarified that uninsured U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks will be treated in the same manner as insured depository institutions under section 716 and, as a result, will qualify for the same exemptions and two-year transition period available by statute to U.S. insured depository institutions. The interim final rule also establishes the process for state member banks and uninsured state branches or agencies of foreign banks to apply to the Federal Reserve for transition relief.4Although the rule is already effective, we are seeking comments on it and will revise the rule, as necessary, in light of comments received. Oversight of Community BanksIn addition to overseeing large banking firms, the Federal Reserve supervises approximately 800 state-chartered community banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System.5Community banks play an important role in extending credit in local economies across the country--particularly, though by no means only, in their lending to small and medium-sized businesses. Recognizing the disproportionate burden that regulatory compliance can impose on smaller institutions, the Federal Reserve has put in place special processes for taking account of the circumstances and more limited compliance resources of community banks, while still achieving safety-and-soundness aims. We created a special subcommittee of our regulatory and supervisory oversight committee to review all proposals with an eye to their effects on community banks. We have also established a Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council to enable community bankers to comment on the economy, lending conditions, supervisory policies, and other matters of interest. The changes we will be seeing in the financial regulatory architecture as a result of the Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III are principally directed at our largest and most complex financial firms. Many of the Basel III requirements will not apply to smaller banks--including the countercyclical capital buffer, supplementary leverage ratio, trading book reforms, AOCI flow through, higher capital requirements for counterparty credit risk on derivatives, and disclosure requirements. In fact, most of the significant changes from the proposed capital rules published by the three banking agencies last year that we made in the final version of the rules issued earlier this month were in response to concerns expressed by smaller banks. Community banking organizations also will not be subject to the Federal Reserve's additional enhanced prudential standards that larger banking firms face or will face, such as capital plans, stress testing, resolution plans, single-counterparty credit limits, and capital surcharges for systemically important financial firms. In addition, most of the major systemic risk and prudential provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act--such as the Volcker Rule, derivatives push-out, derivatives central clearing requirements, and the Collins Amendment--will have a far smaller impact on community banks than on large banking firms. Constraining Systemic Risk Outside the Banking SectorWhile strengthening the regulation and improving the resolvability of banking firms is of paramount importance, we should not forget that one of the key elements of the recent financial crisis was the precipitous unwinding of large amounts of short-term wholesale funding that had been made available to highly leveraged and maturity-transforming financial firms, many of which were clearly outside of the traditional banking sector. Nonbank financial intermediaries can provide substantial benefits to an economy, but a complete financial reform program must address financial stability risks that emanate from the shadow banking system. Particularly as we tighten the oversight of the regulated banking system, it will become more and more essential that we are able to monitor and constrain the build-up of systemic risks in the nonbank financial sector. Among other things, financial stability depends on strong consolidated supervision and regulation of all financial firms whose failure could pose a threat to the financial system--whether or not they own a bank. One of the key lessons of the financial crisis was the prodigious amount of systemic risk that was concentrated in several nonbank financial firms. To mitigate these risks, the Dodd-Frank Act gave the Council authority to bring systemically important financial firms that are not already bank holding companies within the perimeter of Federal Reserve supervision and regulation. Last month, the Council made three proposed designations of nonbank financial firms, and earlier this week the Council made final designations of two of these firms. The Federal Reserve already supervises these two firms as savings and loan holding companies and we will now begin the process of applying relevant enhanced prudential regulatory and supervisory standards. We remain committed to applying a supervisory and regulatory framework to such firms that is tailored to their business mix, risk profile, and systemic footprint--consistent with the Collins Amendment and other legal requirements under the Dodd-Frank Act. The threats to financial stability from the shadow banking system do not reside solely in a few individual nonbank financial firms with large systemic footprints. Significant threats to financial stability emanate from systemic classes of nonbank financial firms and from vulnerabilities intrinsic to short-term wholesale funding markets. Many of the key problems related to shadow banking and their potential solutions are still being debated domestically and internationally, but some of the necessary steps are already clear. First, we need to increase the transparency of shadow banking markets so that authorities can monitor for signs of excessive leverage and unstable maturity transformation outside regulated banks. Since the financial crisis, the ability of the Federal Reserve and other regulators to track the types of transactions that are core to shadow banking activities has improved markedly. But there remain several areas, notably involving transactions organized around an exchange of cash and securities, where gaps still exist. For example, many repurchase agreements and securities lending transactions can still only be monitored indirectly. Improved reporting in these areas would better enable regulators to detect emerging risks in the financial system. Second, we need to reduce further the risk of runs on money market mutual funds. Late last year, the Council issued a proposed recommendation on this subject that offered three reform options. Last month, the SEC issued a proposal that includes a form of the floating net asset value (NAV) option recommended by the Council. Third, we need to be sure that initiatives to enhance the resilience of the triparty repo market are successfully completed. These marketwide efforts have been underway for some time and have already reduced discretionary intraday credit extended by the clearing banks by approximately 25 percent. Market participants, with the active encouragement of the Federal Reserve and other supervisors, are on track to achieve the practical elimination of all such intraday credit in the triparty settlement process by the end of 2014. Completing these three reforms would represent a strong start to the job of reducing systemic risk in the short-term wholesale funding markets that are key to the functioning of securities markets. Still, important work would remain. For example, a major source of unaddressed risk emanates from the large volume of short-term securities financing transactions (SFTs) in our financial system, including repos, reverse repos, securities borrowing, and lending transactions. Regulatory reform has mostly passed over these transactions because SFTs appear to involve minimal risks from a microprudential perspective. But SFTs, particularly large matched books of SFTs, create sizable macroprudential risks, including vulnerabilities to runs and asset fire sales. Although the Dodd-Frank Act provides additional tools to address the failure of a systemically important broker-dealer, the existing bank and broker-dealer regulatory regimes have not been designed to materially mitigate these systemic risks. Continued attention to these potential vulnerabilities is needed, both here in the United States and abroad. ConclusionAs I hope is apparent from this review of progress on the implementation of regulatory reforms, we are at the beginning of the end of the rulemaking process for most of the major Dodd-Frank Act provisions. Some regulations already finalized are now in effect. Others provide a transition period for firms and markets to prepare for the new rules of the road. Still others will be completed in the coming months. With respect to all three sets of regulations, the emphasis will soon be shifting from rule-writing to rule compliance, interpretation, and enforcement. Here, the benchmarks for progress and performance are less visible, at least until something goes wrong. For that reason, it is all the more important that the regulatory agencies put in place institutional mechanisms to assure strong, sensible oversight of the new regulatory framework. Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have. List of Rules, Notices, and Reports of the Federal Reserve Board under the Dodd-Frank Act as of July 2, 2013 1. Seewww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20130702a.htm.Return to text 2. Section 171 of the Dodd-Frank Act, commonly referred to as the Collins Amendment, requires the federal banking agencies to establish minimum risk-based and leverage capital requirements for bank holding companies, savings and loan holding companies, insured depository institutions, and nonbank financial holding companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for supervision by the Federal Reserve. Under section 171, among other things, these minimum capital requirements may not be less than, nor quantitatively lower than, the generally applicable capital requirements that were in effect for insured depository institutions on the date of enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act. Section 939A requires all federal agencies to remove references to credit ratings in their regulations, including the capital rules.Return to text 3. Seewww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20130702b.htm.Return to text 4. For approvals granted by the Board for the two-year transition period, seewww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/716f-requests.htm.Return to text 5. For supervisory purposes, community banks are generally defined as those with less than $10 billion in assets.Return to text