Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Federal bank regulatory agencies today released updated supervisory guidance on leveraged lending, which has been increasing since 2009 after declining during the financial crisis. The guidance from the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (the agencies) covers transactions characterized by a borrower with a degree of financial leverage that significantly exceeds industry norms. The guidance replaces guidance issued in April 2001. Before the financial crisis, the volume of leveraged credit transactions grew tremendously and participation by non-regulated investors willing to accept looser terms increased. While leveraged lending declined during the crisis, volumes have since increased and prudent underwriting practices have deteriorated. For example, some debt agreements have included features that weaken lender protection by excluding meaningful maintenance covenants and including other features that can limit lenders' recourse in the event of weakened borrower performance. In addition, capital and repayment structures for some transactions, whether originated to hold or to distribute, have been aggressive. Management information systems at some institutions have proven less than satisfactory in accurately aggregating exposures on a timely basis. It is important that banks provide leveraged financing to creditworthy borrowers in a safe and sound manner. The guidance issued today focuses attention on the following key areas: This guidance applies to financial institutions supervised by the agencies that engage in leveraged lending activities. The number of community banks with substantial involvement in leveraged lending is small and they should be largely unaffected by this guidance. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today requested comment on proposed revisions to"Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment." TheQuestions and Answersdocument provides additional guidance to financial institutions and the public on the agencies' Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The proposed revisions focus primarily on community development. Community development activities are considered as part of the CRA performance tests for large institutions, intermediate small institutions, and wholesale and limited purpose institutions. Small institutions may use community development activity to receive consideration toward an outstanding CRA rating. Among other things, the proposed amendments would: The proposed revisions are being issued by the Federal Reserve Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The notice that will be published in theFederal Registeris attached. Comments will be due 60 days after that publication, which is expected shortly. For more information on the CRA, including theseQuestions and Answersand the agencies' CRA regulations, visit the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council website at:http://www.ffiec.gov/cra. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board in April will begin a statistical study of household finances, the Survey of Consumer Finances, that will provide policymakers with important insight into the economic condition of all types of American families. The survey has been undertaken every three years since 1983. It is being conducted for the Board by NORC, a social science research organization at the University of Chicago, through December of this year. The data collected will provide a representative picture of what Americans own--from houses and cars to stocks and bonds--how and how much they borrow and how they bank. Past study results have been important in policy discussions regarding recovery of households from the Great Recession, changes in the use of credit, use of tax-preferred retirement savings accounts, and a broad range of other issues. "This survey is one of the nation's primary sources of information on the financial condition of different types of households," Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke said in a letter to prospective survey participants. "Our previous surveys…have helped the Federal Reserve and other parts of the government make policy decisions and have also supported a wide variety of basic research, public discussion, and education." Participants in the study are chosen at random from 127 areas, including metropolitan areas and rural counties across the United States, using a scientific sampling procedure. A representative of NORC contacts each potential participant personally to explain the study and request time for an interview. "I assure you that we give the highest priority to guarding the privacy of all survey participants and the confidentiality of their answers," Chairman Bernanke said. NORC uses names and addresses only for the administration of the survey, and that identifying information will be destroyed at the close of the study. NORC is required never to give the names and addresses of participants to anyone at the Federal Reserve or anywhere else. Summary results for the 2013 study will be published in early 2015 after all data from the survey have been assessed and analyzed. The attached letter from Chairman Bernanke will be mailed in mid-April to approximately 13,000 households urging their participation in the study. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Chairman Bernanke's Letter Survey of Consumer Finances
Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the 2013 National Association for Business Economics Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. Thank you. I'm delighted to address the National Association for Business Economics (NABE), a group that has done so much to promote understanding of the economy and the appropriate role of policy. My topic today is the challenges confronting monetary policy in what has been an unusually weak recovery from a severe recession. I will discuss the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts in these circumstances to speed the U.S. economy's return to maximum employment in a context of price stability.1 As you know, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has recently taken new steps to achieve this objective. In September, the Committee approved a new program of agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS) purchases, pledging to continue the program--contingent on favorable ongoing evaluations of its efficacy and costs--until there has been a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.2Most recently, in December the Committee announced that it would purchase longer-term Treasury securities after completion of the maturity extension program. At the same time, it revamped its forward guidance for the federal funds rate, explicitly linking the path of that rate to quantitative measures of economic performance.3 My goal today is to explain these policies and why I consider them appropriate under current conditions. With respect to the asset purchase program, I will discuss several economic indicators that I plan to consider in evaluating the outlook for the labor market and then offer my perspective at present on the program's efficacy and costs, an assessment I will continue updating in light of experience. The Outlook for the Labor Market and InflationThe Committee's recent actions are shaped by the fact that the labor market is still far from healed from the trauma of the Great Recession. Despite some welcome improvement, employment remains well below its pre-recession peak, reflecting an economy that is still operating far short of its potential. At 7.9 percent in January, the unemployment rate has declined from its recent peak of 10 percent in October 2009. But that's still higher than unemployment ever reached in the 24 years prior to the recent recession and well above the 5.2 to 6 percent that is the central tendency of FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. With economic activity constrained by fiscal consolidation, the lingering effects from the financial crisis, and the added headwinds of Europe's recession and debt problems, most FOMC participants reported in December that they expected only a gradual decline in unemployment over the next two years, to about 7 percent by the end of 2014.4 The official estimate of 12 million currently unemployed does not include 800,000 more discouraged workers who say they have given up looking for work.5In addition, nearly 8 million people, or 5.6 percent of the workforce, say they are working part time even though they would prefer full-time jobs. A broader measure of underemployment that includes these and others who want a job stands at 14.4 percent, nearly double the 7.9 percent "headline" rate that is most commonly reported in the media.6 The large shortfall of employment relative to its maximum level has imposed huge burdens on all too many American households and represents a substantial social cost. In addition, prolonged economic weakness could harm the economy's productive potential for years to come. The long-term unemployed can see their skills erode, making these workers less attractive to employers. If these jobless workers were to become less employable, the natural rate of unemployment might rise or, to the extent that they leave the labor force, we could see a persistently lower rate of labor force participation. In addition, the slow recovery has depressed the pace of capital accumulation, and it may also have hindered new business formation and innovation, developments that would have an adverse effect on structural productivity. In contrast to the large gap between actual and maximum employment, inflation, apart from fluctuations due to energy and other commodity prices, has been running for some time now a little below the rate of 2 percent per year that the Committee judges to be consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. The Committee anticipates that inflation will continue to run at or below 2 percent over the medium term. Moreover, expectations for inflation over the next 5 to 10 years remain well anchored, according to surveys of households and professional forecasters. With employment so far from its maximum level and with inflation running below the Committee's 2 percent objective, I believe it's appropriate for progress in the labor market to take center stage in the conduct of monetary policy. Let me therefore turn to the FOMC's recent actions and describe how I see them promoting this important goal. Forward Guidance for the Federal Funds RateI'll begin with the Committee's forward guidance for the federal funds rate. The FOMC has employed such forward guidance since 2003 but has relied more heavily on it since December 2008, when the target for the federal funds rate was reduced to its effective lower bound. In current circumstances, forward guidance can lower private-sector expectations regarding the future path of short-term rates, thereby reducing longer-term interest rates on a wide range of debt instruments and also raising asset prices, leading to more accommodative financial conditions. In addition, given the FOMC's stated intention to sell assets only after the federal funds rate target is increased, any outward shift in the expected date of liftoff for the federal funds rate suggests that the Federal Reserve will be holding a large stock of assets on its balance sheet longer, which should work to further increase accommodation.7 Starting in March 2009, the FOMC's postmeeting statements noted that "economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period," and in November of the same year added "low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations" as justification for this stance."8In August 2011, the Committee substituted "at least through mid-2013" for the words "for an extended period."9This date was moved further into the future several times, most recently last September, when it was shifted to mid-2015.10Also in September, the Committee changed the language related to that commitment, dropping the reference to "low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation." Instead, it emphasized that "a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens," clarifying the Committee's intention to continue to provide support well into the recovery.11 Finally, last December, the Committee recast its forward guidance for the federal funds rate by specifying a set of quantitative economic conditions that would warrant holding the federal funds rate at the effective lower bound. Specifically, the Committee anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate will be appropriate "at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored."12 An important objective of these changes in forward guidance is to enhance the public's understanding of the Committee's policy strategy and its "reaction function"--namely, how the FOMC anticipates varying its federal funds rate target in response to evolving economic developments. For example, the Committee's initial, calendar-based guidance did not clearly convey the rationale for the specified date. In particular, when the Committee extended the calendar date, the public was left to infer whether the change reflected a deterioration in the Committee's economic outlook or, instead, a decision to increase policy accommodation. In my view, the language now incorporated into the statement affirmatively conveys the Committee's determination to keep monetary policy highly accommodative until well into the recovery. And the specific numbers that were selected as thresholds for a possible change in the federal funds rate target should confirm that the FOMC expects to hold that target lower for longer than would be typical during a normal economic recovery. This improved guidance should help the public to accurately adjust their expectations for the federal funds rate in response to new financial and economic information, which should make policy more effective.13In addition, I hope that improved guidance will help to boost confidence in the outlook and bolster households' unusually depressed expectations for income gains, which in turn will spur a faster recovery. A considerable body of research suggests that, in normal times, the evolution of the federal funds rate target can be reasonably well described by some variant of the widely known Taylor rule.14Rules of this type have been shown to work quite well as guidelines for policy under normal conditions, and they are familiar to market participants, helping them judge how short-term rates are likely to respond to changing economic conditions. The current situation, however, is abnormal in two important and related ways. First, in the aftermath of the financial crisis, there has been an unusually large and persistent shortfall in aggregate demand. Second, use of the federal funds rate has been constrained by the effective lower bound so that monetary policy has been unable to provide as much accommodation as conventional policy rules suggest would be appropriate, given the weakness in aggregate demand. I've previously argued that, in such circumstances, optimal policy prescriptions for the federal funds rate's path diverge notably from those of standard rules.15For example, David Reifschneider and John Williams have shown that when policy is constrained by the effective lower bound, policymakers can achieve superior economic outcomes by committing to keep the federal funds rate lower for longer than would be called for by the interest rate rules that serve as reasonably reliable guides for monetary policy in more normal times.16Committing to keep the federal funds rate lower for longer helps bring down longer-term interest rates immediately and thereby helps compensate for the inability of policymakers to lower short-term rates as much as simple rules would call for. I view the Committee's current rate guidance as embodying exactly such a "lower for longer" commitment. In normal times, the FOMC would be expected to tighten monetary policy before unemployment fell as low as 6-1/2 percent. Under the new thresholds guidance, the public is informed that tightening is unlikely as long as unemployment remains above 6‑1/2 percent and inflation one to two years out is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the FOMC's 2 percent longer-run goal.17The evidence suggests that the evolution I've described in the Committee's forward guidance, particularly the new thresholds,hasshifted the market's view of how forceful the FOMC intends to be in supporting the recovery. In the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Survey of Primary Dealers, for example, participants have repeatedly revised downward the unemployment rate at which they anticipate that tightening will first occur.18 I mentioned that the FOMC's new forward guidance offers considerable insight into the Committee's likely reaction function, but I should note that the guidance it provides is not complete. For example, the Committee has not specified exactly how it intends to vary the federal funds rate after liftoff from the effective lower bound, although it has stated that "when the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach."19This language is consistent with optimal policy prescriptions that call for lower-for-longer considerations to pertain to the path of the federal funds rate both before and after liftoff. In addition, the guidance specifies thresholds forpossible action,not triggers that will necessarily prompt an increase in the federal funds rate. The FOMC statement therefore notes that "in determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments."20 For example, the Committee could decide to defer action even after the unemployment rate has declined below 6‑1/2 percent if inflation is running and expected to continue at a rate significantly below the Committee's 2 percent objective. Alternatively, the Committee might judge that the unemployment rate significantly understates the actual degree of labor market slack. A decline in the unemployment rate could, for example, primarily reflect the exit from the labor force of discouraged job seekers. That is an important reason why the Committee will consider a broad range of labor market indicators. I will discuss some of the additional indicators I plan to consider in judging the strength of the labor market in connection with the Committee's current asset purchase program. The Federal Reserve's Asset Purchase ProgramTurning next to that program, the Federal Reserve initiated a new asset purchase program last September, extending it in December, under which the Federal Reserve is currently buying agency-guaranteed MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month and longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month. As with the guidance for the federal funds rate, the Committee tied the new program to labor market conditions, stating that purchases would continue until there is a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market in a context of price stability.21The FOMC's earlier large-scale asset purchase programs, in contrast, were fixed in size and carried out on a specified schedule. The Committee has also noted that, in determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, it would take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. The purpose of the new asset purchase program is to foster a stronger economic recovery, or, put differently, to help the economy attain "escape velocity." By lowering longer-term interest rates, these asset purchases are expected to spur spending, particularly on interest-sensitive purchases such as homes, cars, and other consumer durables. Research on the effects of such asset purchases suggests that what matters for the reaction of longer-term interest rates to a purchase program is the extent to which the program leads market participants to change their expectations concerning the entire path of the Federal Reserve's holdings of longer-term securities.22Other things being equal, the greater the effect that a purchase program has on the expected path of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings, the more substantial should be the downward pressure on the term premium in longer-term interest rates.23By linking the pace of purchases and how long that pace will be maintained to the outlook for the labor market, the program acts as a sort of automatic stabilizer: As market perceptions of the prospects for the economy vary, so too should expectations of the pace and duration of asset purchases. In stating that asset purchases will continue, subject to caveats pertaining to efficacy and costs, until there has been a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market, the FOMC established a criterion that differs in three important respects from the forward guidance for the federal funds rate: (1) It is qualitative, not quantitative; (2) it refers to an improvement in theoutlookfor the labor market rather than an improvement in actual labor market conditions; and (3) it requires the Committee not only to consider progress toward its employment goal, but also to evaluate the efficacy and costs of asset purchases on an ongoing basis. The public is, naturally, eager to understand how the FOMC will approach such complex judgments. I cannot, of course, speak for the Committee on this issue, but I can spell out some of the key factors that will guide my conclusions. A "Substantial Improvement in the Outlook for the Labor Market"The first imperative will be to judge what constitutes a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. Federal Reserve research concludes that the unemployment rate is probably the best single indicator of current labor market conditions. In addition, it is a good predictor of future labor market developments. Since 1978, periods during which the unemployment rate declined 1/2 percentage point or more over two quarters were followed by further declines over the subsequent two quarters about 75 percent of the time. That said, the unemployment rate also has its limitations. As I noted before, the unemployment rate may decline for reasons other than improved labor demand, such as when workers become discouraged and drop out of the labor force. In addition, while movements in the rate tend to be fairly persistent, recent history provides several cases in which the unemployment rate fell substantially and then stabilized at still-elevated levels. For example, between the fourth quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of 2011, the unemployment rate fell 1/2 percentage point but was then little changed over the next two quarters. Similarly, the unemployment rate fell 3/4 percentage point between the third quarter of 2011 and the first quarter of 2012, only to level off over the subsequent spring and summer. To judge whether there has been a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market, I therefore expect to consider additional labor market indicators along with the overall outlook for economic growth. For example, the pace of payroll employment growth is highly correlated with a diverse set of labor market indicators, and a decline in unemployment is more likely to signal genuine improvement in the labor market when it is combined with a healthy pace of job gains. The payroll employment data, however, also have shortcomings. In particular, they are subject to substantial revision. When the Labor Department released its annual benchmarking of the establishment survey data last month, it revised up its estimate of employment in December 2012 by 647,000. In addition, I am likely to supplement the data on employment and unemployment with measures of gross job flows, such as job loss and hiring, which describe the underlying dynamics of the labor market. For instance, layoffs and discharges as a share of total employment have already returned to their pre-recession level, while the hiring rate remains depressed. Therefore, going forward, I would look for an increase in the rate of hiring. Similarly, a pickup in the quit rate, which also remains at a low level, would signal that workers perceive that their chances to be rehired are good--in other words, that labor demand has strengthened. I also intend to consider my forecast of the overall pace of spending and growth in the economy. A decline in unemployment, when it is not accompanied by sufficiently strong growth, may not indicate a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook. Similarly, a convincing pickup in growth that is expected to be sustained could prompt a determination that the outlook for the labor market had substantially improved even absent any substantial decline at that point in the unemployment rate. The Efficacy of Asset PurchasesLet me turn next to the efficacy and potential costs of asset purchases, a topic discussed at recent FOMC meetings and that I suspect will be discussed at succeeding meetings as well. I see the currently available evidence as suggesting that our asset purchases have been reasonably efficacious in stimulating spending. There is considerable evidence that these purchases have eased financial conditions, and so have presumably increased interest-sensitive spending.24Research suggests that our purchases of mortgage-backed securities pushed down MBS yields and that MBS yields pass through, with a lag, to mortgage rates.25Indeed, I see the recent strength in housing and consumer durables, such as motor vehicle purchases, as partly reflecting the effect of reduced borrowing costs. Plausible, albeit uncertain, estimates of the ultimate economic effect of asset purchases can be obtained from simulations of the Board's FRB/US model. Such simulations suggest that a hypothetical program involving $500 billion in longer-term asset purchases would serve to lower the unemployment rate by close to 1/4 percentage point within three years while keeping inflation close to the Committee's 2 percent objective. One issue on which there has been considerable debate is whether low interest rates are doing as much to promote economic growth since the financial crisis as they would have before the financial crisis--whether the interest rate channel of transmission for monetary policy has been attenuated. I agree with those who think this channel has been partially blocked. Individuals who have impaired credit histories, have been unemployed, or hold underwater mortgages are experiencing great difficulty gaining access to credit, whether to buy or refinance a home, finance a small business, or support spending for other needs. Even those with good, but not stellar, credit histories and sufficient income are facing capacity constraints in the mortgage market. However, even if the interest rate channel is less powerful right now than it was before the crisis, asset purchases still work to support economic growth through other channels, including by boosting stock prices and house values. The resulting improvement in household wealth supports greater consumption spending. The Costs of Asset PurchasesTurning to the potential costs of the Federal Reserve's asset purchases, there are some that definitely need to be monitored over time. At this stage, I do not see any that would cause me to advocate a curtailment of our purchase program. To address one concern that I have heard, there is no evidence that the Federal Reserve's purchases have impaired the functioning of financial markets, and, while we continue to monitor market function carefully, so long as we pursue our purchases sensibly, I do not expect market functioning to become a problem in the future. Further, I've argued previously, and still judge, that the FOMC has the tools it needs to withdraw accommodation, even if the balance sheet at that time is large. These tools include a new one, approved by the Congress during the financial crisis, which allows the Federal Reserve to pay banks interest on their reserves. A suite of supporting tools, such as reverse repurchase agreements with a wide range of counterparties and the Term Deposit Facility, are routinely tested to make sure that the Federal Reserve is prepared to use them and that they will work as planned. Two additional costs have been discussed at recent meetings of the FOMC. First, the expansion of the balance sheet has implications for the Federal Reserve's earnings from its asset holdings and, hence, for its remittances to the Treasury. Second, some have raised the possibility that the Committee's policies could have negative consequences for financial stability. With respect to the Federal Reserve's remittances, balance sheet operations are intended to support economic growth and job creation in a context of price stability and not to maximize Federal Reserve income. There is a possibility that the Federal Reserve's earnings from its assets and the remittances of those earnings to the Treasury will decline later in the decade, perhaps even ceasing entirely for some period. It is important to note, however, that any losses that could conceivably occur would not impair the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy.26Further, even if remittances to the Treasury ceased for a time, it is highly likely that average annual remittances over the period affected by our asset purchases will be higher than the pre-crisis norms. Though our expanded portfolio of longer-term securities has in recent years translated into substantial earnings and remittances to the Treasury, the Federal Reserve has, to be sure, increased its exposure to interest rate risk by lengthening the average maturity of its securities holdings. As the economic recovery strengthens and monetary policy normalizes, the Federal Reserve's net interest income will likely decline. In particular, the Federal Reserve's interest expenses will increase as short-term interest rates rise, while reserve balances initially remain sizable. In addition, policy normalization may well involve significant sales of the Federal Reserve's agency securities holdings, and losses could be incurred in these sales. A recent study by the Board staff considered the effect of a number of scenarios on Federal Reserve income, based on assumptions about the course of balance sheet normalization that are consistent with the exit strategy principles adopted at the June 2011 FOMC meeting.27 The projections resulting from this exercise imply that Federal Reserve remittances to the Treasury will likely decline for a time. In some scenarios, they decline to zero. Once the Federal Reserve's portfolio is normalized, however, earnings are projected to return to their long‐run trend. The study supports the conclusion that the Federal Reserve's purchase programs will very likely prove to have been a net plus for cumulative income and remittances to the Treasury over the period from 2008 through 2025, by which time it is assumed that the balance sheet has been normalized.28 Focusing only on the ebb and flow of the Federal Reserve's remittances to the Treasury, however, is not, in my view, the appropriate way to evaluate the effect of these purchases on the government's finances. More germane is the overall effect of the program on federal finances. If the purchases provide even a modest boost to economic activity, increased tax payments would swamp any reduction in remittances. By depressing longer-term interest rates, the purchases also hold down the Treasury's debt service costs. These effects can be quantified through simulations of the Board's FRB/US model. In the simulation I described earlier, a hypothetical program involving $500 billion of asset purchases would reduce the ratio of federal debt to gross domestic product (GDP) by about 1.5 percentage points by late 2018. The lower debt-to-GDP ratio mainly reflects stronger tax revenue as a result of more-robust economic activity. Finally, let me comment on the possibility that our asset purchase program could threaten financial stability by promoting excessive risk-taking, a significant concern that I and my colleagues take very seriously. To put this concern in context, though, remember that during the most intense phase of the financial crisis, risk aversion surged. Even in the aftermath of the crisis, businesses, banks, and investors have been exceptionally cautious, presumably reflecting their concern about future business conditions, uncertainty about economic policy, and the perception of pronounced tail risks relating, for example, to stresses in global financial markets. I see one purpose of the Committee's accommodative policies as promoting a return to prudent risk-taking. Indeed, the return to more normal levels of risk-taking and the associated normalization of credit markets have been vital to recovery from the Great Recession. Of course, risk-taking can go too far, thereby threatening future economic performance, and a low interest rate environment has the potential to induce investors to take on too much leverage and reach too aggressively for yield. At this stage, there are some signs that investors are reaching for yield, but I do not now see pervasive evidence of trends such as rapid credit growth, a marked buildup in leverage, or significant asset bubbles that would clearly threaten financial stability.29That said, such trends need to be carefully monitored and addressed, and the Federal Reserve has invested considerable resources to establish new surveillance programs to assess risks in the financial system. In the aftermath of the crisis, regulators here and around the world are also implementing a broad range of reforms to mitigate systemic risk.30With respect to the large financial institutions that it supervises, the Federal Reserve is using a variety of supervisory tools to assess their exposure to, and proper management of, interest rate risk. To the extent that investors are reaching for yield, I see the low interest rate environment and not the FOMC's asset purchases, per se, as a contributing factor. It is true that asset purchases put downward pressure on the term premium component of longer-term rates, and that discontinuing purchases would likely cause term premiums to rise. But ending asset purchases before observing a substantial improvement in the labor market might also create expectations that the amount of accommodation provided would not be sufficient to sustain the improvement in the economy. This weakening in the economic outlook might bring down the expected path of the federal funds rate, with the result that longer-term interest rates might not rise appreciably, on net. Moreover, a weakening of the economic environment could also create significant financial stability risks. That said, financial stability concerns, to my mind, are the most important potential cost associated with the current stance of monetary policy. ConclusionIn these remarks, I have reviewed recent FOMC policy actions--actions I have supported because I believe they will help foster a stronger recovery and keep inflation close to the Committee's longer-run target. I recognize that the Federal Reserve's highly accommodative policy entails some costs and risks. It will be important both to monitor them and to continue strengthening our financial system. However, insufficiently forceful action to achieve our dual mandate also entails costs and risks. There is the high cost that unemployed workers and their families are paying in this disappointingly slow recovery. There is the risk of longer-term damage to the labor market and the economy's productive capacity. At present, I view the balance of risks as still calling for a highly accommodative monetary policy to support a stronger recovery and more-rapid growth in employment. Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today at NABE's spring conference. ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009a). "FOMC Statement," press release, March 18. ------ (2009b). "FOMC Statement," press release, November 4. ------ (2011a). "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9. ------ (2011b). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 21-22, 2011," press release, July 12. ------ (2012a). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 13. ------ (2012b). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 12. ------ (2013). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 11-12, 2012," press release, January 3. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2013), "Employment Situation--January 2013 (PDF)," press release, February 1. Carpenter, Seth B., Jane E. Ihrig, Elizabeth C. Klee, Daniel W. Quinn, and Alexander H. Boote (2013). "The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-01. Washington: Board of Governors, January. Clarida, Richard,JordiGalí, and MarkGertler(2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence andSome Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147-80. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David López-Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects,"Economic Journal, vol. 122 (November), pp. F415-F446. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (forthcoming). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics. Gagnon, Joseph, Mathew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). "The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7 (March), pp. 3-43. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44 (February supplement), pp. 3-46. Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Portfolio and its Effects on Mortgage Markets," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-22. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Joyce, Michael A.S., Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011). "The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7 (September), pp. 113-61. Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen (2011). "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 215-65. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November, part 2), pp. 936-66. Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2006). "Monetary Policy Inertia: Fact or Fiction?"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (December), pp. 85-135. Stein, Jeremy C. (2013). "Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses," speech delivered at "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, February 5-7. Swanson, Eric T. (2011). "Let's Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of Operation Twist and Its Implications for QE2,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 151-88. Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams (2013). "Measuring the Effect ofthe Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates (PDF)," Working Papers Series 2012-02. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, January. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2012). "Financial Stability Regulation," speech delivered at the Distinguished Jurist Lecture, University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, October 10. Woodford, Michael (2012). "Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 31-September 1. Yellen, Janet L. (2012a). "Perspectives on Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Boston Economic Club Dinner, Boston, June 6. ------ (2012b). "Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications," speech delivered at the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, Calif., November 13. ------ (2013). "A Painfully Slow Recovery for America's Workers: Causes, Implications, and the Federal Reserve's Response," speech delivered at "A Trans-Atlantic Agenda for Shared Prosperity," a conference sponsored by the AFL-CIO, Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, and the IMK Macroeconomic Policy Institute, held in Washington, February 11. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. I am indebted to members of the Board staff--Stephanie Aaronson, Thomas Laubach, John Maggs, Edward Nelson, Devin Saiki, and William Wascher--who contributed to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text 2.See Board of Governors (2012a).Return to text 3.See Board of Governors (2012b).Return to text 4.In the December 2012 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the central tendency of FOMC participants' projections for the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2013 and 2014 was 7.4 to 7.7 percent and 6.8 to 7.3 percent, respectively. The central tendency omits the three lowest and three highest projections. The SEP is an addendum to the FOMC minutes and is available at Board of Governors (2013).Return to text 5.The most widely reported estimate of those in the labor force who are unemployed--12.3 million in January, rounded to 12 million, from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)--is seasonally adjusted. (Without seasonal adjustment, the actual estimate of unemployed in January was 13.2 million.) The BLS does not seasonally adjust its estimate of discouraged workers who have left the labor force, an estimate that was 804,000 in January. For more on the employment situation in January, see Bureau of Labor Statistics (2013).Return to text 6.In my view, and as I've argued elsewhere (Yellen, 2013), the evidence indicates that elevated unemployment and the disappointingly slow improvement in the labor market are primarily the result of weak aggregate demand and not an increase in structural unemployment.Return to text 7.Empirical studies of the Committee's date-based forward guidance suggest that changes in that guidance generated an appreciable effect on longer-term yields. See, for example, Swanson and Williams (2012) and Woodford (2012).Return to text 8.See Board of Governors (2009a, 2009b).Return to text 9.See Board of Governors (2011a).Return to text 10.See Board of Governors (2012a).Return to text 11.See Board of Governors (2012a).Return to text 12.See Board of Governors (2012b).Return to text 13.The new guidance should serve as an automatic stabilizer in the face of shifts in the outlook. For example, weaker economic data, suggesting that the thresholds will be reached later than previously anticipated, should lead market participants to push out the expected timing of liftoff, automatically promoting lower longer-term rates and an easing of financial conditions. See, for example, Yellen (2012b).Return to text 14.See, for example, Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000) and Rudebusch (2006).Return to text 15.See, for example, Yellen (2012a, 2012b).Return to text 16.See Reifschneider and Williams (2000).Return to text 17.Setting the threshold above the unemployment rate's longer-run normal level recognizes the fact that monetary policy affects real activity and inflation with a lag so that, assuming inflation is near the Committee's long-run target, it will likely be necessary to begin the process of removing accommodation before the longer-run normal rate is reached.Return to text 18.The Survey of Primary Dealersis available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website.Return to text 19.See Board of Governors (2012b).Return to text 20.See Board of Governors (2012b).Return to text 21.The Committee also indicated that it expects the asset purchase program to end well before the target for the federal funds rate is raised.Return to text 22.See Gagnon and others (2011).Return to text 23.Typically, investors demand a higher return as a condition for putting their funds into a longer-term security instead of investing in a series of short-term securities. The difference in expected returns on these two alternative investments is called a term premium.Return to text 24.Empirical studies have drawn on the experience of the Federal Reserve's large-scale asset purchases in recent years, as well as from earlier episodes in the United States and from the experience with asset purchases in the United Kingdom. See, for example, D'Amico and King (forthcoming), D'Amico and others (2012), Gagnon and others (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), Joyce and others (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011), and Swanson (2011).Return to text 25.See Hancock and Passmore (2012).Return to text 26.See Carpenter and others (2013).Return to text 27.See Carpenter and others (2013) for the Board study; the exit strategy principles are in Board of Governors (2011b).Return to text 28.The extent of realized capital losses on sales of Federal Reserve assets depends on the precise securities sales policy that the Committee eventually decides to undertake. An increase in longer-term interest rates would lower the market value of the securities in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio. But the Federal Reserve would continue to receive interest income on those securities for as long as they remained in the SOMA portfolio, and securities held to maturity could roll off the portfolio without the Federal Reserve realizing losses on them. While the authors of the Board staff study used particular assumptions about future securities sales that are consistent with the exit strategy principles outlined by the Committee in June 2011, other strategies for sales that are equally consistent might lead to different results.Return to text 29.In a recent speech, Governor Jeremy Stein (2013) discussed several areas in which a noticeable increase in risk-taking behavior has emerged.Return to text 30.See, for example, a speech on financial stability regulation by Governor Daniel Tarullo (2012).Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Mortgage Bankers Association Mid-Winter Housing Finance Conference, Avon, Colorado Since joining the Board in 2008 amid a crisis centered on mortgage lending, I have focused much of my attention on housing and mortgage markets, issues surrounding foreclosures, and neighborhood stabilization. Today I am pleased to provide some comments about the outlook for housing and mortgages. Before I proceed, I should note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). I think the evidence is pretty clear that a recovery in the housing market is finally under way. National house prices have increased for 13 consecutive months and are now 10 percent higher than at their trough in December 2011.1Construction activity has also picked up. Housing starts and permits are still far below their peaks but have risen by about one-third over the past year, and homebuilder sentiment has improved notably.2New and existing home sales have increased. In national surveys, households report that low interest rates and house prices make it a good time to buy a home; they also appear more certain that house price gains will continue.3And real estate agents report stronger traffic of people shopping for homes.4 The open question is whether this positive trend is sustainable. When I look at the factors driving recent improvement and those that have inhibited housing recovery through the downturn, I conclude that recent gains in the housing market will continue and perhaps even strengthen. My main hesitation with this forecast is that mortgage credit conditions remain quite tight for many would-be borrowers, and I suspect that the easing of these conditions will be a slow and gradual process. In particular, I expect demand to come from a pickup in new household formation, but I also recognize that these households may be the very population that faces especially tight credit conditions. I will return to the subject of mortgage credit later in my talk. Housing Market Overview and OutlookLast year's house price gains were achieved in an environment largely defined by historically unusual factors: a large number of underwater homeowners, which have effectively reduced the supply of properties for sale; the fact that foreclosed properties continue to represent an outsized, although gradually decreasing, share of sales transactions; and strong demand on the part of investors. Turning first to underwater homeowners, although the actual number of these homeowners is unknown--plausible estimates range fairly broadly from 7 million to 14 million--it seems clear that some are unable or unwilling to sell their homes because they lack the funds to carry out the transactions or are reluctant to realize losses. As a result, some potential sellers have not responded to the signs of housing market recovery by putting their properties on the market. The number of single-family homes for sale has fallen to its lowest level in a decade, which has likely contributed to the recent house price gains. Indeed, cities that started 2012 with an outsized share of underwater homeowners have seen some of the largest price increases. Next, sales of properties from lenders' real estate owned (REO) inventories represented 14 percent of sales transactions in 2012, down from 21 percent in 2010.5These sales have damped house prices by increasing the supply of homes for sale and, in some areas, by reducing the desirability of a neighborhood as a place to live.6This effect may be diminishing, as the foreclosure inventory has gradually started to decline. The decline in REO sales has been partly offset by an increase in short sales, but these properties tend to transact at smaller discounts than REO properties.7 Finally, investors have been attracted to the housing market because of the low prices on REO properties. The properties tend to sell at lower prices because some are damaged and because lenders may be more motivated sellers than the typical homeowner. The combination of a low purchase price, a possible steady stream of rental income, and the potential for significant capital gains has attracted considerable interest from large institutional investors as well as from the mom-and-pop investors who have historically dominated this market. This increase in investor demand has supported house prices so far and may continue to provide a floor for them. What role will these forces play going forward? I think house prices will continue to rise, as the supply of existing homes on the market will remain quite tight. I do not believe that a flood of houses on the market from households that are currently underwater or from bank REO is likely to materialize or to be sufficient to outpace growing demand. As house price gains continue, more underwater homeowners will regain a position of positive equity in their homes. House price increases of 10 percent or less would be sufficient for about 40 percent of underwater homeowners to regain positive equity; presumably, some subset of those homeowners will be interested in selling their homes. If the majority of newly above-water sellers exit homeownership, they could create a substantial increase in overall supply and change the trajectory of house prices. But I think it is much more likely that many of them will also purchase a home in the same market, perhaps moving up to a larger home or downsizing to a smaller one. In that case, they would create additional demand as well as supply. And, in any event, the sales would provide more clarity about the level of house prices and increase liquidity in these markets. The weight of the shadow inventory--homes in the process of foreclosure or loans 90 days or more past due--on home prices is likely to wane as the number of loans entering the foreclosure pipeline declines and those already in the pipeline resolve. I think the nature and duration of the effect on prices will vary across the country, depending on the location of the shadow inventory and the speed of its resolution. Some evidence of this relationship can be found by comparing the relative performance of house prices in states where foreclosures are processed through the court system (judicial states) with performance in states where foreclosures do not go through the courts (nonjudicial states). Through mid-2012, house prices fell further in nonjudicial states than in judicial states, likely in part because the faster nonjudicial foreclosure process boosted the for-sale inventory in those states. Since that time, though, prices have moved back up in nonjudicial states, as the inventory was worked down while prices drifted lower in judicial states as inventory accumulated. Over time, the shadow inventory is becoming more concentrated in states with the slower judicial foreclosure processes and will likely continue to damp house prices in those states. Nonetheless, the specific dynamics going forward will depend on the pace at which these properties are put on the market for sale. Investor activity is difficult to predict. As house prices rise, some investors may no longer find purchasing homes to be a profitable enterprise. Other investors may want to lock in their gains and sell properties. The prospect of steady rental income and possible further capital gains, though, will likely continue to be attractive to many investors. In addition, I suspect that the development of large-scale rental of single-family homes as an asset class has gained enough traction with investors to continue in some form. For the housing recovery to gain true momentum, however, demand for housing among owner-occupiers must increase. As I noted earlier, household sentiment toward homebuying, as measured by households' assessments of purchasing conditions and by homebuyer traffic, appears to be on an upswing and should gradually strengthen demand. But I expect the strongest impetus to recovery to come from pent-up demand for housing in the form of household formation. Between 2006 and 2011, roughly 550,000 new households formed per year, on net, significantly fewer than the 1.35 million per year over the previous five years. Indeed, household formation from 2006 to 2011 appears to have been far lower than in any other five-year period since at least the mid-1960s.8 Federal Reserve staff research indicates that this decline in household formation largely reflects the weak labor market, especially among younger adults. If you have an adult son or daughter still living at home because he or she can't find a job, it might not surprise you to know that the number of individuals aged 18 to 30 living with older family members increased between 2006 and 2010 by over 1 million more than would be expected by the demographic trend.9In this downturn, the unemployment rate among younger adults rose by more than among the population as a whole. And when they are unemployed or have low incomes, younger individuals are particularly likely to live with their parents or older family members rather than moving out on their own. As the unemployment rate continues to decline--albeit likely at a slower pace than any of us would like--household formation and housing demand should increase. One model suggests that household formation could increase to 1-1/2 million or more per year. If, as seems likely, however, many of these new households rent rather than buy their homes, the effect on rental housing could be stronger than for owner-occupied homes, and applications for mortgages to purchase homes might recover only slowly. Evidence to date of an increase in home purchases by owner-occupiers--as opposed to investors--is scarce. The most discouraging evidence comes from purchase mortgage originations. Data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) indicate that in 2011, purchase mortgage originations hit their lowest level since the early 1990s. According to Federal Reserve staff estimates, purchase originations remained near these subdued levels in 2012 even as mortgage rates hit historic lows. The drop in purchase mortgage originations, although widespread, has been most pronounced among borrowers with low credit scores. For example, between 2007 and 2012, purchase originations fell by about 30 percent for borrowers with credit scores above 780, compared with a fall of about 90 percent for borrowers with credit scores between 620 and 680. Originations are virtually nonexistent for borrowers with credit scores below 620. Whether this pattern stems from tight supply or from weak demand among borrowers with lower credit scores, it has disturbing implications for potential new households. Younger individuals--who have seen the greatest drop in household formation--have, on average, credit scores that are more than 50 points lower than those of older individuals, a difference that existed even before the recession. Staff analysis comparing first-time homebuying in recent years with historical levels underscores the contraction in credit supply. From late 2009 to late 2011, the fraction of individuals under 40 years of age getting a mortgage for the first time was about half of what it was in the early 2000s.10The drop was especially pronounced for individuals with low credit scores and remained large even after controlling for local unemployment rates and for measures of the individual's demand for credit--a result indicating that tight credit supply is an important factor. As I noted earlier, household formation has been particularly weak among young individuals, who are also a large part of the potential first-time homebuyer population. Many of these young individuals have relatively weak credit records and are more likely to have had a recent spell of unemployment. Our staff analysis highlights how tight credit conditions are for such individuals in the current environment. In the early 2000s, about one-third of first-time homebuyers under the age of 40 had credit scores below 620, and another one-fourth had scores between 620 and 680. Today, many of these individuals would have a difficult time obtaining mortgage credit. Why Is Mortgage Credit So Tight?Why are conditions still so tight for these potential first-time homebuyers, and when might they return to normal? As I'll discuss next, the mortgage market is reacting to a variety of economic, market, and regulatory issues that may not be present in other lending markets. So it's difficult to predict what a "normal" mortgage market will look like when things settle down. After the crisis we have just experienced, I am pretty sure that we don't want the market to return to the lending environment of the pre-crisis boom times. But I also don't think it would be a good idea to go back to the quite restrictive credit conditions of the early 1980s. Part of the tightening in mortgage credit standards is the result of lender fears about the economy and the trajectory of house prices. Of respondents who reported tightening mortgage lending standards in the April 2012 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, more than 80 percent identified concerns about the economy or house prices as a factor in their decision. As the economic recovery continues, lenders should gain confidence that mortgage loans will perform well, and they should expand their lending accordingly. Credit for potential home purchasers with lower credit scores--in particular, the first-time homebuyers I discussed earlier--has likely also been affected by capacity constraints of mortgage lenders. As most of you know very well, the mortgage industry has been operating near its capacity. Although purchase originations have been subdued, refinancing originations, according to staff estimates, have responded to record-low interest rates by more than doubling from mid-2011 to the end of 2012. The ratio of refinance applications to the number of real estate credit employees--a measure of capacity constraints--has been at levels near those seen during the record 2003 refinancing boom. And, at the same time, each loan takes longer to process, as all elements of an application are now fully documented. Capacity may be slow to expand, as hiring and training additional staff takes time and some lenders may judge the boom as likely to be too short lived to justify the cost. Indeed, the number of real estate credit employees, as measured by the Bureau of Labor and Statistics, has only edged up over the past year. When capacity constraints are binding, lenders may manage the surge in refinancing demand by holding mortgage rates high relative to lenders' funding costs. That would explain the pattern observed during refinance booms, such as the one in 2003, when mortgage rates fell more slowly than yields on mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Also, when MBS yields drop sharply, as occurred in September 2012 when the Federal Reserve announced its most recent MBS purchase program, the mortgage rate may take time to adjust as a result of both capacity issues and the need to process loans with rate locks in place. Furthermore, when refinancing demand is high, lenders have less incentive to pursue harder-to-complete or less profitable loan applications. In the current environment, refinance applications by high-credit-quality borrowers--many of whom may have refinanced repeatedly as rates have fallen over the past couple of years--are likely the easiest to complete. And refinances under the revised Home Affordable Refinance Program, require substantially less documentation than other loans. It is possible that the abundance of these applications may have had the unintended effect of crowding out borrowers with lower credit scores, whose applications may be more time consuming to process. Indeed, staff research suggests that the increase in the refinance workload during the past 18 months appears to be associated with a 50 percent decrease in purchase originations among borrowers with credit scores between 620 and 680 and a 15 percent decrease among borrowers with credit scores between 680 and 720. Purchase originations among borrowers with higher credit scores appear to be affected to only a small degree. Any crowding-out effect that does exist due to capacity constraints should start to unwind if mortgage rates stay at the current levels or rise, in which case the current refinancing boom will begin to run out of steam. Lenders might then ease credit conditions to fill declining refinance pipelines with additional purchase volume. At the same time, as lenders gain more confidence in the strength of the economic recovery and the upswing in house prices, their outlook for home-purchase originations may brighten, making them more confident in easing standards or increasing capacity. Even so, there are still a number of nonmarket forces at work that could make lenders more cautious than normal. For example, lenders remain concerned about the risk that they will be required to repurchase defaulted loans from the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs)--the so-called putback risk. The ability to hold lenders accountable for poorly underwritten loans is a significant protection for taxpayers. However, if lenders are unsure about the conditions under which they will be required to repurchase loans sold to the GSEs, they may shy away from originating loans to borrowers whose risk profiles indicate a higher likelihood of default. The Federal Housing Finance Agency launched an important initiative last year to clarify the liabilities associated with representations and warranties, but so far, those efforts do not appear to have been sufficient to keep putback risk from weighing on the mortgage market. Mortgage servicing standards, particularly for delinquent loans, are more stringent than in the past due to settlement actions and consent orders. Servicing rules recently released by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) will extend many of these standards to all lenders. These standards remedy past abuses and provide important protections to borrowers, but they also increase the cost of servicing nonperforming loans. Under current servicing compensation arrangements, servicers receive the same monthly servicing fee for the routine processing of current loans as they do for the more expensive processing of defaulted loans, a model that assumes that the higher profits on routine processing will offset the cost of servicing delinquent loans. However, this compensation model, coupled with higher default servicing costs, may instead make lenders less willing to extend credit to lower-credit-quality borrowers, who are more likely to default. A change to servicer compensation models, especially for default servicing, could alleviate some of the concern about making these loans, albeit at higher costs to some borrowers. Another key factor contributing to mortgage lender caution is uncertainty about the ultimate regulatory environment. Regulatory decisions will work individually and collectively to shape the cost and availability of mortgage credit in the future. So it is important for policymakers to think carefully about their individual decisions as well as how those decisions will work within the full constellation of mortgage regulation. Regulatory changes are being implemented to ensure that borrowers have more protections and lenders take into account the costs that imprudent mortgage lending can impose on communities, the financial system, and the economy. The accompanying effect, however, may be tighter credit standards, especially for lower-credit-quality borrowers, than prevailed during most of the past decade. It will be up to policymakers to find the right balance between consumer safety and financial stability, on the one hand, and availability and cost of credit, on the other. The CFPB took an important step toward resolving regulatory uncertainty when it released a host of rules in January, including rules on ability-to-repay requirements, the definition of a qualified mortgage (QM), loan officer compensation, and servicing standards. The Federal Reserve and other agencies are in the process of moving forward on proposed rulemakings that would implement revised regulatory capital requirements and the requirements for risk retention mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, which include an exemption for mortgages that meet the definition of qualified residential mortgages (QRMs). These and other prudential rules, taken together with the CFPB rules, will further shape the economics of mortgage lending. For example, bank capital rules will specify the amount of capital a bank must hold against certain mortgages. The risk retention rule will specify which loans in the QM universe qualify as QRM loans and therefore are not subject to risk retention when securitized. The risk retention rules will also define how securitizers must meet the risk retention requirement for mortgages that are not QRMs, and the cost associated with this requirement may affect mortgage costs. I won't comment today on the rulemakings that are still under way. However, I believe that, as we layer on additional requirements, it is important to think about the implications of the rules that have already been finalized. So I would like to share my assessment of some potential implications of the QM rule. To provide a little context, the QM rule is part of a larger ability-to-repay rulemaking that requires lenders to make a reasonable and good faith determination that the borrower can repay the loan. Many of the rules' requirements for verification of income, assets, and other payment obligations are probably standard practice for lenders today. But having the rules in place, reinforced with increased legal risk for lenders that do not meet the rules' requirements, helps ensure that these practices continue, even as the economy improves and competition heats up. Borrowers who cannot afford their loans can sue the lender for violations of the ability-to-repay rules and claim monetary damages. If the original lender sells or securitizes the loan, the borrower can claim these damages at any time in a foreclosure action taken by the lender or any assignee. If the mortgage meets the QM standard, however, the lender receives some degree of protection from such potential lawsuits because it is presumed that the borrower had the ability to repay the loan. Loans outside the QM box may become more costly for lenders and borrowers for at least three reasons. The first reason is the possible increase in foreclosure losses and litigation costs. Although the expected losses from this litigation are likely to be small, the full extent of the costs and of lenders' legal liability will become known only after the initial round of ability-to-repay suits are settled by the courts. The second reason is that mortgages that do not meet the QM definition also, by definition, will not meet the future QRM standard, and so lenders will be required to retain some of the risk if these loans are securitized. This requirement may increase costs and limit the size of the market. The third reason is that investors may be wary of investing in securities collateralized by non-QM loans because it is difficult to gauge the risks. A borrower's ability to repay a loan that is not a QM may be based on "soft" information or on idiosyncratic factors that are difficult for the investor to observe or monitor. Investors may respond to this information asymmetry by requiring a higher risk premium or by refusing to purchase these securities altogether. For all of these reasons, the non-QM market could become small and illiquid, which would further increase the cost of these loans. Loans eligible to be purchased, insured, or guaranteed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, or the U.S. Department of Agriculture are automatically designated as QMs. This provision is slated to end no later than January 2021. As long as such loans remain an outsized share of mortgage originations, the QM rule may have less of an effect on the availability of mortgage credit. As more private capital returns to the mortgage market, though, two aspects of the QM rule will have a more significant effect on access to credit: the debt-to-income (DTI) requirement and the provisions that affect interest rates, points, and fees. Turning first to DTI, under the QM definition, borrower payments on all debts and some recurring obligations--such as mortgages, credit card debt, student loans, auto loans, alimony, and child support--must be 43 percent or less of borrower income. To gauge the possible number of borrowers affected by this requirement, the Board staff looked at households in the Survey of Consumer Finances that purchased a home with mortgage credit in the two years preceding the survey. In the 2001, 2004, and 2010 waves of the survey, about 15 to 20 percent of these households had payments that exceeded 43 percent of income, although the share spiked to 40 percent in the 2007 survey.11The households with high DTIs tended to have lower income, fewer financial assets, and higher mortgage loan-to-value ratios than households with lower payment ratios. Of course, some of these households may be able to reduce their DTIs by purchasing a less expensive house or by delaying home purchase for the time it takes to pay off some existing debt. Nonetheless, the borrowers most affected by this aspect of the rule are likely also those who currently face tight access to credit, such as first-time or less-creditworthy borrowers. The QM definition may also affect lenders' ability to charge for the risks of originating loans to borrowers who are more likely to default. For example, lenders might compensate for this risk by charging a higher interest rate on the loan. However, if lenders originate a QM with an annual percentage rate (APR) that is 150 basis points or more above the rate available to the highest-quality borrowers (known as a higher-priced loan), lenders receive less protection against lawsuits claiming violation of the ability-to-repay and QM rules. The extent to which this lower level of legal protection (the "rebuttable presumption of compliance") will affect lenders' willingness to originate such loans is still unclear. Very few of these higher-priced loans are being originated currently, reflecting the weak mortgage demand and tight underwriting standards that I discussed earlier. The HMDA data suggest that only 4 percent of mortgages originated in 2011 carried APRs this high. However, as demand picks up and lending standards ease, the number of potentially higher-priced loans may increase. In 2006--admittedly, not one of the best years for prudent mortgage underwriting in this country--about 25 percent of conventional purchase mortgage originations were considered higher priced.12 Lenders who prefer to price for risk through points and fees rather than increases in rates also face constraints in originating QMs. Points and fees on a QM loan may not exceed 3 percent of the loan amount, with higher caps available for loans smaller than $100,000. The "points and fees" definition has been expanded from its original definition in the Truth in Lending Act and now includes, for example, compensation paid to the loan originator in the form of a higher interest rate on the loan. Unfortunately, data on points and fees are limited, so it is difficult to determine how many potential borrowers might be affected by this requirement. To be clear, many borrowers were overcharged or defrauded by lenders in the past decade, and these abuses were concentrated among the more vulnerable parts of the population. It is a positive development if new regulations make such abuses more difficult. Still, the costs associated with mortgage lending, especially to borrowers more likely to default, have increased, and if lenders cannot charge enough to recoup these costs, they may not be willing to make the loans at all. As a result, the QM-related incentives against charging higher interest rates, points, or fees will likely affect more loans than in the past and may, in turn, have a greater effect on credit availability for higher-risk borrowers. To bring this discussion back to the effect on the housing market, I think the ability of newly formed households, which are more likely to have lower incomes or weaker credit scores, to access the mortgage market will make a big difference in the shape of the recovery. Economic improvement will cause household formation to increase, but if credit is hard to get, these will be rental rather than owner-occupied households. And without first-time homebuyers, the move-up market will be sluggish, new and existing home sales will be more subdued, and purchase mortgage volumes will return only slowly. As I've noted, credit availability to newly formed households is being affected by a variety of economic, market, and regulatory factors. Some of these factors are likely to ease, whereas others will be more permanent. As a result, this housing recovery may look different than previous ones. In particular, tighter mortgage credit and sustained investor interest in single-family rental properties may result in a lower homeownership rate than in the past. However, the same regulations that could contribute to tighter mortgage credit should also ensure that more of those homeownership experiences succeed. The Role of Monetary PolicyI would like to conclude with a brief discussion of the role of monetary policy in the housing recovery. The fact that mortgage purchase originations have remained nearly flat at a time when interest rates have hit historic lows naturally raises the question of whether monetary policy is effective in stimulating the housing market and thereby the broader economy. As I will explain next, I believe that the answer is yes. Monetary policy has clearly set the stage for a revival of the housing market. Record-low interest rates have sparked interest in homebuying. Monetary policy has contributed significantly to the recent improvement in the labor market and thereby begun to ease one of the main sources of weak housing demand. Monetary policy has likely also supported investor demand for purchasing houses, as the expected return on an investment in housing is more likely to exceed the low yields available on Treasury securities and other debt instruments. Households may be making the same calculus as investors. The interest-rate-sensitive housing market is affected by all of the tools of monetary policy, but purchases of agency MBS have a more direct effect on the mortgage market. So, without delving deeply into monetary policy generally, I would like to make a few observations about the efficacy and costs of MBS purchases specifically. In doing so, I want to reiterate that these are my views and may not be in accord with those of my colleagues on the FOMC. In many ways, purchases of MBS have the same downward effect on the general level of long-term interest rates as purchases of other longer-term securities. But, in addition, purchases of agency MBS reduce the spread between Treasury and MBS yields and thus, compared with purchases of Treasury securities, have somewhat larger effects on mortgage rates. This larger effect was especially true in the first round of purchases in 2009 when investor uncertainty about the degree of government support for agency MBS was quite high.13MBS purchases also influence MBS yields by affecting the cost of hedging the risk (known as convexity risk) that mortgages prepay more quickly when rates decline or more slowly when rates increase, because, unlike some mortgage market investors, the Federal Reserve does not hedge such risk. Lower MBS yields result in lower mortgage rates, which can spur the economy through elevated home-purchase and refinancing activity. But this effect is not yet fully transmitted to the economy, as the difference between MBS yields and mortgage rates is still somewhat wide and, as I discussed earlier, tight credit has prevented many households from accessing the low rates. Any improvement in credit conditions would thus act to improve the efficacy of MBS purchases. Similarly, policies that constrain mortgage lending or increase its cost would reduce efficacy. I think the additional impetus to housing from MBS purchases is appropriate for at least three reasons. First, the housing market has suffered extraordinary damage during the past few years. Second, even with the recent positive signs, housing investment has contributed far less to economic growth than in a typical recovery. And, third, even as terms and standards on other types of credit have eased, standards for mortgage credit remain quite tight. While the purchase of agency MBS has some special efficacy in supporting housing markets, the peculiarities of the MBS market itself present some potential market functioning issues that bear monitoring. The MBS market is not as deep or as liquid as the Treasury market, and the total size of the market is not growing as quickly. As refinancing activity slows, the gross pace of new MBS issuance could slow as well, and Federal Reserve purchases at the current level could leave an even larger footprint in the secondary mortgage market. So it is entirely possible that it might be appropriate at some point to adjust the pace of MBS purchases in response to developments in primary or secondary mortgage markets. Within the context of the Committee's judgment about the appropriate overall level of monetary accommodation, such an adjustment could result in an increase or decrease in the pace of total asset purchases, or it could lead to a change in the composition of purchases. Finally, the statement of exit strategy principles provided in the June 2011 FOMC minutes contemplates the sale of MBS once the Committee has begun to remove policy accommodation in order to return the System Open Market Account to an all-Treasury portfolio.14As our holdings of MBS become larger in both absolute terms and in relation to the overall supply of agency MBS outstanding, we could reach a point where market functioning concerns begin to outweigh the efficacy of such purchases. Or we might conclude that sales of MBS in volumes sufficient to meet the parameters of the exit strategy principles might create significant market disruptions. In either case, I think we should consider alternatives, such as holding the securities for longer or allowing them to roll off more gradually. ConclusionIn conclusion, I am optimistic that the housing recovery will continue to take root and expand. While low mortgage rates are helping support the recovery, I believe it will be the pent-up demand of household formation unleashed by improving economic conditions that will provide real momentum. However, the strength of this momentum will be determined by credit availability to these new households, an availability that may be much slower to return as mortgage market participants assess the regulatory, market, and economic environment. I think that if such credit is not readily available, the housing recovery will still continue, but the mix of owner-occupied and rental housing and the level of mortgage originations might be quite different. Thank you very much for your attention this afternoon. I would be happy to take any questions that you might have. 1. House price information is from staff calculations based on CoreLogic data.Return to text 2. More details on homebuilder sentiment are available on theNational Association of Home Builderswebsite.Return to text 3. Household reports are from staff calculations based on results of the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers.Return to text 4. More details on real estate agent assessments of market conditions are available at theNational Association of Realtorswebsite.Return to text 5. A home enters a lender's REO inventory when the lender completes foreclosure proceedings or otherwise obtains legal control of a property. Percentages are from staff calculations based on data provided by CoreLogic.Return to text 6. Elliot Anenberg and Edward Kung (2012), "Estimating the Size and Source of Price Declines due to Nearby Foreclosures," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-84 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).Return to text 7. The finding is from data provided by CoreLogic.Return to text 8. The finding is from staff calculations based on data from the Housing Vacancy Survey supplement of the Current Population Survey. See U.S. Department of Commerce (2013), "Housing Vacancy Survey," U.S. Census Bureau.Return to text 9. The information is from staff calculations based on data from the American Community Survey. See U.S. Department of Commerce (2013), "American Community Survey," U.S. Census Bureau.Return to text 10. The finding is from staff calculations based on data from Equifax.Return to text 11. Homeowner DTI is measured at the time of the survey, not at the time of loan origination, and may understate the number of affected households if household finances improve after the purchase of a home. A recent study by CoreLogic suggests that 25 percent of mortgages originated in 2010 had DTIs greater than 43 percent. See Sam Khater (2013), "The Mortgage Market Impact of Qualified Mortgage Regulation (PDF),"The MarketPulse, vol. 2 (February), pp. 3-6.Return to text 12. The data that would permit the calculation of this share for earlier years are not available.Return to text 13. See, for example, Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore (2011), "Did the Federal Reserve's MBS Purchase Program Lower Mortgage Rates?"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 58 (July), pp. 498-514.Return to text 14. The System Open Market Account contains the Federal Reserve's holdings of U.S. Treasury and federal agency securities as well as selected other assets accumulated in the process of implementing monetary policy. For the exit strategy principles, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 21-22, 2011," press release, July 12.Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Institute of International Bankers 2013 Washington Conference, Washington, D.C. Today I will discuss "too big to fail" and the ongoing work since the financial crisis to end it.1More than three years into this effort, there have been sweeping reforms to the regulation of large financial organizations in the United States and around the world. Substantial proportions of the new rules are designed to end the practice of bailing out such firms with taxpayer money. The too-big-to-fail reform project is massive in scope. In my view, it holds real promise. But the project will take years to complete. Success is not assured. In the meantime, some urge the adoption of more intrusive reforms, such as a return to Glass-Steagall-style activity limits, more stringent limits on size or systemic footprint, or a requirement that the largest institutions break up into much smaller pieces. I believe that public discussion and evaluation of these ideas is important. At a minimum, we need to thoroughly understand these alternatives in case the existing reform project falters. It is worth noting that too big to fail is not simply about size. A big institution is "too big" when there is an expectation that government will do whatever it takes to rescue that institution from failure, thus bestowing an effective risk premium subsidy. Reforms to end too big to fail must address the causes of this expectation. In broad terms, these reforms seek to eliminate the expectation of bailouts in two ways--by significantly reducing the likelihood of systemic firm failures, and by greatly limiting the costs to society of such failures. When failures are unusual and the costs of such a failure are modest, the expectation at the heart of too big to fail will be substantially eliminated. My focus today is principally on the second of these two aspects of reform--containing the costs and systemic risks from failures, a goal being advanced by work to create a credible resolution authority. I hope you won't mind if I draw today on some of my own experiences over the years with too big to fail, beginning with my service at the Treasury Department during the Administration of President George H.W. Bush. I joined the Administration only a few years after the rescue of Continental Illinois, which is sometimes said to have codified the practice of too big to fail. In my years at Treasury, we faced a wave of well over 1,000 savings and loan and bank failures. That included the failure of the Bank of New England Corp., then the third largest bank failure in U.S. history.2It happened in January 1991, at a time of great stress in the financial system and the broader economy, and only days after 45 depository institutions in the region had been closed and 300,000 deposit accounts frozen.3My Treasury colleagues and I joined representatives of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Federal Reserve Board in a conference room on a Sunday morning. We came to understand that either the FDIC would protect all of the bank's depositors, without regard to deposit insurance limits, or there would likely be a run on all the money center banks the next morning--the first such run since 1933. We chose the first option, without dissent.4 In the summer of 1991, we faced the Salomon Brothers crisis. Salomon, a global investment bank, was one of the largest financial institutions in the United States, and the largest dealer in U.S. government securities. The firm came under severe market pressure after some of its traders were caught submitting phony bids in Treasury bond auctions. As recounted in harrowing detail in the book "The Snowball," Salomon came within hours of failure over a weekend in late August.5Salomon was clearly understood to be outside the safety net, and I recall no discussion of a government rescue. But the firm's failure would almost certainly have caused massive disruption in the markets. To this day, I am grateful that we resolved that crisis with neither a bailout nor a failure. Over 20 years later, both these events still frame the too big to fail reform agenda. Faced with the failure of a large commercial bank, we chose to extend the safety net rather than run the very real risk of a systemic depositor run. Our "near miss" with Salomon in 1991 presaged the enormous damage that would result from the failure of Lehman Brothers, another investment bank, in 2008. In fact, the dimension of the problem grew substantially over the years. Since 1991, the ratio of U.S. banking assets to annual gross domestic product in the United States has more than doubled, from 55 percent to 126 percent. Meanwhile, the percentage of those assets held by the largest three institutions has increased from 14 to 32 percent. Bailouts may have been more tolerable in the early 1990s when they were rare and their use for a failing bank was uncertain. That is no longer the case. Recent years have seen large and numerous bailouts as a result of the financial crisis. The public, the regulatory community, and large financial institutions themselves all agree now that too big to fail must end. As I said earlier, reforms to end too big to fail must wage the fight on two fronts. First, we need enhanced regulation to make large financial institution failures much less likely. Second, we need a credible mechanism to manage the failure of even the largest firms, without causing or amplifying a systemic crisis. Let's survey what has been proposed and implemented thus far in that two-front war on too big to fail. The U.S. and Global Efforts to Address Too Big to FailReducing the Probability of Default of Systemic Financial FirmsMuch has been done since the crisis to strengthen the regulation of large banking organizations. The highlights would begin with the Basel III capital and liquidity reforms, including the graduated risk-based capital surcharges for globally systemic financial firms. These reforms are in the process of implementation in the United States and elsewhere. In addition, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank) imposes on the largest financial institutions enhanced prudential standards and also requires central clearing of derivatives. And banking regulators have implemented enhanced supervisory measures such as stress testing and recovery planning. While these measures are not the primary focus of my remarks today, I believe that they collectively constitute a broad and well-structured agenda to strengthen the resilience of the financial system. The Federal Reserve and the rest of the regulatory community are working diligently to implement that agenda. Today, risk-based capital and leverage ratios for banks of all sizes have improved materially since 2009 and are significantly above their levels in the years preceding the crisis. The banking sector overall also has substantially improved its liquidity position over the past few years. The system is undeniably stronger than before the crisis.6 Reducing the Systemwide Loss Given Default of Systemic Financial FirmsIt is neither possible nor desirable to regulate large financial institutions so that they literally cannot fail. But regulation can limit the systemwide impact of such a failure. Let's review what has been done since the crisis to reduce the damage to the system from the failure of one of the very largest firms. Under Dodd-Frank, nearly all financial institution failures, including those of large, complex institutions, will continue to be addressed as they were before passage of the new law. The holding company will be resolved in bankruptcy. Operating subsidiary failures will continue to be treated either under bankruptcy or, where applicable, under specialized resolution schemes, including the Federal Deposit Insurance Act for banks and the Securities Investor Protection Act for securities firms. Dodd-Frank eliminated the authority used by the Federal Reserve and other regulators to bail out individual institutions during the crisis, including Bear Stearns, Citicorp, Bank of America and AIG. But Congress also recognized that there may be rare instances in which the failure of a large financial firm could threaten the financial stability of the United States. To empower regulators to handle such a failure without destabilizing the financial system or exposing taxpayers to loss, Dodd-Frank created two important new regulatory tools. First, the Act requires large bank holding companies and nonbank financial firms designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council to submit a resolution plan or "living will" for their rapid and orderly resolution under the Bankruptcy Code. Second, the Act created a new Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA) as a backup to resolution in an ordinary bankruptcy. The largest bank holding companies submitted their first annual "living wills" to the Federal Reserve and the FDIC last summer. The initial round has yielded valuable information that is being used to identify and assess key challenges to resolvability under the Bankruptcy Code (Title I plans). The Title I plans will help to focus firm efforts to mitigate those challenges so that bankruptcy may be a viable resolution strategy for large institutions. These plans will also support development of the FDIC's backup resolution plans under OLA (Title II plans). The resolution plan process is iterative by design. There is still much work to be done by firms, domestic and foreign regulators, and national governments. We remain committed to ensuring that this work is done quickly but responsibly in the coming years. That brings us to the question of special resolution regimes. In October 2011, immediately before I was nominated to the Federal Reserve Board, I helped design a public simulation of the failure of a large financial institution under OLA. The cast included former senior government officials as well as leading experts from the private sector. The FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and the industry offered their assistance as we developed the simulation. From the outset, my earlier experience had led me to be skeptical about the possibility of resolving one of the largest financial companies without destabilizing the financial system. Today's global financial institutions are of staggering size and complexity. I believed that an attempt to resolve one of these firms--a firm with multiple business lines carried out through countless legal entities, across many jurisdictions and different legal systems--could easily spin out of control. The result could be greatly increased uncertainty for creditors and counterparties, which could trigger or accelerate a run on the failed institution that could quickly spread and destabilize the whole system. As we developed the simulation, however, I came around to the view that it is possible to resolve a large, global financial institution. What changed my mind was the FDIC's innovative "single-point-of-entry" approach, which was just coming into focus in 2011. This approach is a classic simplifier, making theoretically possible something that seemed impossibly complex. Under single point of entry, the FDIC will be appointed receiver of only the top-tier parent holding company of the failed financial group. Promptly after the parent holding company is placed into receivership, the FDIC will transfer the assets of the parent company (primarily its investments in subsidiaries) to a bridge holding company. Equity claims of the failed parent company's shareholders will be wiped out, and claims of its unsecured debt holders will be written down as necessary to reflect any losses in the receivership that the shareholders cannot cover. To capitalize the bridge holding company and the operating subsidiaries, and to permit transfer of ownership and control of the bridge company back to private hands, the FDIC will exchange the remaining claims of unsecured creditors of the parent for equity and/or debt claims of the bridge company. If necessary, the FDIC would provide temporary liquidity to the bridge company until the "bail-in" of the failed parent company's creditors can be accomplished. It is crucial to recognize how this approach addresses the problem of runs. Single point of entry is designed to focus losses on the shareholders and long-term debt holders of the failed parent and to produce a well-capitalized bridge holding company in place of the failed parent. The critical operating subsidiaries would be well capitalized, and would remain open for business. There would be much reduced incentives for creditors or customers of the operating subsidiaries to pull away, or for regulators to ring-fence or take other extraordinary measures. If the process can be fully worked out and understood by market participants, regulators, and the general public, it should work to resolve even the biggest institution without starting or accelerating a run, and without exposing taxpayers to loss. Single point of entry has important features in common with Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization. The principal differences in favor of OLA are the greater speed at which a firm can be placed into a resolution process and stabilized, the ability to avoid disruptive creditor actions, and the availability of temporary backup liquidity support to continue critical operations. Some have proposed changes to adapt the Bankruptcy Code to the purpose of handling the failure of a large financial institution--for example, to allow the government to provide debtor in possession (DIP) financing, or to allow a firm's primary regulator to initiate a bankruptcy filing.7At a minimum, these proposals would further limit the need for OLA to the rarest of cases. As the development of the single-point-of-entry approach continues, it is important to continue to reduce the uncertainties that creditors and other market participants would face in connection with their potential treatment in OLA. Questions remain about how the FDIC will apply its broad statutory discretion. For example: How will the FDIC exercise its discretion to dissimilarly treat creditors of the same class? How will a creditor's "minimum right of recovery" be determined? And how will the FDIC value the failed firm? Stability demands that market participants have a reasonable degree of certainty about their treatment in OLAex ante. This is an important concern. To reduce uncertainty, the FDIC is working to provide market participants as much clarity as is feasible regarding its contemplated approach to the failure of a systemic U.S. firm. Regulators will always need to maintain some degree of flexibility to manage the evolving failure of a systemic financial firm. But greater clarity would increase the predictability of this new process, and thus reduce the likelihood that creditors, counterparties, and customers would pull away from even a well-capitalized institution in OLA. I strongly support these efforts to provide more clarity to market participants. Two remaining challenges loom large: ensuring that all systemic financial firms have sufficient unsecured long-term debt at the parent level to recapitalize a bridge holding company in OLA; and mitigating cross-border impediments to resolution of a multinational financial firm. In consultation with the FDIC, the Federal Reserve is considering the pros and cons of a regulatory requirement that systemic U.S. financial firms maintain a minimum amount of long-term unsecured debt. Such a requirement would help ensure that equity and long-term debt holders of a systemic firm can bear potential future losses at the firm and sufficiently capitalize a bridge holding company. The cross-border activities of large institutions present another set of challenges to an orderly resolution. OLA is limited in its applicability to U.S.-chartered entities. Subsidiaries and bank branches of a U.S.-based systemic firm chartered in other countries could be ring-fenced or wound down separately under the insolvency laws of those countries, if foreign authorities did not have full confidence that local interests would be protected. Certain OLA stabilization mechanisms, including the one-day stay provision with respect to over-the-counter derivatives and other qualified financial contracts, may not apply outside the United States. Accordingly, counterparties to qualified financial contracts with the foreign subsidiaries and branches of a U.S. firm may have contractual rights and substantial economic incentives to terminate their transactions as soon as the U.S. parent enters an OLA resolution. Today, regulators and the industry are focused on the potential for addressing this concern through modifications to contractual cross-default practices and other means. Further progress on these cross-border challenges will require significant coordination among U.S. regulators and the key foreign central banks and supervisors for the largest financial firms. For example, the FDIC and the Bank of England are deeply engaged in this important work, as recently described in their joint paper applying the single-point-of-entry framework to the resolution of a globally active, U.S. - or U.K.-headquartered banking firm.8The FDIC also has an active dialogue with the European Commission. These challenges will also require foreign jurisdictions to have national resolution regimes consistent with the Financial Stability Board's "Key Attributes."9 Assessing Progress on Too Big to FailIt seems to me that efforts by U.S. and global regulators to fight too big to fail are generally on the right track. The Basel III and Dodd-Frank reforms designed to reduce the probability of failure of large banking firms are sensible and, for the most part, targeted at the causes of the crisis. They are being implemented thoughtfully and effectively. And I believe that those Financial Stability Board and Dodd-Frank reforms designed to permit the resolution of systemic firms without taxpayer exposure or undue disruption are very promising. That said, much of the work lies ahead. The critics also deserve a fair hearing. Criticism of the current U.S. and global anti-too-big-to-fail policies generally takes one of two tacks. Some of the criticism argues that Dodd-Frank--particularly the OLA mechanism-- enshrines taxpayer bailouts. I do not believe that it does. OLA requires by its terms that the losses of any financial company placed into FDIC receivership be borne by the private sector stockholders and creditors of the firm. Single point of entry can work without exposing taxpayers to loss. Although the FDIC has authority to provide temporary liquidity to a failed firm, any costs incurred by the FDIC in resolving the firm must be recovered completely from either the assets of the firm or assessments on the financial industry. The failed firm's investors, and, if necessary, other large financial firms, will bear any costs. That is "bail-in," not "bailout." Another strand of criticism argues that reforms do not go far enough and calls for more activity limits on banking firms, for limiting their size or systemic footprint, or for simply breaking them up. Activity LimitsSome have urged the resurrection of the 1930s-era Glass-Steagall prohibitions--that is, preventing the affiliation of commercial banks with investment banks. This proposal seems neither directly related to the causes of the financial crisis, nor likely to help end too big to fail. The systemic run that led to the financial crisis began with traditional investment banks, such as Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers. The activities of these firms were, of course, not affected by the repeal of Glass-Steagall. Commercial banking firms now engage in activities traditionally associated with investment banking, such as securities underwriting. The combination of these activities under a single corporate umbrella did not contribute meaningfully to the financial crisis. In my view, losses at the commercial banks were more importantly a consequence of bad credit underwriting and the failure of risk management systems to keep up with innovation and the explosive growth in securitization--developments that were not fundamentally driven by the repeal of Glass-Steagall. Size LimitsThere are also calls to further limit the size or systemic footprint of financial firms. Limits of this nature require, and deserve, careful analysis. Two provisions of existing law already impose size caps on U.S. banking firms. One limits acquisitions of banks by any bank holding company that controls more than 10 percent of the total insured deposits in the United States, and a second, added by Dodd-Frank, forbids acquisitions by any financial firm that controls more than 10 percent of the total liabilities of financial firms in the United States. In addition, Dodd-Frank added a new requirement that banking regulators consider "risk to the stability of the U.S. banking or financial system" in evaluating any proposed merger or acquisition by a bank or bank holding company. Critics argue that these restrictions are inadequate and subject to exceptions that continue to allow even the largest firms to grow, both organically and through acquisitions. The simplest forms of this idea would put a further absolute limit on the amount of balance sheet assets or liabilities, or on the risk-weighted assets of a financial firm. Capping the size or systemic footprint of each financial firm would limit the adverse systemic effects of the failure of any single firm. Smaller, simpler financial firms should be easier to manage and supervise in life, and easier to resolve in death. One option would be to impose a cap on a large U.S. banking firm's short-term non-deposit liabilities as a fraction of U.S. GDP. This form of proposal would allow such a firm to continue to increase assets and diversify its activities to achieve potentially available economies of scale and scope, so long as the firm finances expansion through more stable forms of funding.10 Any new size limits should be designed to limit systemic footprint while minimizing costs to efficiency. This will be a challenging task. The question of whether the benefits of further size limits would exceed any losses in scale economies and other efficiencies is the subject of ongoing research and debate.11 Break-upSome critics want to get right to the business of breaking up the big banks into smaller, more manageable, more easily resolvable pieces.12At the heart of this proposal is the thought that no financial institution should be so large or complex that it cannot be allowed to fail, like any other private business, with losses to its equity holders and creditors, and consequences for senior management. If the largest institutions were too big to fail during the financial crisis, why not make them smaller? Today, the market still appears to provide a subsidy, of changing and uncertain amount, to very large banks to account for the possibility of a government bailout in the event of failure.13This subsidy, in the form of lower funding costs, may encourage "too-bigness." There would be substantial externalities to a large bank failure as well. The market needs to believe--and it needs to be the case--that every private financial institution can fail and be resolved under our laws without imposing undue costs on society. The current reform agenda is designed to accomplish just that, through two channels.First,it is intended to substantially reduce the likelihood of failure through a broad range of stronger regulation, including higher capital and liquidity standards, stress tests and recovery planning among other reforms. Second,it is intended to minimize the externalities from failure by making it possible to resolve a large financial institution without taxpayer exposure and without uncontainable disruption. If these reforms achieve their purpose, in my view they would be preferable to a government-imposed break-up, which would likely involve arbitrary judgments, efficiency losses, and a difficult transition. ConclusionToday, few ideas can be less controversial than ending too big to fail. The question is "How?", and there are differing opinions on that. In Titles I and II of Dodd-Frank, Congress has given the regulators a game plan for ending too big to fail. The regulators, including the Federal Reserve, are forcefully implementing the plan we have been given. My own view is that the framework of current reforms is promising, and should be given time to work. In any case, too big to fail must end, even if more intrusive measures prove necessary in the end. Thank you very much. 1. The thoughts that follow are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of my colleagues on the Board of Governors. I am grateful to Felton Booker, Barbara Bouchard, Michael Gibson, John Maggs, and Mark Van Der Weide for numerous helpful conversations and suggestions.Return to text 2. Ranked by total assets at the time of failure, in 1991 Bank of New England Corp. ($21.7 billion) was the largest U.S. bank failure following Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust ($40 billion; 1984) and First Republic Bank ($32.5 billion; 1988).Return to text 3. See Thomas E. Pulkkinen and Eric S. Rosengren (1993), "Lessons from the Rhode Island Banking Crisis (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,New England Economic Review, May/June.Return to text 4. See FDIC (1997), "Bank of New England Corp. (PDF)," inManaging the Crisis: The FDIC and RTC Experience,Part II.Return to text 5. Alice Schroeder (2008),The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of Life(New York: Bantam Books).Return to text 6. See Ben S. Bernanke (2012), "Banks and Bank Lending: The State of Play," speech delivered at the 48th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, Illinois (via satellite), May 10.Return to text 7. See Kenneth E. Scott and John B. Taylor, eds. (2012),Bankruptcy Not Bailout: A Special Chapter 14(Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press).Return to text 8. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Bank of England (2012), "Resolving Globally Active, Systemically Important, Financial Institutions (PDF)" (December 10).Return to text 9. TheKey Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions (PDF)(Key Attributes) were adopted by the Financial Stability Board in November 2011 as a new international standard that sets out the core elements of an effective special resolution regime for systemically significant financial firms.Return to text 10. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), "Industry Structure and Systemic Risk Regulation," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution Conference on Structuring the Financial Industry to Enhance Economic Growth and Stability, Washington, D.C., December 4.Return to text 11. See Joseph P. Hughes and Loretta J. Mester (2011), "Who Said Large Banks Don't Experience Scale Economies? Evidence from a Risk-Return-Driven Cost Function (PDF)," Working Paper 11-27 (Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia); Richard Davies and Belinda Tracey (2012), "Too Big to be Efficient? The Impact of Implicit Funding Subsidies on Scale Economies in Banking (PDF)," Bank of England, June; David C. Wheelock and Paul W. Wilson (2009), "Do Large Banks have Lower Costs? New Estimates of Returns to Scale for U.S. Banks," Working Paper Series 2009-054E (St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, October); Andrew G. Haldane (2012), "On Being the Right Size (PDF)," speech delivered at the Institute of Economic Affairs' 22nd Annual Series, The Beesley Lectures, London, October 25Return to text 12. See Dean Baker (2010), "Why We Must Break Up the Banks,"The Guardian, April 7; and Bruno J. Navarro (2012), "Neil Barofsky: Breaking Up Big Banks ‘Necessary' (http://www.cnbc.com/id/48328948/Neil_Barofsky_Breaking_Up_Big_Banks_lsquoNecessaryrsquo)," CNBC, July 25 (accessed September 11, 2012). See also, Richard W. Fisher (2013), "Ending ‘Too Big to Fail': A Proposal for Reform Before it's Too Late (With Reference to Patrick Henry, Complexity and Reality)," speech delivered to the Committee for the Republic, Washington, D.C., January 16, which sets forth a proposal to limit banks to traditional commercial banking activities, restrict access to the Federal safety net to banks, and require affiliates of a bank to disclose to their customers that they are outside the Federal safety net.Return to text 13. See Joseph Noss and Rhiannon Sowerbutts (2012), "The Implicit Subsidy of Banks (PDF)," Bank of England Financial Stability Paper No. 15.Return to text
On March 11, 2013, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $3 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were pro-rated at 53.037 percent. Resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 except that all awards below $10,000 were rounded up to $10,000. The awarded deposits will settle on March 14, 2013, and will mature on April 11, 2013. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded deposits.
The Federal Reserve on Thursday announced it has approved the capital plans of 14 financial institutions in the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). Two other institutions received conditional approval, while the Federal Reserve objected to the plans of two firms. Strong capital levels help ensure that banking organizations have the ability to lend to households and businesses and to continue to meet their financial obligations, even in times of economic difficulty. The Federal Reserve in CCAR evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest bank holding companies, including the firms' proposed capital actions such as dividend payments and share buybacks and issuances. When considering an institution's capital plan, the Federal Reserve considers both qualitative and quantitative factors. These include a firm's capital ratios under severe economic and financial market stress, the strength of the firm's capital planning process, and the institution's plans to meet new Basel 3 capital requirements as they would be implemented in the United States. After the Federal Reserve objects to a capital plan, the institution may only make capital distributions with prior written approval from the Federal Reserve. "Now in its third year, the Federal Reserve's review of capital plans provides a regular, structured, and comparative way to promote and assess the capacity of large bank holding companies to understand and manage their capital positions, with particular emphasis on risk-measurement practices," Federal Reserve Gov. Daniel Tarullo said. "The financial crisis showed not only that regulators needed to increase capital requirements and conduct regular stress tests, but also that firms need strong internal processes to evaluate their own capital needs based on their individual risks and circumstances." The Federal Reserve can object to a capital plan based on qualitative or quantitative concerns, or both. The Federal Reserve can require new capital plans from an institution at any time to require improvements in the capital planning process, or if there is a change in condition of an individual institution or in the economy that could potentially lead to a change in a firm's capital position. The Federal Reserve did not object to the capital plans for American Express Company; Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; Capital One Financial Corporation; Citigroup, Inc.; Fifth Third Bancorp; KeyCorp; Morgan Stanley; The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.; Regions Financial Corporation; State Street Corporation; SunTrust Banks, Inc.; U.S. Bancorp; and Wells Fargo & Company. The Federal Reserve did not object to the capital plans for The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and JP Morgan Chase & Co., but required the two institutions to submit new capital plans by the end of the third quarter to address weaknesses in their capital planning processes. The Federal Reserve objected to the capital plans of Ally Financial, Inc., and BB&T Corporation. U.S. firms have substantially increased their capital since the first set of government stress tests in 2009. The weighted tier 1 common equity ratio, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, of the 18 bank holding companies in the 2013 CCAR has more than doubled from 5.6 percent at the end of 2008 to 11.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2012, reflecting an increase in tier 1 common equity from $393 billion to $792 billion during the same period. The 18 institutions hold more than 70 percent of the total assets of all U.S. bank holding company assets. The stronger capital position is due in part to substantially lower capital distributions by bank holding companies than before the financial crisis. The 18 institutions paid out 19 percent of net income in common dividends in 2012, half of what they paid out as a percentage of net income before the financial crisis in 2006. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2013: Assessment Framework and Results:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve announced on Wednesday that, to better facilitate the release of information in conjunction with the Chairman's quarterly news conferences, the time between the release of the Federal Open Market Committee's statement and the beginning of the news conference is being reduced. Committee policy statements for all regularly scheduled meetings will now be released at 2 p.m. Eastern Time. For meetings with news conferences, the Committee's current economic projections will also be released at 2 p.m. Eastern Time, and the Chairman's news conference will begin at approximately 2:30 p.m. Eastern Time. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents for the March 19-20 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the March 19-20 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application filed by FirstMerit Corporation, Akron, Ohio, to acquire Citizens Republic Bancorp, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire Citizens Bank, both of Flint, Michigan. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Citigroup Inc., (PDF)New York, New YorkConsent Order dated March 21, 2013 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: East Dubuque Bancshares, Inc., East Dubuque, Illinois and East Dubuque Savings Bank, Dubuque, IowaWritten Agreement dated April 19, 2010Terminated March 20, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Mountain West Financial Corp., Helena, MontanaWritten Agreement dated August 31, 2010Terminated March 12, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Bank of Bartlett, Bartlett, TennesseePrompt Corrective Action Directive dated January 30, 2012Terminated March 18, 2013 Bank of Little Rock, Little Rock, ArkansasWritten Agreement dated May 18, 2010Terminated March 15, 2013 Pembina County Bankshares, Ltd., Cavalier, North DakotaWritten Agreement dated March 9, 2011Terminated March 18, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Devon Bancorp, Inc. (PDF), Chicago, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated March 13, 2013 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Bank VI, Salina, KansasWritten Agreement dated July 14, 2010Terminated March 13, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday published a report containing summary information on the volume and value, interchange fee revenue, certain debit card issuer costs, and fraud losses related to debit card transactions in 2011. The report is the second in a series to be published every two years pursuant to section 920 of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA). The Board's Regulation II (Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing), which implements this provision of the EFTA, provides that a debit card issuer subject to the interchange fee standard (a covered issuer) may not receive an interchange fee that exceeds 21 cents plus 5 basis points multiplied by the value of the transaction, plus a 1-cent fraud-prevention adjustment, if eligible. The regulation does not apply to debit card issuers with consolidated assets of less than $10 billion, certain government-administered debit cards, and certain prepaid cards. The interchange fee standard became effective on October 1, 2011. Covered issuers' costs of authorizing, clearing, and settling (ACS) debit card transactions, excluding fraud losses, varied greatly across respondents in 2011, with the median issuer having an average ACS cost of 11 cents and the issuer at the 75th percentile having an average ACS cost of 36 cents. Issuers with the highest debit card transaction volume generally had the lowest ACS costs per transaction as reflected in an overall average of 5 cents per transaction. Conversely, issuers with the smallest debit card programs generally had the highest ACS costs per transaction. The Board estimated debit-card fraud losses to all parties (merchants, cardholders, and issuers) to be $1.38 billion in 2011, with an average loss of approximately 8 basis points per debit card transaction, down slightly from 2009. The median covered issuer's average fraud loss per transaction was nearly 5 basis points, the same as in 2009. The median covered issuer had average fraud prevention and data security costs of slightly less than 1.5 cents per transaction. The Board does not plan to propose revisions to the Regulation II interchange fee standard or the fraud-prevention adjustment based on these survey data. Sixty-seven percent of covered issuers had average ACS costs below 21 cents (the base component of the interchange fee standard) in 2011. This proportion is lower than the 80 percent of covered issuers with average ACS costs below 21 cents in 2009 due to the addition of first-time survey respondents, most of whom are foreign banking organizations or other covered issuers with very small debit card programs and high ACS costs per transaction. Issuers that responded to both the 2009 and 2011 data collections typically reported ACS costs per transaction that were lower in 2011 than in 2009. Covered issuers that had average ACS costs below 21 cents in 2011 processed well over 99 percent of all reported covered transactions, the same proportion as in 2009. The median issuer fraud loss, which serves as the basis for the ad valorem portion of the interchange fee standard, is essentially unchanged from 2009 (5 basis points). Further, when rounded to the nearest cent, the median fraud-prevention and data security costs remained at 1 cent per transaction (the current fraud-prevention adjustment). 2011 Interchange Fee Revenue, Covered Issuer Costs, and Covered Issuer and Merchant Fraud Losses Related to Debit Card Transactions (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January suggests a return to moderate economic growth following a pause late last year. Labor market conditions have shown signs of improvement in recent months but the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending and business fixed investment advanced, and the housing sector has strengthened further, but fiscal policy has become somewhat more restrictive. Inflation has been running somewhat below the Committee's longer-run objective, apart from temporary variations that largely reflect fluctuations in energy prices. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic growth will proceed at a moderate pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee continues to see downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely will run at or below its 2 percent objective. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee decided to continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per month and longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. Taken together, these actions should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months. The Committee will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will continue to take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases as well as the extent of progress toward its economic objectives. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; James Bullard; Elizabeth A. Duke; Charles L. Evans; Jerome H. Powell; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Eric S. Rosengren; Jeremy C. Stein; Daniel K. Tarullo; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the action was Esther L. George, who was concerned that the continued high level of monetary accommodation increased the risks of future economic and financial imbalances and, over time, could cause an increase in long-term inflation expectations.
On Monday, March 11, 2013, the Federal Reserve will offer $3 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's September 8, 2010 release, this offering is part of ongoing small-value operations designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to become familiar with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Offering and Competitive Auction Parameters Competitive bids submitted at the stop-out rate will be pro-rated and will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. Non-Competitive bids are allowed in this auction. All non-competitive bids will be automatically awarded in full at the stop-out rate of the competitive auction. The minimum amount for a non-competitive bid is $10,000; the maximum amount is $5,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. Non-Competitive bids must be submitted between 10:00 a.m. ET and 2:00 p.m. ET on the auction date. Submission of BidParticipants must submit bids by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the auction date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, results will be posted on the Term Deposit Facility Resource Center page of the Central Bank Central website (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Participant awards will be posted to the Term Deposit Facility application at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date, and participants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application.
The nation's largest bank holding companies have continued to improve their ability to withstand an extremely adverse hypothetical economic scenario and are collectively in a much stronger capital position than before the financial crisis, according to the summary results of bank stress tests announced by the Federal Reserve on Thursday. Reflecting the severity of the stress scenario--which includes a peak unemployment rate of 12.1 percent, a drop in equity prices of more than 50 percent, a decline in housing prices of more than 20 percent, and a sharp market shock for the largest trading firms--projected losses at the 18 bank holding companies would total $462 billion during the nine quarters of the hypothetical stress scenario. The aggregate tier 1 common capital ratio, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, would fall from an actual 11.1 percent in the third quarter of 2012 to 7.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 2014 in the hypothetical stress scenario. The Federal Reserve's stress scenario estimates are the outcome of deliberately stringent and conservative assessments under hypothetical, adverse economic conditions and the results are not forecasts or expected outcomes. Despite the large hypothetical declines, the aggregate post-stress capital ratio exceeds the actual aggregate tier 1 common ratio for the 18 firms of approximately 5.6 percent at the end of 2008, prior to the government stress tests conducted in the midst of the financial crisis in early 2009. This is the third round of stress tests led by the Federal Reserve since the tests in 2009, but is the first year that the Federal Reserve has conducted stress tests pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and the Federal Reserve's implementing regulations. "The stress tests are a tool to gauge the resiliency of the financial sector," Federal Reserve Governor Daniel K. Tarullo said. "Significant increases in both the quality and quantity of bank capital during the past four years help ensure that banks can continue to lend to consumers and businesses, even in times of economic difficulty." For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Stress Test Methodology and Results:PDF|HTML
The use of mobile phones to access a bank account, credit card, or other financial account became more prevalent in the Unites States last year, according to the Federal Reserve Board's latest report on the use of mobile financial services. As of November 2012, 28 percent of all mobile phone users and 48 percent of smartphone users had used mobile banking in the past 12 months. This is a significant increase from 21 percent in December 2011 for mobile phone users and 42 percent for smartphone users. While relatively less common, the use of mobile phones to make payments at the point-of-sale increased threefold over the same period, with 6 percent of smartphone owners having used their phone to make a purchase. The Federal Reserve Board completed its firstSurvey of Consumers' Use of Mobile Financial Servicesin December 2011, and released a summary report in March 2012. The Board conducted a second survey in late November 2012 to monitor trends in the use of mobile financial services, and to understand how the rapidly expanding use of this technology affects consumer decisionmaking and the overall economy. Mobile devices have increasingly become tools that consumers use for banking, payments, budgeting, and shopping. The Board's report looks at how consumers access their bank's services using mobile phones ("mobile banking"), at their payment for goods and services using mobile phones ("mobile payments"), as well as their use of mobile phones to inform their shopping decisions. The use of mobile financial services is particularly prevalent among the 10 percent of the population that is underbanked (people with bank accounts but who use check cashers, payday lenders, or payroll cards). Among the 90 percent of underbanked consumers with mobile phones, 49 percent had used mobile banking in the 12 months preceding November 2012, up from 29 percent in December 2011. Mobile phones may also allow for the extension of financial services to an additional 10 percent of the population that is unbanked (those without a bank account), as 59 percent of this group has a mobile phone, half of which are smartphones. While the use of mobile banking increased 33 percent between 2011 and 2012, the report indicates that many consumers remain skeptical of the benefit of mobile banking and the level of security associated with the technology. More than half of mobile phone owners who do not currently use mobile banking say they have no interest in using this technology. Consumers are similarly skeptical of the benefits and security of mobile payments, or believe it is simply easier to use another method of payment. Less than one-fourth of all mobile phone owners expressed an interest in using their mobile phones to buy things at the point-of-sale. The most common mobile banking activities continue to be reviewing account balances, monitoring recent transactions, or transferring money between accounts. Notably, the use of mobile phones to deposit checks has doubled between surveys, with 21 percent of mobile banking users having deposited a check with their phone in the 12 months prior to November 2012. Mobile phones are also increasingly used to help make decisions while shopping. Among smartphone owners, 42 percent had used their phone to compare prices while shopping and 44 percent had used their phones to browse product reviews in store. Almost two-thirds of those who had used their phone to do price comparisons had changed where they made their purchase based on that information. The survey was conducted on behalf of the Board by GfK (formerly Knowledge Networks), an online consumer research firm. Data collection began November 16, 2012, and concluded on November 27, 2012. Nearly 2,600 respondents completed the survey. A report summarizing the survey's mobile financial services findings may be found at:www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/consumers-and-mobile-financial-services-report-201303.pdf (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve System on Friday released the 2012 combined annual financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks, the consolidated variable interest entities (VIEs) that were created to respond to strains in financial markets, and the Board of Governors. These financial statements are audited annually by an independent auditing firm. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2012 net income before providing for remittances to the U.S. Treasury was $90.6 billion. The Reserve Banks provided for remittances to the U.S. Treasury of $88.4 billion. The Reserve Banks' net income was derived primarily from $80.5 billion in interest income on securities acquired through open market operations--U.S. Treasury securities, government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) debt securities, and federal agency and GSE mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Realized gains on sales of Treasury securities during the year were $13.3 billion, and net earnings attributable to the consolidated VIEs totaled $6.0 billion. Total Reserve Bank assets as of December 31, 2012, were $2.9 trillion, which is approximately the same as at the end of the previous year. Holdings of U.S. Treasury securities increased by $58.9 billion, and federal agency and GSE MBS holdings increased by $102.1 billion. GSE debt securities holdings decreased by $28.3 billion, and balances held under central bank liquidity swap arrangements decreased by $90.9 billion. Investments held by the consolidated VIEs decreased from $35.7 billion to $2.8 billion as a result of the sale of investments during the year. Proceeds from the sale of investments were used to repay, in full, loans extended by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC. Loans outstanding under the Term Asset-Backed Securities Lending Facility decreased from $9.1 billion to $0.6 billion in 2012 as a result of principal payments and loan prepayments. The Federal Reserve System financial statements are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin At the National Community Reinvestment Coalition Annual Conference, Washington, D.C. I am delighted to be here at the National Community Reinvestment Coalition (NCRC) Annual Conference today, and to be gathered with so many people who have been working for decades to strengthen communities and the integrity of our nation's economic institutions and financial practices. Those of you involved in community development and community reinvestment know all too well the trauma and hardship experienced by low-income communities over the last several years. You know it in a way that is lost on people whose communities have not been so badly battered by these economic storms. That's why I'm looking forward this morning to sharing with you my perspective on the importance of focusing on the situation and prospects of low- and moderate-income working Americans. In my remarks, I will start by discussing the types of jobs being generated in the current recovery. Certainly, the pace of recovery in employment has improved, but it's important to look at the types of jobs that are being created because those jobs will directly affect the fortunes and challenges of households and neighborhoods as well as the course of the recovery. I will then suggest that we think about how the absence of a substantial number of new high-paying jobs, when combined with changes in the landscape for financial services, affects access generally to affordable, sustainable credit. Finally, I will explore some of the monetary, supervisory, and regulatory touchpoints in which the situation and prospects of low- and moderate-income working Americans can be addressed. Challenges Posed by Labor Market ConditionsThe Great Recession stands out for the magnitude of job losses we experienced throughout the downturn. These factors have hit low- and moderate-income Americans the hardest. The poverty rate has risen sharply since the onset of the recession, after a decade of relative stability, and it now stands at 15 percent--significantly higher than the average over the past three decades.1And those who are fortunate enough to have held onto their jobs have seen their hourly compensation barely keep pace with the cost of living over the past three years.2 While today's 7.7 percent unemployment rate is a marked improvement from the 10 percent rate we reached in late 2009, it is still higher than the unemployment rate for the 24 years before the Great Recession, a span of time over which the rate averaged about 6 percent. Moreover, the government's current estimate of 12 million unemployed does not include nearly a million discouraged workers who say they have given up looking for work and 8 million people who say that they are working part time even though they would prefer a full-time job. A broader measure of underemployment that includes these and other potential workers stands at 14.3 percent. About two-thirds of all job losses resulting from the recession were in moderate-wage occupations, such as manufacturing, skilled construction, and office administration jobs. However, these occupations have accounted for less than one-quarter of subsequent job gains. The declines in lower-wage occupations--such as retail sales and food service--accounted for about one-fifth of job loss, but a bit more than one-half of subsequent job gains. Indeed, recent job gains have been largely concentrated in lower-wage occupations such as retail sales, food preparation, manual labor, home health care, and customer service.3 Furthermore, wage growth has remained more muted than is typical during an economic recovery. To some extent, the rebound is being driven by the low-paying nature of the jobs that have been created. The slow rebound also reflects the severe nature of the crisis, as the slow wage growth especially affects those workers who have become recently re-employed following long spells of unemployment. In fact, while average wages have continued to increase steadily for persons who have remained employed all along, the average wage for new hires have actually declined since 2010.4 The faces of low-wage Americans are diverse. They include people of varying employment status, race, gender, immigration status, and other characteristics. Many such Americans are attached to the workforce and are deeply committed to both personal success and to making a contribution to society. For purposes of reference, in 2011, low wage was defined as $23,005 per year or $11.06 per hour.5 Today, about one-quarter of all workers are considered "low wage." They are sanitation workers, office receptionists, and nursing assistants; they are single mothers of three who worry: How will I be able to send my children to college? What if my landlord raises the rent this year? Tens of millions of Americans are the people who ask themselves these questions every day. This diverse group of workers faces numerous barriers when trying to access the labor market or advance in their current positions. Many of these barriers were identified in an initiative that the Federal Reserve's Community Development function launched in 2011. Over the course of a year, Reserve Banks across the country hosted a series of 32 regional discussions aimed at examining the complex factors creating chronic unemployment conditions and identifying promising workforce development solutions.6The kinds of problems faced by low-wage workers are familiar to all of you and have long been part of the structural conditions of poverty and near-poverty in America. We know, for example, that location presents thorny challenges for many low-wage workers. Within metropolitan areas, jobs are not spread out evenly and job creation tends to be depressed in low-income communities. As a result, many low-wage workers face long commutes and serious commuting difficulties due to less reliable transportation and an inadequate transportation infrastructure. Moreover, a number of low-wage employees work non-standard hours, exacerbating both transportation and childcare issues, as well as personal health problems.7 Traditionally, many workers find jobs through social networks and through personal connections that they have to the labor market. But, because low-income individuals are typically less mobile, more isolated, and less socially connected than other people, they are often left out of the social networks that, in practice, lead to jobs for most Americans. Addressing These ChallengesAmong those responding to these challenges are innovative local practitioners who are implementing programs designed to expand job opportunities for low-wage workers. Consider Impact Services in Philadelphia, an organization that builds relationships with the local business community to better understand their hiring needs and then devises programs that supply those firms with appropriately skilled workers from the community.8The National Fund for Workforce Solutions is another example. This organization works with local communities to organize funding collaboratives to support regional industries.9 More Recent Challenges for Low-Wage WorkersSo progress is being made, thanks to coalitions like these across the country that are working for practical changes at the community level. But the 21stcentury labor market is increasingly complex; it continues to generate new challenges. For example, growth in sectors such as green industries and advanced manufacturing is creating jobs, but these jobs may demand different skills. Access to reliable information becomes critical for workers who are considering a new job, and must carefully weigh the skills and credentials required by potential employers with the cost of training and the likelihood of gaining employment. And, more and more, employers are requiring post-secondary credentials. Today, a high school diploma alone is less likely to qualify an individual for a job with a path toward meaningful advancement. And, as demand for more credentials increases, workers who lack those credentials will find it increasingly difficult to gain upward mobility in the job market. Contingent WorkMany employers are looking to make the employment relationship more flexible, and so are increasingly relying on part-time work and a variety of arrangements popularly known as "contingent work." This trend toward a more flexible workforce will likely continue. For example, while temporary work accounted for 10 percent of job losses during the recession, these jobs have accounted for more than 25 percent of net employment gains since the reces­sion ended.10In fact, tempo­rary help is rapidly approaching a new record, and businesses' use of staffing services continues to increase.11 Contingent employment is arguably a sensible response to today's competitive marketplace. Contingent arrangements allow firms to maximize workforce flexibility in the face of seasonal and cyclical forces. The flexibility may be beneficial for workers who want or need time to address their family needs. However, workers in these jobs often receive less pay and fewer benefits than traditional full-time or "permanent" workers, are much less likely to benefit from the protections of labor and employment laws, and often have no real pathway to upward mobility in the workplace.12 Many workers who hold contingent positions do so involuntarily. Department of Labor statistics tell us that 8 million Americans say they are working part-time jobs but would like full-time jobs.13These are the people in our communities who are "part time by necessity." As businesses increase their reliance on independent contractors and part-time, temporary, and seasonal positions, workers today bear far more of the responsibility and risk for managing their careers and financial security. Indeed, the expansion of contingent work has contributed to the increasing gap between high- and low-wage workers and to the increasing sense of insecurity among workers.14 Flexible and part-time arrangements can present great opportunities to some workers, but the substantial increase in part-time workers does raise a number of concerns. Part-time workers are particularly vulnerable to personal shocks due to lower levels of compensation, the absence of meaningful benefits, and even a lack of paid sick or personal days. Not surprisingly, turnover is high in these part-time jobs. Access to CreditThe economic marginalization that comes with the growth of part-time and low-paying jobs is exacerbated by inadequate access to credit for many working Americans. Ideally, people chronically short of cash would have access to safe and sound financial institutions that could provide reliable and affordable access to credit as well as good savings plans. Unfortunately, many working Americans have no practical access to reasonably priced financial products with safe features, much less the kind of safe and fair credit that is available to wealthier consumers. Working Americans have several core financial needs. They need a safe, accessible, and affordable method to deposit or cash checks, receive deposits, pay bills, and accrue savings. They may also need access to credit to tide them over until their next cash infusion arrives. They may be coming up short on paying their rent, their mortgage, an emergency medical expense, or an unexpected car repair. They may want access to a savings vehicle that, down the road, will help them pay for these items and for education or further training, or start a business. And many want some form of non-cash payment method to conduct transactions that are difficult or impossible to conduct using cash. Products and services that serve these core financial needs are not consistently available at competitive rates to working Americans. Those with low and moderate incomes may have insufficient income or assets to meet the relatively high requirements needed to establish a credit history. Others may have problems in their credit history that inhibit their ability to borrow on competitive terms. Many workers simply may not have banks in their communities, or may not have access to banks that actually compete with each other in terms of pricing or customer service. There is a growing trend toward greater concentration of financial assets at fewer banks. In my mind, this raises doubts about whether banking services will continue to be provided at competitive rates to all income levels of customers wherever they may live. According to a study of bank branch locations published by NCRC in 2007, there are more persons per branch in low- and moderate-income census tracts than in moderate- and upper-income census tracts. While branch-building has been on the rise, indications are that the increase in the number of bank offices has not occurred evenly across neighborhoods of varying income.15 In fact, a significant number of low- and moderate-income families have become--or are at risk of becoming--financially marginalized. The percentage of families earning $15,000 per year or less who reported that they have no bank account increased between 2007 and 2009 such that more than one in four families was unbanked. Families slightly further up the income distribution, earning between $25,000 and $30,000 per year, are also financially marginalized: 13 percent report being unbanked and almost 24 percent report being underbanked.16 This combination of economic insecurity and financial marginalization has incentivized more low- and moderate-income families to seek out alternative financial service providers to meet their financial needs. Some of the providers they find, such as check-cashers and outfits furnishing advance loans on paychecks, can lead unwary workers into very deep financial holes. In light of these challenges, I ask questions that have been asked before: What can economic policy do to reduce unemployment, economic marginalization, and the financial vulnerability of millions of lower-income working Americans? There is no simple cure to these conditions, but government policymakers need to focus seriously on the problems, not simply because of notions of fairness and justice, but because the economy's ability to produce a stable quality of living for millions of people is at stake. Our country cannot achieve prosperity without addressing the powerful undertow created by flat wages and tenuous financial security for so many millions of Americans. The Role of Monetary PolicySo how can the Federal Reserve address these challenges? Let me start with monetary policy. Congress has directed the Federal Reserve to use monetary policy to promote maximum employment and price stability. The Federal Reserve's primary monetary policy tool is its ability to influence the level of interest rates. Federal Reserve policymakers pushed short-term interest rates down nearly to zero as the financial crisis spread and the recession worsened in 2007 and 2008. By late 2008, it was clear that still more policy stimulus was necessary to turn the recession around. The Federal Reserve could not push short-term interest rates down further, but it could--and did--use the unconventional policy tools to bring longer-term interest rates such as mortgage rates down further. Fed policymakers intend to keep interest rates low for a considerable time to promote a stronger economic recovery, a substantial improvement in labor market conditions, and greater progress toward maximum employment in a context of price stability. Both anecdotal evidence and a wide range of economic indicators show that these attempts are working to strengthen the recovery and that the labor market is improving. Nonetheless, and again, the millions of people who would prefer to work full time can find only part-time work. While the Federal Reserve's monetary policy tools can be effective in promoting stronger economic recovery and job gains, they have little effect on the types of jobs that are created, particularly over the longer term. So, while monetary policy can help, it does not address all of the challenges that low- and moderate-income workers are confronting. That said, the existing mandate regarding maximum employment requires policymakers on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to understand labor market dynamics, which obviously must include an understanding of low- and moderate-income workers. Regulatory and Supervisory TouchpointsIn addition to monetary policy, the Federal Reserve's regulatory and supervisory policies have the potential to address some of the challenges faced by low-income communities and consumers. The Federal Reserve is required by law--by virtue of the Bank Holding Company Act--to approve various applications, such as mergers, acquisitions, and proposals to conduct new activities. This statutory review requires an explicit consideration of public benefits and the effects of the proposed transaction on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. This assessment is, as many of you know, a critical opportunity for community input and analysis. Indeed, as people with their feet firmly planted on the ground in communities across America, you probably remember James Q. Wilson's theory of "broken windows" in community policing: Move in quickly when vandalism and disorder first start to appear--even if it is only a broken window or graffiti on a stop sign--or else face losing the whole neighborhood as disrespect for the law rapidly spreads.17 The "broken windows" strategy is every bit as compelling when it comes to addressing the disorder that comes from sloppy practices by financial institutions. If banking practices are undermining the ability of the economically marginalized to become financially included and to access the credit they need in an affordable way, regulators must move in quickly to stop the disorder and repair the broken windows of financial intermediation. Bank supervisors should be prepared to respond to the earliest signs of trouble by requiring operationally challenged banks to address problems quickly and completely. If corrections are made, then the regulators can move on. If not, then the regulators need to escalate enforcement. Swift and decisive corrective action is not always how federal bank regulators have responded to broken windows in the past. In my view, for example, regulators' response to the rampant, long-running problems in loan-servicing practices at large financial institutions was not swift and was not decisive. The point is that federal regulators must listen carefully to community input and analysis in order to keep track of where windows are breaking and how they are being broken. And they must carefully study and take responsibility for analyzing comments provided by organizations such as the NCRC when considering the public benefit of an application. Both the exam process and the application process must be strengthened as key venues for federal regulators to incorporate the voices of affected communities; I'd like to see us revise and strengthen these processes to include the analysis in these voices. The Role of BusinessNow let's shift back to the private sector. In particular, to the question of whether businesses can be competitive in the current marketplace and still provide a pathway out of poverty for their employees. The Hitachi Foundation recently set out to answer this question by identifying firms that provided upward job mobility for their employees. They found that the identified employers showed noteworthy consistency in how they train and educate workers, develop career ladders, and craft supportive human resources policies and other motivators. They also found some evidence to indicate that the companies benefited from strategic and financial returns while their lower-wage workers also benefited from increased earnings and career advancement.18,19 "Anchor institutions," such as hospitals and universities, which are firmly rooted in their locales, can also be powerful engines for job creation in their communities. Anchors may include cultural institutions, health care facilities, community foundations, faith-based institutions, public utilities, and municipal governments. These institutions have the potential to generate local jobs through targeted procurement purchases of food, energy, supplies, and services from local businesses. This can be a substantial, positive development in the local economy.20 The Evergreen Cooperative in Cleveland, Ohio, is an example of a network of worker-owned businesses, launched in low-income neighborhoods, to support local anchor institutions. The cooperatives were initially established to provide services to local hospitals and universities that had agreed to make their purchases locally. This model is effective because it capitalizes on local production, and because it forges a local business development strategy that effectively meets many of the anchor institutions' own needs.21 Role for Community-Based OrganizationsClearly, the challenges facing low-wage workers are multi-faceted and complex. In addition to the challenges that workforce development and community organizations have addressed for years, structural changes in the economy heighten obstacles, make the stakes higher if we fail to conquer them, and, therefore, require new levels of openness and creativity by policymakers. You are the ideal audience for this message because you know how to link federal policymaking with economic empowerment. NCRC has grown to an association of more than 600 community-based organizations that promote access to basic banking services to create and sustain affordable housing, jobs, and vibrant communities for America's working families. Community-based organizations like many of those represented in this room will need to consider how to work with low-wage workers to bridge information gaps by expanding workers' networks, providing legitimate information, and identifying new job opportunities. But finally, the pressure that community-based organizations exert on financial regulators must continue. Access to credit is an enduring challenge, and the obstacles and problems--all the "broken windows" you see on the block--must be reported and explained. They must be understood by the federal policymakers who are responsible for enforcing our country's laws and regulations in the realm of access to credit; by the federal policymakers who engage in the conduct of monetary policy; and by the federal policymakers whose actions contribute to the shaping of the landscape for financial services in this country. Your voices--whether you are reporting, documenting, monitoring, analyzing, proposing, or even protesting--must be heard. Your voices are crucial to alerting policymakers to the significant developments and emerging trends in the nation's communities that must be confronted--and confronted in a swift and decisive way--if we are to make prosperity a national agenda that touches every American. Thank you. 1.Mean annual poverty rate for all people. U.S. Bureau of the Census.Return to text 2.These dynamics have disproportionately hurt the young, the less-educated, and racial and ethnic minorities. The unemployment rate for those without a high school diploma is 11.2 percent. Among workers age 16 to 19, the unemployment rate is 25.1 percent. Compared with the 7.7 percent unemployment rate for all workers, the unemployment rate among African Americans is 13.8 percent, and 9.6 percent among Latinos.Return to text 3.See National Employment Law Project (2012), "The Low-Wage Recovery and Growing Inequality (PDF),"Data Brief, August. These patterns were also observed during the recessions of the early 1990s and early 2000's—the so-called "jobless recoveries"—but not prior to then.Return to text 4.On average, a person's income remains depressed for decades following job loss, and income losses over one's working life are especially severe when the job loss occurs during a recession. See Steven J. Davis and Till von Wachter (2011), "Recession and the Costs of Job Loss (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, September 12.Return to text 5.See Rebecca Thiess (2012). "The Future of Work: Trends and Challenges for Low-Wage Workers (PDF),"EPI Briefing Paper, April 27.Return to text 6.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "A Perspective from Main Street: Long-Term Unemployment and Workforce Development (PDF)," December.Return to text 7.Ibid.Return to text 8.For more information about Impact Services Corporation, go towww.impactservices.org/employment-and-training.Return to text 9.One of the National Fund's collaboratives is the Southwest Alabama Workforce Development Council (SAWDC). This collaborative is working to address a local skills gap by creating a comprehensive workforce development system for the region. This system includes formal feedback from the business community to the educational system about skills that are in high demand. Educators then develop a curriculum that prepares students to access the local job market. During the National Fund's first five years of existence, it worked with more than 3,000 employers to serve more than 42,000 job seekers and workers across 32 communities. For more information about the National Fund for Workforce Solutions, go towww.nfwsolutions.org.Return to text 10.See P. Steven Berchem (2012), "Structural Shift? (PDF)"Staffing Success. American Staffing Association.This article cites U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (2012), "Employment, Hours, and Earnings From the Current Employment Statistics Survey (National)," August 4.Return to text 11.In a 2011 McKinsey Global Institute U.S. Jobs Survey of 2,000 employers of all sizes and in all sectors, 34 percent of employers indicated that they expect their com­panies to increase temporary and contract workers over the next five years. See James Manyika, Susan Lund, Byron Auguste, Lenny Mendonca, Tim Welsh, and Sreenivas Ramaswamy (2011), "An Economy That Works: Job Creation and America's Future," McKinsey Global Institute, June, www.mckinsey.com/insights/employment_and_growth/an_economy_that_works_for_us_job_creation.Return to text 12.See U.S. Department of Labor and U.S. Department of Commerce (1994), "Section Five: Contingent Workers," in the final report of the Dunlop Commission on the Future of Worker-Management Relations.Return to text 13.See U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 14.See U.S. Department of Labor and U.S. Department of Commerce (1994).Return to text 15.See National Community Reinvestment Coalition (2007), "Are Banks on the Map? An Analysis of Bank Branch Location in Working Class and Minority Neighborhoods (PDF)," March.Return to text 16.See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2012), "2011 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households," September; andBrian K. Bucks, Arthur B. Kennickell, Traci L. Mach, and Kevin B. Moore (2009), "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, v. 95 (February), pp. A1–A55.Return to text 17.See George L. Kelling and James Q. Wilson (1982), "Broken Windows: The police and neighborhood safety",The Atlantic, March 1, www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1982/03/broken-windows/304465.Return to text 18.For more information about The Hitachi Foundation, go towww.hitachifoundation.org/index.php.Return to text 19.While the common perception may be that businesses do not invest in employee training, a survey by the American Society for Training and Development indicated that employers committed $172 billion in 2011 to employee training. See American Society for Training and Development (2011), "2011 State of the Industry Report Shows Increased Spending, Commitment for L&D," December 20. This investment, however, traditionally funds the highest-educated and highest-paid employees. The Hitachi Foundation has suggested that considering a reallocation of even a small portion of these funds toward frontline workers would offer benefits to both employers and employees. As an example of these employer practices, right here in our backyard, the Community Foundation for the National Capital Region piloted the "Career Navigators" program with three hospitals in Maryland's Montgomery County and one in the District of Columbia to help employees navigate a pathway to better jobs with their current employer. These hospitals concluded that investing in training and education for top-performing, entry-level staffers in positions such as housekeeping, food service, and patient transport could provide a pipeline for the skilled employees that the hospitals would rely upon in the future. Employees receive support with literacy and college-readiness training, career coaching, and scholarships. The program also helps hospitals document internal career pathways and train the human resource staff to serve as career coaches. Throughout these efforts, the participating hospitals have reported enhanced employee engagement, reduced errors, and improved performance.Return to text 20.See Ted Howard (2012), "Owning Your Own Job Is Beautiful Thing: Community Wealth Building in Cleveland, Ohio (PDF)," in Nancy O. Andrews and David J. Erickson, eds.,Investing in What Works for America's Communities(San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and Low Income Investment Fund). See also Gar Alperovitz (forthcoming April 2013, Chelsea Green),What Then Must We Do?Return to text 21.The success of the "Cleveland model" has spurred new efforts in places as diverse as Amarillo, Texas; Atlanta; Pittsburgh; Richmond, California; and Washington, D.C. See Ted Howard (2012).Return to text
Federal Deposit Insurance CorporationBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencyConference of State Bank Supervisors Federal and state bank supervisors today announced an increase in the number of required loan data fields in the Interagency Loan Data Request (ILDR). The federal agencies making today's announcement were the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. They were joined by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS). The ILDR is a voluntary, standardized data request that banks can use to electronically submit loan information for safety and soundness examinations. The electronic collection of this loan level data reduces the time that examiners spend compiling the information, giving them more time to verify and analyze the data. In turn, banks benefit from a more efficient examination process. While participation in the ILDR is voluntary, certain data fields are mandatory for those who choose to electronically submit the information. The federal agencies and the CSBS are now increasing the number of required fields from five to 30 to facilitate greater consistency in the data submission process. There are 82 fields in total. The attachment provides a list of the data fields and highlights the required fields. Other than the change in the number of required fields, the ILDR format and layout remain unchanged. Financial institutions using the ILDR should provide the new required loan data fields for examinations starting on September 30, 2013. Table of Data Fields for Interagency Loan Data Request (ILDR) (PDF)
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Annual Monetary/Macroeconomics Conference: The Past and Future of Monetary Policy, sponsored by Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California I will begin my remarks by posing a question: Why are long-term interest rates so low in the United States and in other major industrial countries? At first blush, the answer seems obvious: Central banks in those countries are pursuing accommodative monetary policies to boost growth and reduce slack in their economies. However, while central banks certainly play a key role in determining the behavior of long-term interest rates, theirs is only a proximate influence. A more complete explanation of the current low level of rates must take account of the broader economic environment in which central banks are currently operating and of the constraints that that environment places on their policy choices. Let me start with a brief overview of the recent history of long-term interest rates in some key economies.Chart 1shows the 10-year government bond yields for five major industrial countries: Canada, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Note that the movements in these yields are quite correlated despite some differences in the economic circumstances and central bank mandates in those countries. Further, with the notable exception of Japan, thelevelsof the yields have been very similar--indeed, strikingly so, with long-term yields declining over time and currently close to 2 percent in each case. The similar behavior of these yields attests to the global nature of the economic and financial developments of recent years, as well as to the broad similarity in how the monetary policymakers in the advanced economies have responded to these developments. Of course, Japanese yields are clearly a case apart, as Japan has endured an extended period of deflation, while inflation in the other four countries has been positive and generally close to the stated objectives of the monetary authorities. But even Japanese yields have shown some tendency to fluctuate along with other benchmark yields, and they have also declined over the period shown. In my comments, I will delve more deeply into the reasons why these long-term interest rates have fallen so low. This examination may be useful both for understanding the current stance of policy and also for thinking about how rates may evolve. In short, we expect that as the economy recovers, long-term rates will rise over time to more normal levels. A return to more normal conditions in financial markets would, of course, be most welcome. Many commentators have noted, however, that both an extended period of low rates and the transition back toward normal levels may pose risks to financial stability. In the final portion of my remarks, I will discuss some aspects of how the Federal Reserve is approaching these risks. Why Are Long-Term Interest Rates So Low?So, why are long-term interest rates currently so low? To help answer this question, it is useful to decompose longer-term yields into three components: one reflecting expected inflation over the term of the security; another capturing the expected path of short-term real, or inflation-adjusted, interest rates; and a residual component known as the term premium. Of course, none of these three components is observed directly, but there are standard ways of estimating them.Chart 2displays one version of this decomposition of the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield based on a term structure model developed by Federal Reserve staff.1The broad features I will emphasize are similar to those found by other authors using a variety of methods.2 All three components of the 10-year yield have declined since 2007. The decomposition attributes much of the decline in the yield since 2010 to a sharp fall in the term premium, but the expected short-term real rate component also moved down significantly. Let's consider each component more closely. The expected inflation component has drifted gradually downward for many years and has become quite stable. In large part, the downward trend and stabilization of expected inflation in the United States are products of the increasing credibility of the Federal Reserve's commitment to price stability. In January 2012, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) underscored this commitment by issuing a statement--since reaffirmed at its January 2013 meeting--on its longer-run goals and policy strategy, which included a longer-run inflation target of 2 percent.3The anchoring of long-term inflation expectations near 2 percent has been a key factor influencing long-term interest rates over recent years. It almost certainly helped mitigate the strong disinflationary pressures immediately following the crisis. While I have not shown expected inflation for other advanced economies, the pictures would be very similar--again, except for Japan. With the expected inflation component of the 10-year rate near 2 percent and the rate itself a bit below 2 percent recently, it is clear that the combination of the other two components--the expected path of short-term real interest rates and the term premium--must make a small net negative contribution. The expected path of short-term real interest rates is, of course, influenced by monetary policy, both the current stance of policy and market participants' expectations of how policy will evolve. The stance of monetary policy at any given time, in turn, is driven largely by the economic outlook, the risks surrounding that outlook, and at times other factors, such as whether the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates is binding. In the current environment, both policymakers and market participants widely agree that supporting the U.S. economic recovery while keeping inflation close to 2 percent will likely require real short-term rates, currently negative, to remain low for some time. As shown in chart 2, the expected average of the short-term real rate over the next 10 years has gradually declined to near zero over the past few years, in part reflecting downward revisions in expectations about the pace of the ongoing recovery and, hence, a pushing out of expectations regarding how long nominal short-term rates will remain low.4 As the persistence of the effects of the crisis have become clearer, the Federal Reserve's communications have reinforced the expectation that conditions are likely to warrant highly accommodative policy for some time: Most recently, the FOMC indicated that it expects to maintain an exceptionally low level of the federal funds rate at least as long as the unemployment rate is above 6.5 percent, projected inflation between one and two years ahead is no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent target, and long-term inflation expectations remain stable.5 In discussing the role of monetary policy in determining the expected future path of real short-term rates, I have cheated a little: What monetary policy actually controls isnominalshort-term rates. However, because inflation adjusts slowly, control of nominal short-term rates usually translates into control of real short-term rates over the short and medium term. In the longer term, real interest rates are determined primarily by nonmonetary factors, such as the expected return to capital investments, which in turn is closely related to the underlying strength of the economy. The fact that market yields currently incorporate an expectation of very low short-term real interest rates over the next 10 years suggests that market participants anticipate persistently slow growth and, consequently, low real returns to investment. In other words, the low level of expected real short rates may reflect not only investor expectations for a slow cyclical recovery but also some downgrading of longer-term growth prospects.6 Chart 3, which displays yields on inflation-indexed, long-term government bonds for the same five countries represented in chart 1, shows that expected real yields over the longer term are low in other advanced industrial economies as well. Note again the strong similarity in returns across these economies, suggesting once again the importance of common global factors. While indexed yields spiked up around the end of 2008, reflecting market stresses at the height of the crisis that undercut the demand for these bonds, these effects dissipated in 2009. Since that time, inflation-indexed yields have declined steadily and now stand below zero in each country.7Apparently, low longer-term real rate expectations are playing an important role in accounting for low 10-year nominal rates in other industrial countries, as well as in the United States. The third and final component of the long-term interest rate is the term premium, defined as the residual component not captured by expected real short-term rates or expected inflation. As I noted, the largest portion of the downward move in long-term rates since 2010 appears to be due to a fall in the term premium, so it deserves some special discussion. In general, the term premium is the extra return investors expect to obtain from holding long-term bonds as opposed to holding and rolling over a sequence of short-term securities over the same period. In part, the term premium compensates bondholders for interest rate risk--the risk of capital gains and losses that interest rate changes imply for the value of longer-term bonds. Two changes in the nature of this interest rate risk have probably contributed to a general downward movement of the term premium in recent years. First, the volatility of Treasury yields has declined, in part because short-term rates are pressed up against the zero lower bound and are expected to remain there for some time to come. Second, the correlation of bond prices and stock prices has become increasingly negative over time, implying that bonds have become more valuable as a hedge against risks from holding other assets.8 Beyond interest rate risk, a number of other factors also affect the term premium in practice. For example, during periods of financial turmoil, the prices of longer-term Treasury securities are often driven up by so-called safe-haven demands of investors who place special value on the safety and liquidity of Treasury securities. Indeed, even during more placid periods, global demands for safe assets increase the value of Treasury securities. Many foreign governments and central banks, particularly those with sustained current account surpluses, hold substantial international reserves in the form of Treasuries. Foreign holdings of U.S. Treasury securities currently amount to about $5‑1/2 trillion, roughly half of the total amount of marketable Treasury debt outstanding. The global economic and financial stresses of recent years--triggered first by the financial crisis, and then by the problems in the euro area--appear to have significantly elevated the safe-haven demand for Treasury securities at times, pushing down Treasury yields and implying a lower, or even a negative, term premium.9 Federal Reserve actions have also affected term premiums in recent years, most prominently through a series of Large-Scale Asset Purchase (LSAP) programs. These programs consist of open market purchases of agency debt, agency mortgage-backed securities, and longer-term Treasury securities. To the extent that Treasury securities and agency-guaranteed securities are not perfect substitutes for other assets, Federal Reserve purchases of these assets should lower their term premiums, putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and easing financial conditions more broadly. Although estimated effects vary, a growing body of research supports the view that LSAPs are effective at bringing down term premiums and thus reducing longer-term rates.10Of course, the Federal Reserve has used this unconventional approach to lowering longer-term rates because, with short-term rates near zero, it can no longer use its conventional approach of cutting the target for the federal funds rate.11Accordingly, this portion of the decline in the term premium might ultimately be attributed to the sluggish economic recovery, which prompted additional policy action from the Federal Reserve. Let's recap. Long-term interest rates are the sum of expected inflation, expected real short-term interest rates, and a term premium. Expected inflation has been low and stable, reflecting central bank mandates and credibility as well as considerable resource slack in the major industrial economies. Real interest rates are expected to remain low, reflecting the weakness of the recovery in advanced economies (and possibly some downgrading of longer-term growth prospects as well). This weakness, all else being equal, dictates that monetary policy must remain accommodative if it is to support the recovery and reduce disinflationary risks. Put another way, at the present time the major industrial economies apparently cannot sustain significantly higher real rates of return; in that respect, central banks--so long as they are meeting their price stability mandates--have little choice but to take actions that keep nominal long-term rates relatively low, as suggested by the similarity in the levels of the rates shown in chart 1. Finally, term premiums are low or negative, reflecting a host of factors, including central bank actions in support of economic recovery. Thus, while the current constellation of long-term rates across many advanced countries has few precedents, it is not puzzling: It follows naturally from the economic circumstances of these countries and the implications of these circumstances for the policies of their central banks. How Are Long-Term Rates Likely to Evolve?So, how are long-term rates likely to evolve over coming years? It is worth pausing to note that, not that long ago, central bankers would have carefully avoided this topic. However, it is now a bedrock principle of central banking that transparency about the likely path of policy, in general, and interest rates, in particular, can increase the effectiveness of policy. In the present context, I would add that transparency may mitigate risks emanating from unexpected rate movements. Thus, let me turn to prospects for long-term rates, starting with the expected path of rates and then turning to deviations from the expected path that may arise. If, as the FOMC anticipates, the economic recovery continues at a moderate pace, with unemployment slowly declining and inflation expectations remaining near 2 percent, then long-term interest rates would be expected to rise gradually toward more normal levels over the next several years. This rise would occur as the market's view of the expected date at which the Federal Reserve will begin the removal of policy accommodation draws nearer and then as accommodation is removed. Some normalization of the term premium might also contribute to a rise in long-term rates. To illustrate possible paths,Chart 4displays four different forecasts of the evolution of the 10-year Treasury yield over coming years. The black line is the forecast reported in the December 2012 Blue Chip Financial Forecasts survey. The green line gives the Congressional Budget Office forecast published in February, and the blue line presents the median from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, as reported in the first quarter of this year. Finally, the purple line shows a forecast based on the term structure model used for the decomposition of the 10‑year yield in chart 2.12While these forecasts embody a wide range of underlying models and assumptions, the basic message is clear--long-term interest rates are expected to rise gradually over the next few years, rising (at least according to these forecasts) to around 3 percent at the end of 2014. The forecasts in chart 4 imply a total increase of between 200 and 300 basis points in long-term yields between now and 2017. Of course, the forecasts in chart 4 are just forecasts, and reality might well turn out to be different.Chart 5provides three complementary approaches to summarizing the uncertainty surrounding forecasts of long-term rates. The dark gray bars in the chart are based on the range of forecasts reported in the Blue Chip Financial Forecasts, the blue bars are based on the historical uncertainty regarding long-term interest rates as reflected in the Board staff's FRB/US model of the U.S. economy, and the orange bars give a market-based measure of uncertainty derived from swaptions. These three different measures give a broadly similar picture about the upside and downside risks to the forecasts of long-term rates. Rates 100 basis points higher than the expected paths in chart 4 by 2014 are certainly plausible outcomes as judged by each of the three measures, and this uncertainty grows to as much as 175 basis points by 2017. Note, though, that while the risk of an unexpected rise in interest rates has drawn much attention, the level of long-term interest rates also could prove to be lower than forecast. Indeed, by the measures shown in chart 5, the upside and downside risks to the level of rates are roughly symmetric as of 2017. We also have some historical experience with increases in rates during tightening cycles to consider. For example, in 1994, 10-year Treasury yields rose about 220 basis points over the course of a year, reflecting an unexpected quickening in the pace of economic growth and signs of building inflation pressures. This increase in long-term rates appears to have reflected a mix of a pronounced rise in the expected path of the policy interest rate and some increase in the term premium.13A rise of more than 200 basis points in a year is at the upper end of what is implied by the mean paths and uncertainty measures shown in charts 4 and 5, but these measures still admit a substantial probability of higher--and lower--paths. Overall, then, we anticipate that long-term rates will rise as the recovery progresses and expected short-term real rates and term premiums return to more normal levels. The precise timing and pace of the increase will depend importantly on how economic conditions develop, however, and is subject to considerable two-sided uncertainty. Managing Risks Associated with the Future Course of Long-Term Interest RatesAs I noted when I began my remarks, one reason to focus on the timing and pace of a possible increase in long-term rates is that these outcomes may have implications for financial stability. Commentators have raised two broad concerns surrounding the outlook for long-term rates. To oversimplify, the first risk is that rates will remain low, and the second is that they will not. In particular, in an environment of persistently low returns, incentives may grow for some investors to engage in an unsafe "reach for yield" either through excessive use of leverage or through other forms of risk-taking. My Board colleague Jeremy Stein recently discussed how this behavior may arise in some financial markets, including credit markets.14Alternatively, we face a risk that longer-term rates will rise sharply at some point, imposing capital losses on holders of fixed-income instruments, including financial institutions. Of course, the two risks may very well be mutually reinforcing: Taking on duration risk is one way investors may reach for yield, and the losses resulting from a sharp rise in longer-term rates will be greater if investors have done so.15 One might argue that the right response to these risks is to tighten monetary policy, raising long-term interest rates with the aim of forestalling any undesirable buildup of risk. I hope my discussion this evening has convinced you that, at least in economic circumstances of the sort that prevail today, such an approach could be quite costly and might well be counterproductive from the standpoint of promoting financial stability. Long-term interest rates in the major industrial countries are low for good reason: Inflation is low and stable and, given expectations of weak growth, expected real short rates are low. Premature rate increases would carry a high risk of short-circuiting the recovery, possibly leading--ironically enough--to an even longer period of low long-term rates. Only a strong economy can deliver persistently high real returns to savers and investors, and the economies of the major industrial countries are still in the recovery phase. So how can financial stability concerns--which the Federal Reserve takes very seriously--be addressed? Our strategy, undertaken in cooperation with other regulators and central banks, has a number of elements. First, we have greatly increased our macroprudential oversight, with a particular focus on potential systemic vulnerabilities, including buildups of leverage and unstable funding patterns as well as interest rate risk.16Under the umbrella of our interdisciplinary Large Institutions Supervision Coordinating Committee, we pay special attention to developments at the largest, most complex financial firms, making use of information gathered in our supervision of the institutions and drawn from financial market indicators of their health and systemic vulnerability. We also monitor the shadow banking sector, especially its interaction with regulated institutions; in this work, we look for factors that may leave the system vulnerable to an adverse "fire sale" dynamic, in which declining asset values could force leveraged investors to sell assets, depressing prices further. We exchange information regularly with other regulatory agencies, both directly and under the auspices of the Financial Stability Oversight Council. Throughout the Federal Reserve System, work in these areas is conducted by experts in banking, financial markets, monetary policy, and other disciplines, and at the Federal Reserve Board we have established our Office for Financial Stability Policy and Research to help coordinate this work. Findings are presented regularly to the Board and to the FOMC for use in its monetary policy deliberations. Second, recognizing that our monitoring of the financial sector will always be imperfect, we are using regulatory and supervisory tools to help ensure that financial institutions are sufficiently resilient to weather losses and periods of market turmoil arising from any source. Indeed, reflecting expectations embodied in the new Basel III and Dodd-Frank standards, the largest and most complex financial firms have substantially increased both their capital and their liquidity in recent years. Our current round of stress testing of the largest bank holding companies, to be completed early this month, examines whether the largest banking firms have sufficient capital to come through a seriously adverse economic downturn and still have the capacity to perform their roles as providers of credit. In a related exercise, we are also asking banks to stress-test the adequacy of their capital in the face of a hypothetical sharp upward shift in the term structure of interest rates. Third, our approach to communicating and implementing monetary policy provides the Federal Reserve with new tools that could potentially be used to mitigate the risk of sharp increases in interest rates. In 1994--the period discussed earlier in which sharp increases in interest rates strained financial markets--the FOMC's communication tools were very limited; indeed, it had just begun issuing public statements following policy moves. By contrast, in recent years, the Federal Reserve has provided a great deal of additional information about its expectations for the path of the economy and the stance of monetary policy. Most recently, as I mentioned, the FOMC announced unemployment and inflation thresholds characterizing conditions that will guide the timing of the first increase in the target for the federal funds rate. Further, the FOMC stated that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy is likely to remain appropriate for a considerable time after our current asset purchase program ends. By providing greater clarity concerning the likely course of the federal funds rate, FOMC communication should both make policy more effective and reduce the risk that market misperceptions of the Committee's intentions would lead to unnecessary interest rate volatility. In addition, the Federal Reserve could, if necessary, use its balance sheet tools to mitigate the risk of a sharp rise in rates. For example, the Committee has indicated its intention to sell its agency securities gradually once conditions warrant. The Committee also noted, however, that the pace of sales could be adjusted up or down in response to material changes in either the economic outlook or financial conditions. In particular, adjustments to the pace or timing of asset sales could be used, under some circumstances, to dampen excessively sharp adjustments in longer-term interest rates. ConclusionLet me finish with some thoughts on balancing the risks we face in the current challenging economic environment, at a time when our main policy tool, the federal funds rate, is near its effective lower bound. On the one hand, the Fed's dual mandate has led us to provide strong support for the recovery, both to promote maximum employment and to keep inflation from falling below our price stability objective. One purpose of this support is to prompt a return to the productive risk-taking that is essential to robust growth and to getting the unemployed back to work. On the other hand, we must be mindful of the possibility that sustained periods of low interest rates and highly accommodative policy could lead to excessive risk-taking in some financial markets. The balance here is not an easy one to strike. While the recent crisis is vivid testament to the costs of ill-judged risk-taking, we must also be aware of constraints posed by the present state of the economy. In light of the moderate pace of the recovery and the continued high level of economic slack, dialing back accommodation with the goal of deterring excessive risk-taking in some areas poses its own risks to growth, price stability, and, ultimately, financial stability. Indeed, as I noted, a premature removal of accommodation could, by slowing the economy, perversely serve to extend the period of low long-term rates. For these reasons, we are responding to financial stability concerns with the multipronged approach I summarized a moment ago, which relies primarily on monitoring, supervision and regulation, and communication. We will, however, be evaluating these issues carefully and on an ongoing basis; we will be alert for any developments that pose risks to the achievement of the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives of price stability and maximum employment; and we will, of course, remain prepared to use all of our tools as needed to address any such developments. ReferencesAdrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (forthcoming). "Financial Stability Monitoring," Finance and Economics Discussion Series. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 12. Campbell, John Y., Adi Sunderam, and Luis M. Viceira (2009). "Inflation Bets or Deflation Hedges? The Changing Risks of Nominal Bonds," NBER Working Paper Series 14701. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David López-Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects,"Economic Journal, vol. 122 (November), pp. F415-F446. D'Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei (2010). "Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation Protected Security Prices," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-19. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 2009. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). "The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7 (March), pp. 3-43. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44 (February supplement), pp. 3-46. Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Portfolio and Its Effects on Mortgage Markets (PDF)," Finance and Economic Discussion Series 2012-22. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen (2011). "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 215-65. Li, Canlin, and Min Wei (2012). "Term Structure Modelling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large Scale Asset Purchase Programs," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-37. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. Rosa, Carlo (2012). "How 'Unconventional' Are Large-Scale Asset Purchases? The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 560. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May. Stein, Jeremy C. (2013). "Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses," speech delivered at "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, February 5-7. 1. Estimates are based on the model of D'Amico, Kim, and Wei (2010). That model employs the "arbitrage-free" term structure framework and jointly models real yields, nominal yields, and inflation as functions of four underlying latent factors. Historical data on nominal yields, real yields, and inflation can be used to estimate these underlying factors and the relationship of real and nominal yields to the factors. Based on this information, the model can be used to produce estimates of the components of nominal yields shown in chart 2. Note that inflation in chart 2 is measured by the consumer price index; inflation measured by this index is close to but on average slightly higher than inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, the measure to which the Federal Open Market Committee's 2 percent inflation objective refers.Return to text 2. For example, this decomposition as estimated based on expectations as reported in the Blue Chip Financial Forecasts gives broadly similar results, as do many standard term structure models.Return to text 3. SeeStatement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF), as amended effective on January 29, 2013.Return to text 4. Real interest rates are not constrained by the zero bound, and the fact that expected average real short-term interest rates are near zero reflects that the nominal rate is expected, on average, to run close to the expected inflation rate, which is near 2 percent.Return to text 5. See the FOMC's December statement at Board of Governors (2012).Return to text 6. Between April 2009 and October 2012, expectations for average growth over the next 10 years, as reported in Consensus Forecasts, have fallen about 0.2 percentage points for the United States. This reduction in growth expectations is a broad phenomenon: Between April 2009 and October 2012, the average prediction for growth over the next 10 years for Canada, Germany, Japan, and the United Kingdom has fallen between 0.1 and 0.6 percentage points.Return to text 7. It is important to note that these indexed yields are likely being pushed down by term premiums akin to the term premiums in nominal rates discussed in this speech.Return to text 8. See, for example, Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2009).Return to text 9. There are some additional more technical features of the Treasury market that push down the term premium. For example, the Treasury term premium is likely also depressed by the global demand for Treasury securities for use as collateral or margin in funding or derivatives markets.Return to text 10. See, for example, Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2011); Li and Wei (2012); Hamilton and Wu (2012); D'Amico, English, López-Salido, and Nelson (2012); Rosa (2012); Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011); and Hancock and Passmore (2012).Return to text 11. Term premiums, calculated using similar methods, have also declined fairly sharply recently in Canada, Germany, and the United Kingdom; somewhat less so in Japan. This result is notable in that the central banks of these economies, with the exception of the Bank of England, have not pursued large-scale purchases of longer-term securities.Return to text 12. This projection assumes that two key components of the 10-year Treasury yield shown in chart 2--the expected average real short-rate and the term premium--revert to their respective mean levels over the period 2000 to 2006 during the next 5 years; the expected average inflation component is assumed to remain constant near the 2 percent level prevailing at the end of 2012.Return to text 13. The two components were intertwined, as measures of uncertainty about the path of policy moved up sharply, likely contributing to a rise in term premiums. Notably, in this episode, the rise in rates created some stress in financial markets but did not lead to serious financial instability, nor did it significantly impair economic activity. However, one would not want to conclude from that one case that sharp rises in rates do not pose risks.Return to text 14. See Stein (2013).Return to text 15. On the other hand, some risk-taking--such as when an entrepreneur takes out a loan to start a new business or an existing firm expands capacity--is a necessary element of a healthy economic recovery. Moreover, although accommodative monetary policies may increase certain types of risk-taking, in the present circumstances they also serve in some ways to reduce risk in the system, most importantly by strengthening the overall economy, but also by encouraging firms to rely more on longer-term funding, and by reducing debt service costs for households and businesses.Return to text 16. See Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (forthcoming).Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Department of Economics and STICERD (Suntory and Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines) Public Discussion in Association with the Bank of England, London School of Economics, London, United Kingdom I'm very pleased to participate in this conference honoring my good friend Mervyn King. As Mervyn noted in a recent speech in New York, we had adjoining offices at MIT as young academics and never imagined that 30 years later we still would be colleagues--as central bankers.1Now, as then, I value his advice and insight. The topic of this session is lessons learned from the financial crisis. For me, perhaps the central insight is that the recent crisis, despite its many exotic features, was in fact a classic financial panic--a systemwide run of "hot money" away from assets whose values suddenly became uncertain. In that respect, the crisis was akin to many other financial crises faced by governments and central banks--including that most venerable of central banks, the Bank of England--over the centuries. The response to the crisis likewise followed the classic prescriptions of liquidity provision, liability guarantees, asset evaluation and disposition, and recapitalization where necessary. Although the crisis had classic features, to a significant extent it took place in a novel institutional context, making diagnosis and response more challenging: For example, in the United States, collateralized wholesale funding rather than conventional bank deposits constituted the hot money, and run pressure was experienced not only by banks but by diverse other institutions, such as structured investment vehicles. In addition, the scale and complexity of globalized financial institutions and markets made it difficult to predict how the crisis might spread or to coordinate the response. One of the few positive aspects of this episode was the extraordinary degree of international cooperation achieved among policymakers, including the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve, in responding to the crisis. Because I have developed these themes in some detail elsewhere, I thought today I would tackle a different and more recent issue that has arisen in the aftermath of the crisis--the issue of whether, in the widespread easing of monetary policies, we are seeing a competitive depreciation of exchange rates.2Like other aspects of the crisis, the notion of competitive depreciation has strong classical antecedents, particularly in relation to the global Great Depression of the 1930s. So let me start by briefly revisiting the older discussion and its evolution. As my audience knows, on the eve of the Great Depression the exchange rates of most industrial countries were determined by the rules of the international gold standard--or, more technically, by the gold-exchange standard, as foreign exchange (primarily dollars and pounds sterling) was used along with gold as a form of international reserves. The gold standard, which had been suspended during World War I, was painstakingly rebuilt in the 1920s. Unfortunately, the reconstructed gold standard had a number of serious problems. For one, the exchange rates implied by the gold valuations that countries chose for their currencies following World War I were in some cases far from the levels consistent with balanced flows in trade and payments. Notably, as John Maynard Keynes pointed out in his famous pamphlet,The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill, the British pound was overvalued under the new gold standard, which disadvantaged British exports and contributed to weak economic conditions in the United Kingdom in the late 1920s.3One of Mervyn King's predecessors as governor of the Bank of England, Montagu Norman, who presided over both Britain's return to the gold standard and its subsequent exit, said of the ill-fated choice of parity for the pound: "Only God could tell whether it [the value in gold chosen for the pound sterling] was or was not the correct figure"; another commentator added, "But of course the Deity may not be an Economist."4 Another problem, which became clear as the global economy weakened and financial conditions deteriorated, was that fixed exchange rates under the gold standard were vulnerable to speculative runs. Although runs, or in some cases policy decisions, effectively took a number of countries off the gold standard in the early 1930s, the financial world was shaken to its foundation when the United Kingdom, the unofficial center of the global gold standard, was forced by a speculative attack to leave gold in September 1931. Over the next five years, essentially all of the world's industrial nations left the gold standard, either de facto or de jure. Declines in the value of the departing nation's currency, sometimes very sharp ones, typically followed. The uncoordinated abandonment of the gold standard in the early 1930s gave rise to the idea of "beggar-thy-neighbor" policies. According to this analysis, as put forth by important contemporary economists like Joan Robinson, exchange rate depreciations helped the economy whose currency had weakened by making the country more competitive internationally.5Indeed, the decline in the value of the pound after 1931 was associated with a relatively early recovery from the Depression by the United Kingdom, in part because of some rebound in exports. However, according to this view, the gains to the depreciating country were equaled or exceeded by the losses to its trading partners, which became less internationally competitive--hence, "beggar thy neighbor." Over time, so-called competitive depreciations became associated in the minds of historians with the tariff wars that followed the passage of the Smoot-Hawley tariff in the United States. Both types of policies were decried--and in some textbooks, still are--as having prolonged the Depression by disrupting trade patterns while leading to an ultimately fruitless and destructive battle over shrinking international markets. Economists still agree that Smoot-Hawley and the ensuing tariff wars were highly counterproductive and contributed to the depth and length of the global Depression. However, modern research on the Depression, beginning with the seminal 1985 paper by Barry Eichengreen and Jeffrey Sachs, has changed our view of the effects of the abandonment of the gold standard.6Although it is true that leaving the gold standard and the resulting currency depreciation conferred a temporary competitive advantage in some cases, modern research shows that the primary benefit of leaving gold was that it freed countries to use appropriately expansionary monetary policies. By 1935 or 1936, when essentially all major countries had left the gold standard and exchange rates were market-determined, the net trade effects of the changes in currency values were certainly small. Yet the global economy as a whole was much stronger than it had been in 1931. The reason was that, in shedding the strait jacket of the gold standard, each country became free to use monetary policy in a way that was more commensurate with achieving full employment at home. Moreover, and critically, countries also benefited from stronger growth in trading partners that purchased their exports. In sharp contrast to the tariff wars, monetary reflation in the 1930s was a positive-sum exercise, whose benefits came mainly from higher domestic demand in all countries, not from trade diversion arising from changes in exchange rates. The lessons for the present are clear. Today most advanced industrial economies remain, to varying extents, in the grip of slow recoveries from the Great Recession. With inflation generally contained, central banks in these countries are providing accommodative monetary policies to support growth. Do these policies constitute competitive devaluations? To the contrary, because monetary policy is accommodative in the great majority of advanced industrial economies, one would not expect large and persistent changes in the configuration of exchange rates among these countries. The benefits of monetary accommodation in the advanced economies are not created in any significant way by changes in exchange rates; they come instead from the support for domestic aggregate demand in each country or region. Moreover, because stronger growth in each economy confers beneficial spillovers to trading partners, these policies are not "beggar-thy-neighbor" but rather are positive-sum, "enrich-thy-neighbor" actions. Again, the distinction between monetary policies aimed at domestic objectives and trade-diverting exchange rate devaluations or other protectionist measures is critical. The former can be mutually beneficial, the latter are not. Indeed, it was this view that prompted the Group of Seven central bankers and finance ministers to issue a statement in February agreeing to refrain from actions focused on achieving competitive advantage by weakening their currencies and reaffirming that fiscal and monetary policies would remain oriented toward meeting domestic objectives using domestic instruments.7 Among the advanced economies, the mutual benefits of monetary easing are clear. The case of emerging market economies is more complicated. To a first approximation, industrial countries are most concerned that domestic aggregate demand be set at the level that best fosters price stability and a return to full employment at home. In contrast, many emerging market economies may be concerned not only with the level of domestic demand (as needed to achieve objectives for employment and inflation) but with other considerations as well. First, because in recent decades many of these countries have pursued an export-led strategy for industrialization, they may be leery of expansionary policies in the advanced economies that, all else being equal, tend to cause the currencies of emerging market economies to appreciate, restraining their exports. Second, because many emerging market economies have financial sectors that are small or less developed by global standards but open to foreign investors, they may perceive themselves to be vulnerable to asset bubbles and financial imbalances caused by heavy and volatile capital inflows, including those arising from low interest rates in the advanced economies. I agree these challenges are significant. However, a few points should be made. Regarding the effects of monetary easing on exchange rates and exports, I would note that trade-weighted real exchange rates of emerging market economies, with some exceptions, have not changed much from their values shortly before the intensification of the financial crisis in late 2008. Moreover, even if the expansionary policies of the advanced economies were to lead to significant currency appreciation in emerging markets, the resulting drag on their competitiveness would have to be balanced against the positive effects of stronger advanced-economy demand. Which of these two effects would be greater is an empirical matter. Simulations of the Federal Reserve Board's econometric models of the global economy suggest that the effects are roughly offsetting, so that accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies do not appear, on net, to have adverse consequences for output and exports in the emerging market economies.8A return to solid growth among the advanced economies is ultimately in the interest of advanced and emerging market economies alike. Regarding capital flows: It is true that interest rate differentials associated with differences in national monetary policies can promote cross-border capital flows as investors seek higher returns. But my reading of recent research makes me skeptical that these policy differences are the dominant force behind capital flows to emerging market economies; differences in growth prospects across countries and swings in investor risk sentiment seem to have played a larger role.9Moreover, the fact that some emerging market economies have policies that depress the values of their currencies may create an expectation of future appreciation that in and of itself induces speculative inflows. Of course, heavy capital inflows and their volatility pose challenges to emerging market policymakers, whatever their source. Policymakers do have some tools to address these concerns. In recent years, emerging market nations have implemented macroprudential measures aimed at strengthening their financial systems and reducing overheating in specific sectors, such as property markets. Policymakers have also experimented with various forms of capital controls. Such controls raise concerns about effectiveness, cost of implementation, and possible microeconomic distortions. Nevertheless, the International Monetary Fund has suggested that, in carefully circumscribed circumstances, capital controls may be a useful tool.10 In sum, the advanced industrial economies are currently pursuing appropriately expansionary policies to help support recovery and price stability in their own countries. As the modern literature on the Great Depression demonstrates, these policies confer net benefits on the world economy as a whole and should not be confused with zero- or negative-sum policies of trade diversion. In fact, the simultaneous use by several countries of accommodative policy can be mutually reinforcing to the benefit of all. Let me end these remarks as I began, by paying tribute to Mervyn King. He has been a leader in the central banking community during an extraordinarily difficult period. I wish him the very best in the next stage of his career. 1. See Mervyn A. King (2012), "Talk to the Economic Club of New York," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, December 10, http://econclubny.com/events/Transcript_MervynKing2012.pdf.Return to text 2. See, for example, Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Reflections on a Year of Crisis," speech delivered at "Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 20-22; and Ben S. Bernanke (2012), "Some Reflections on the Crisis and the Policy Response," speech delivered at "Rethinking Finance: Perspectives on the Crisis," a conference sponsored by the Russell Sage Foundation and The Century Foundation, New York, April 13. See also Ben S. Bernanke (2010), "Causes of the Recent Financial and Economic Crisis," statement before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, September 2.Return to text 3. See John Maynard Keynes (1925),The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill(London: Hogarth Press).Return to text 4. As quoted in C.A.E. Goodhart (1972), review ofBritish Monetary Policy 1924-1931: The Norman Conquest of $4.86, by D.E. Moggridge,Economica, vol. 39 (November), pp. 450.Return to text 5. See Joan Robinson (1947), "Beggar-My-Neighbour Remedies for Unemployment," inEssays in the Theory of Employment, 2nd ed. (Oxford, U.K.: Basil Blackwell), pp. 156-70.Return to text 6. See Barry Eichengreen and Jeffrey Sachs (1985), "Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s,"Journal of Economic History, vol. 45 (December), pp. 925-46.Return to text 7. For the full text of the Group of Seven statement, see Bank of England (2013), "G7 Statement," press release, February 12, www.forexmg-pt.com/2013/02/12/bank-of-england-publications-news-releases-news-release-g7-statement.Return to text 8. Other work also supports the finding of no adverse spillovers. For example, one that finds strong positive spillovers is Bennett T. McCallum (2003), "Japanese Monetary Policy, 1991-2001 (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Quarterly, vol. 89 (Winter), pp. 1-31.Return to text 9. For example, Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub find that factors other than U.S. monetary policy have been substantially more important as drivers of capital flows to emerging market economies; see Marcel Fratzscher, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2012), "A Global Monetary Tsunami? On the Spillovers of US Quantitative Easing (PDF)," Centre for Economic Policy and Research, Discussion Paper Number 9195 (London: CEPR, October). See also Atish R. Ghosh, Jun Kim, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Juan Zalduendo (2012), "Surges (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/12/22 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, January); and International Monetary Fund; Strategy, Policy, and Review Department (2011), "Recent Experiences in Managing Capital Inflow--Cross-Cutting Themes and Possible Policy Framework (PDF)," paper (Washington: IMF, February).Return to text 10. Importantly, such circumstances exclude the use of capital controls to avoid other necessary macroeconomic policy adjustments, such as greater exchange rate flexibility. See, for example, International Monetary Fund (2012), "The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: An Institutional View," (Washington: International Monetary Fund).Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Crapo, and other members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to discuss the important role the Federal Reserve plays in the U.S. government's effort to combat money laundering and terrorist financing. I will begin by describing our efforts to ensure banking industry compliance with the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) and the economic sanctions authorized by the President and Congress. I will also highlight some of the important actions we have taken to enforce the law and to promote safe and sound practices in this area. BackgroundCongress enacted the BSA in 1970 to help safeguard the U.S. financial system and our financial institutions from the abuses of financial crime, and has revised and strengthened the act many times since. The Federal Reserve has issued regulations to implement the BSA, including regulations that require the institutions we supervise to establish a BSA compliance program, and has integrated BSA examinations into our supervisory program. The Federal Reserve also works closely with Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) to ensure that the institutions we supervise provide law enforcement with the reports prosecutors need to investigate suspicious activity. The particular steps a banking organization must take to develop a BSA compliance program have been documented extensively. The foundation for such a program begins with a well-developed and documented risk assessment that identifies and limits the risk exposures of the banking organization's products, services, customers, and geographic locations. Monitoring systems should be in place to identify and report suspicious activity, in particular any account or transaction activity that is not consistent with the bank's expectations. These systems should be accompanied by a strong training program to ensure that personnel, including those in offshore offices, are familiar with U.S. regulatory requirements and bank policies. The BSA compliance program should be reviewed by management, subjected to periodic independent tests that measure whether the program is functioning properly, and improved as needed. Finally, a qualified bank officer should be given sufficient authority to ensure that regulatory requirements and bank policies are being followed on a day-to-day basis. Banking organizations are also expected to maintain a program for ensuring compliance with U.S. economic sanctions administered by the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). The OFAC program should identify higher-risk areas within a bank's operations, and implement appropriate internal controls for screening and reporting prohibited transactions. Banks are expected to perform independent testing for compliance, designate a bank employee or employees that are specifically responsible for OFAC compliance, and create training programs for appropriate personnel in all relevant areas of the bank. A bank's OFAC compliance program should be commensurate with its activities and its risk profile. The Supervisory ProcessThe Federal Reserve conducts a BSA and OFAC compliance program review as part of its regular safety-and-soundness examination program for the approximately 1,060 state-member banks; state chartered branches and agencies of foreign banking organizations; and Edge Act and agreement corporations we supervise. The frequency of the on-site examination is normally every 12 to 18 months, depending upon the banking organization's condition, asset size, and rating. On average, we conduct approximately 960 BSA and OFAC reviews each year. The Federal Reserve's BSA and OFAC reviews are risk-focused. In other words, supervisors have the flexibility to apply the appropriate level of scrutiny to higher-risk business lines. To ensure consistency in the design and execution of our BSA and OFAC examinations, we use procedures developed jointly with the member agencies of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC),1FinCEN, and OFAC. The findings of our BSA and OFAC reviews are taken into account in determining the institution's examination ratings, either as part of the management component rating for domestic institutions, or as part of the risk management and compliance component ratings used to evaluate the U.S. operations of foreign bank branches and agencies we supervise. The Federal Reserve reinforces its supervisory program by conducting targeted examinations of financial institutions that show signs of being vulnerable to illicit financing. Banks are selected for such examinations based on, among other things, our analysis of the institution's payments activity, suspicious activity reports, currency transaction reports, and law enforcement leads. The Federal Reserve devotes substantial resources to BSA compliance. Each Federal Reserve Bank has a BSA specialist and coordinator on staff, and, since the late 1980s, the Board's Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation has included an anti-money laundering section, overseen by a senior official, to help coordinate these efforts. Coordination EffortsEffective implementation and enforcement of the BSA and U.S. economic sanctions requires the participation of, and coordination among, several agencies and international groups. Let me be specific about the steps we are taking to coordinate. First, to ensure that the banking industry has clear understanding of regulatory expectations, the Federal Reserve has actively participated in supervisory forums, such as the FFIEC, which has an expansive BSA working group that promotes high standards for bank examinations and compliance. In addition, we participate in the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group, a public-private partnership established for the purpose of soliciting advice on the administration of the BSA. The Federal Reserve also joined the U.S. Treasury's Interagency Task Force on Strengthening and Clarifying the BSA/AML Framework (Task Force), which includes representatives from the Department of Justice, OFAC, FinCEN, the federal banking agencies, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. The primary focus of the Task Force is to review the BSA, its implementation, and its enforcement with respect to U.S. financial institutions that are subject to these requirements, and to develop recommendations for ensuring the continued effectiveness of the BSA and efficiency in agency efforts to monitor compliance. Second, to make the supervision of internationally active banking organizations more effective, we are engaged as a member of the U.S. delegation to the Financial Action Task Force, an international policymaking and standard-setting body dedicated to combating money laundering and terrorist financing globally. Further, as a member of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), we have been involved in various efforts to prevent criminal use of the international banking system. For example, in 2009, as a complement to BCBS efforts to promote transparency in cross-border payments, the Federal Reserve issued guidance with other federal banking agencies that clarifies U.S. regulatory expectations for U.S. banks engaged in correspondent banking activities. Finally, we are working cooperatively with other federal banking agencies, state regulators, the Department of Justice, the Department of Treasury, and foreign regulators to ensure comprehensive enforcement of the law. We have participated in many of the largest, most complex enforcement cases in the BSA and U.S. sanctions area. Collectively, these cases have focused attention on potential misuse of the financial system for financial crimes, strengthened compliance programs at banking organizations (both in the U.S. and abroad), and generated billions of dollars in fines paid to the U.S. Treasury. Our coordination efforts begin at an early stage in the supervisory process. For example, the Federal Reserve brings every instance of an anti-money laundering deficiency or violation to the attention of FinCEN so that FinCEN may consider assessing a penalty for violations of the BSA. We also notify OFAC of any apparent, unreported sanctions violations discovered in the course of an examination, and direct the banking organization we supervise to provide information directly to OFAC as required by regulation. In addition, we share information and coordinate with the Department of Justice, state law enforcement, the federal banking agencies, and state regulators, as appropriate, as part of our enforcement program. The Enforcement ProcessIt has been our experience that the majority of institutions supervised by the Federal Reserve have well-administered and effective BSA and OFAC compliance programs. Nevertheless, there have been instances where concerns have been raised by our examiners. Importantly, the Federal Reserve does not have authority from Congress to conduct criminal investigations or to prosecute criminal cases. The decision to prosecute a financial institution for money laundering offenses and criminal violations of the BSA and U.S. sanctions laws is made by the Department of Justice. Most of these problems are resolved promptly after they are brought to the attention of a bank's management and directors. In some instances, problems are of more serious concern and use of the Federal Reserve's enforcement authority is deemed appropriate. In these cases, an informal supervisory action may be taken, such as requiring an institution's board of directors to adopt an appropriate resolution or executing a memorandum of understanding between an institution and a Reserve Bank. In the most serious cases, the Federal Reserve may take a formal enforcement action against an institution. These actions may include a written agreement, a cease and desist order, or a civil money penalty. Congress has also given the Federal Reserve the authority to terminate the operations of certain entities operating in the U.S. upon the conviction of a money laundering offense by the Department of Justice, and to prohibit insiders who intentionally commit such offenses from participating in the banking industry. The type of enforcement action pursued by the Federal Reserve against an institution is directly related to the severity of the offense, the type of failure that led to the offense, and management's willingness and ability to implement corrective action. In the last five years, the Federal Reserve has issued 113 enforcement actions relating to BSA and OFAC compliance, including 25 public cease and desist orders and written agreements. Together with these recent actions, the Federal Reserve has assessed hundreds of millions of dollars in penalties. The institutions that have been subject to these actions are large and small, domestic and foreign. In each case, the Federal Reserve has required the institution to take corrective measures to ensure their programs are brought into compliance. Enforcement of U.S. Economic SanctionsMany of the recent U.S. sanctions cases the Federal Reserve has pursued involve foreign banks with operations that extend across many different countries around the world. These cases have attracted significant attention and involve a particular type of activity worthy of special attention. The misconduct in these cases relates primarily to the manner in which these firms handle cross-border payments. Cross-border payments can be broadly defined as transactions between banking entities that are located in different countries, but there are many different permutations of cross-border payments. For example, cross-border payments can be carried out as a wire transfer where the originator and beneficiary are located in different countries; a wire transfer where the originator and beneficiary are in the same country, but where one or more correspondents in a second country are used; or as a chain of wire transfers that has at least one international element. Cross-border payments typically occur when the originator and beneficiary, or their banks, are located in different countries or where the currency used for the payments is not the currency of the country where the transaction originates. For example, U.S. dollars may be used to make a payment between parties each located in a different foreign country. Structurally, there are usually two components to these cross-border payments: (1) the instructions, which contain information about the originator and beneficiary of the funds, and (2) the actual funds transfer. The payment instructions for cross-border payments typically are sent to an intermediary bank using industry financial telecommunications systems, such as the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT). The actual funds transfer occurs separately, typically through the domestic funds transfer system of the originator, via a book transfer of an intermediary with a presence on both sides of the border, and through the domestic funds transfer system of the beneficiary. Foreign banks often operate in jurisdictions that do not impose the same economic sanctions on foreign customers as the United States. Transactions involving these sanctioned customers are nonetheless subject to U.S. law if the transaction is routed through the U.S., as is typical for transactions conducted in U.S. dollars. Foreign banks that operate in countries without sanctions similar to those imposed by the United States have not always had in place the mechanisms to ensure transactions routed through the U.S. comply with U.S. law. Many of the Federal Reserve's enforcement activities are directed at remedying these situations. One of the Federal Reserve's most important sanctions enforcement cases involved ABN AMRO. In response to corrective measures the Federal Reserve imposed on the firm's New York branch in 2004,2which required the bank to review certain historical transactions, ABN AMRO discovered numerous payment messages that were sent through its U.S. branch or a U.S. correspondent in a manner designed to circumvent the filters used by the U.S. institution to detect transactions involving sanctioned parties. In particular, the information that identified a U.S. sanctioned party was omitted from the SWIFT payment sent through the U.S., while a complementary payment instruction with sanctioned party information was deliberately routed outside the United States. The Federal Reserve responded by escalating our enforcement action to a cease and desist order and imposing a substantial penalty on ABN AMRO.3The Federal Reserve's order required ABN AMRO to implement a global compliance program and take specific steps to prevent circumvention of the required U.S. sanctions filters. We coordinated this action with other U.S. and foreign regulators, including the home country supervisor for ABN AMRO. The Federal Reserve's enforcement action against ABN AMRO triggered important changes in cross-border payment practices. The Federal Reserve played a key role in this debate and in developing the standards that have since been adopted to improve transparency in cross-border payment messages--including the standards adopted by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and SWIFT. These standards require the expanded disclosure of the originator and beneficiary on payment instructions sent as part of cover payments. In the years since the ABN AMRO case, the Federal Reserve and other U.S. authorities have taken action against international banks that had been engaged in similar evasive misconduct. Most recently, the Federal Reserve has imposed cease and desist orders on Credit Suisse, Barclays, Standard Chartered, and HSBC.4In each case, the bank's home country supervisor has agreed to help monitor compliance with the Federal Reserve's order. These enforcement cases reflect our continued view that international banks have an obligation to ensure that they do not interfere with the ability of U.S. financial institutions to comply with the sanctions laws. Enforcement of the Bank Secrecy ActThe Federal Reserve has also taken a number of recent enforcement actions to require depository institutions to improve their BSA programs and comply with other anti-money laundering obligations, including the reporting requirements that exist under the BSA. While bank holding companies are not statutorily mandated to have the same program requirements as depository institutions, we have also taken action against bank holding companies to require them to improve their oversight of the subsidiary bank's BSA programs and compliance. For example, in 2010, we issued a cease and desist order against HSBC requiring the U.S. holding company to improve its oversight of the compliance program at HSBC's national bank subsidiary.5HSBC's failure to address our concerns in a timely manner was part of the reason for imposing a substantial penalty on HSBC and its U.S. holding company last year.6 The Federal Reserve takes seriously its responsibility to pursue formal, public action in cases of BSA non-compliance. For example, in January, the Federal Reserve issued a cease and desist order requiring JPMorgan Chase to take corrective action to enhance its program for compliance with the BSA and other anti-money laundering requirements at the firm's various subsidiaries.7In June 2012, we issued a public enforcement action against Commerzbank AG and its U.S. branch for its failure to comply with certain BSA reporting obligations.8 ConclusionThe Federal Reserve places great importance on ensuring that the institutions we supervise comply with the BSA and U.S. economic sanctions. When we find problems at a supervised institution, we demand specific corrective measures, by specific dates, and we take strong enforcement actions when necessary. We will continue these efforts and work cooperatively with law enforcement and other financial regulators to ensure a coordinated response to the threat posed by illicit financing to the U.S. financial system. Thank you very much for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have. 1. The FFIEC member agencies include the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), National Credit Union Administration (NCUA), Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), as well as the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2004), "Written agreement with ABN AMRO Bank," press release, July 26.Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2005), "Agencies release bank supervisory and penalty actions against ABN AMRO Bank, N.V.," press release, December 19.Return to text 4. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Consent order to cease and desist against Credit Suisse," press release, December 16; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Cease and desist order against Barclays Bank and Barclays Bank New York Branch," press release, August 18; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Board issues consent cease and desist order, and assesses civil money penalty against Standard Chartered," press release, December 10; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Board issues consent cease and desist order, and assesses civil money penalty against HSBC Holdings PLC and HSBC North America Holdings, Inc.," press release, December 11.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Cease and desist order against HSBC North America Holdings," press release, October 7.Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Board issues consent cease and desist order, and assesses civil money penalty against HSBC Holdings PLC and HSBC North America Holdings, Inc.," press release, December 11.Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Federal Reserve Board issues two consent cease and desist orders against JPMorgan Chase & Co.," press release, January 14.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Board issues enforcement actions with Calvert Financial Corporation and Mainstreet Bank, Commerzbank AG, First Security Bank of Malta, Grant Park Bancshares, Inc., and Robertson Holding Company, L.P.," press release, June 14.Return to text