Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Three federal financial institution regulatory agencies today issued a FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) document to provide clarification and guidance to banking entities regarding investments in "Covered Funds" and whether collateralized debt obligations backed by trust preferred securities (TruPS CDOs) could be determined to be Covered Funds under the final rules to implement section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The FAQs are intended to clarify that banking entities that have holdings in TruPS CDOs are not required to sell these holdings immediately under the final rules, but instead may use the conformance period to determine if they can be brought into conformance by the end of the conformance period, which is July 21, 2015. The document released by the agencies provides an overview of some of the key legal issues banking entities should consider in determining whether holdings of TruPS CDOs are subject to the provision of the final rules implementing section 619, commonly known as the Volcker Rule. The issues identified and discussed in the document are whether a TruPS CDO qualifies in its current form as a Covered Fund under the final rules; whether it can be restructured or otherwise conformed to the final rules by the end of the conformance period of July 21, 2015; and whether a bank's investment in the CDO constitutes an ownership interest. The final rules were approved by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission on December 10, 2013. FAQ Regarding Collateralized Debt Obligations Backed by Trust Preferred Securities under the Final Volcker rule (PDF)
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemConsumer Financial Protection BureauFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Housing Finance AgencyNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--Six federal financial regulatory agencies today issued a final rule that creates exemptions from certain appraisal requirements for a subset of higher-priced mortgage loans. The exemptions are intended to save borrowers time and money while still ensuring that the loans are financially sound. The appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgages were established by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). Under the Dodd-Frank Act, closed-end mortgage loans are considered to be higher-priced if they are secured by a consumer's home and have interest rates above a certain threshold. The Dodd-Frank Act requires creditors to obtain a written appraisal based on a physical visit of the home's interior before making these loans. The final rule provides that loans of $25,000 or less and certain "streamlined" refinancings are exempt from the Dodd-Frank Act appraisal requirements, which go into effect on January 18, 2014. In addition, the final rule contains special provisions for manufactured homes, which can present unique issues in determining the appropriate valuation method. To ensure that access to affordable housing options is not hindered while creditors make the necessary adjustments, the requirements for manufactured home loans will not become effective for 18 months. Starting on July 18, 2015, loans secured by an existing manufactured home and land will be subject to the Dodd-Frank Act's appraisal requirements. Loans secured by a new manufactured home and land will be exempt only from the requirement that the appraiser visit the home's interior. For loans secured by manufactured homes without land, creditors will be allowed to use other valuation methods without an appraisal, such as using third-party valuation services or "book values." In January 2013, a final rule implementing the new Dodd-Frank Act appraisal requirements was issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Compliance with the January 2013 final rule will become mandatory on January 18, 2014. These same agencies are jointly issuing today's final rule to provide additional exemptions in response to public comments. TheFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemCommodity Futures Trading CommissionFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencySecurities and Exchange Commission Five federal agencies on Tuesday issued final rules developed jointly to implement section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (the "Volcker rule"). The final rules prohibit insured depository institutions and companies affiliated with insured depository institutions ("banking entities") from engaging in short-term proprietary trading of certain securities, derivatives, commodity futures and options on these instruments, for their own account. The final rules also impose limits on banking entities' investments in, and other relationships with, hedge funds or private equity funds. Like the Dodd-Frank Act, the final rules provide exemptions for certain activities, including market making, underwriting, hedging, trading in government obligations, insurance company activities, and organizing and offering hedge funds or private equity funds. The final rules also clarify that certain activities are not prohibited, including acting as agent, broker, or custodian. The compliance requirements under the final rules vary based on the size of the banking entity and the scope of activities conducted. Banking entities with significant trading operations will be required to establish a detailed compliance program and their CEOs will be required to attest that the program is reasonably designed to achieve compliance with the final rule. Independent testing and analysis of an institution's compliance program will also be required. The final rules reduce the burden on smaller, less-complex institutions by limiting their compliance and reporting requirements. Additionally, a banking entity that does not engage in covered trading activities will not need to establish a compliance program. The Federal Reserve Board announced on Tuesday that banking organizations covered by section 619 will be required to fully conform their activities and investments by July 21, 2015. Statement by Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Statement by Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Fact Sheet (PDF) Community Bank Guide (PDF) Board Votes Meeting Memoranda Open Board Meeting on December 10
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--Four federal financial institution regulatory agencies today issued a statement to clarify safety-and-soundness expectations and Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) considerations related to Qualified Mortgage loans and non-Qualified Mortgage loans offered by regulated institutions. The statement is intended to guide institutions as they assess the implementation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau's Ability-to-Repay and Qualified Mortgage Standards Rule, which takes effect January 10, 2014. From a safety-and-soundness perspective, the agencies emphasize that an institution may originate both Qualified Mortgage and non-Qualified Mortgage loans, based on its business strategy and risk appetite. The agencies will not subject a residential mortgage loan to safety-and-soundness criticism solely because of the loan's status as a Qualified Mortgage or non-Qualified Mortgage loan. The agencies continue to expect institutions to underwrite residential mortgage loans in a prudent fashion and address key risk areas in residential mortgage lending, including loan terms, borrower qualification standards, loan-to-value limits, documentation requirements, and portfolio- and risk-management practices, regardless of whether a residential mortgage loan is a Qualified Mortgage or non-Qualified Mortgage. From a consumer protection perspective, the agencies responsible for conducting CRA evaluations do not anticipate that institutions' decision to originate only Qualified Mortgages, absent other factors, would adversely affect their CRA evaluations. The attached statement is being issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examination procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small asset-size threshold are not subject to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks and savings associations. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for urban wage earners and clerical workers, not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 1.39 percent increase in the CPI index for the period ending in November 2013, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2014. The agencies will publish the adjustments in the Federal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of theFederal Financial Institutions Examination Council. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencySecurities and Exchange Commission The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday said they are reviewing whether it would be appropriate and consistent with the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act not to subject collateralized debt obligations backed by trust preferred securities to the investment prohibitions of section 619 of Dodd-Frank, otherwise known as the "Volcker rule." The agencies intend to address the matter no later than January 15, 2014. The accounting staffs of the agencies believe that, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles, any actions in January 2014 that occur before the issuance of December 31, 2013, financial reports should be considered when preparing those financial reports. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and the Securities and Exchange Commissionissued final rulesto implement section 619 on December 10, 2013.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencySecurities and Exchange Commission The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday said they are reviewing whether it would be appropriate and consistent with the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act not to subject collateralized debt obligations backed by trust preferred securities to the investment prohibitions of section 619 of Dodd-Frank, otherwise known as the "Volcker rule." The agencies intend to address the matter no later than January 15, 2014. The accounting staffs of the agencies believe that, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles, any actions in January 2014 that occur before the issuance of December 31, 2013, financial reports should be considered when preparing those financial reports. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and the Securities and Exchange Commissionissued final rulesto implement section 619 on December 10, 2013.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencySecurities and Exchange Commission The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday said they are reviewing whether it would be appropriate and consistent with the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act not to subject collateralized debt obligations backed by trust preferred securities to the investment prohibitions of section 619 of Dodd-Frank, otherwise known as the "Volcker rule." The agencies intend to address the matter no later than January 15, 2014. The accounting staffs of the agencies believe that, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles, any actions in January 2014 that occur before the issuance of December 31, 2013, financial reports should be considered when preparing those financial reports. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and the Securities and Exchange Commissionissued final rulesto implement section 619 on December 10, 2013.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Ceremony Commemorating the Centennial of the Federal Reserve Act, Washington, D.C. I have been asked to close this ceremony marking the 100th anniversary of the signing of the Federal Reserve Act--the law that created the Federal Reserve--by looking ahead to the next century. Given the well-known difficulties that economists have in forecasting even the next few quarters, I will happily point out one important advantage in making a 100-year forecast, which is that I won't be around to explain why the forecast went wrong. Our ability to make accurate long-term forecasts is limited, to say the least. Nevertheless, I will venture one prediction that I don't think is too bold, which is this: The values that have sustained and served the Federal Reserve at its best, and have permitted it to make critical contributions to the economic health of our nation during the past century, will continue to serve it and the nation well in the century ahead. Among the Fed's most important values is the belief that policymaking should be based on dispassionate, objective, and fact-based analysis. The ideal we seek is a combination of the researcher's intellectual rigor and the ability of the effective policymaker to navigate the messiness of the real world, a world that includes complex institutions and markets, imperfect and incomplete data, and often-unpredictable human behavior. Of course, policy analysis and implementation of the highest quality do not just happen. They require professionalism and a commitment to public service as exemplified by the generations of staff members who have served this institution so well. Without the expertise and creativity embodied in the staff, it would have been impossible to develop the innovative policies required to meet, in the words of the Federal Reserve Act, the "unusual and exigent circumstances" we confronted during the recent financial crisis. If there is one thing on which I believe all of us here can agree, it is that the quality of the staff has been a great strength throughout our institution's history. Maintaining that quality and commitment to public service will be essential if the Fed is to have a successful second century. Dispassionate analysis, expertise, and commitment to public service--all are values that have served us well. But one value that strikes me as having been at least as important as any other has been the Federal Reserve's willingness, during its finest hours, to stand up to political pressure and make tough but necessary decisions. The fight against inflation during Paul and Alan's times in office was critical for the nation's longer-term prosperity, and it required perseverance in the face of heavy criticism. I keep in my office one of the 2-by-4s mailed to the Fed during Paul's tenure, which communicates some distinctly unfavorable views of high interest rates and their effects. More recently, of course, the Federal Reserve took controversial but necessary measures to arrest what was arguably the worst financial crisis in American history, helping to avert what likely would have been a much more severe economic downturn than the Great Recession we did experience. We have been able to respond nimbly to economic emergencies and make difficult choices in part because of our institutional structure--including long terms for members of the Board of Governors and diverse regional representation in our policymaking Committee--and because of the willingness of policymakers, past and present, to do whatever was needed in the longer-run interest of the economy. As an institution, the Federal Reserve must continue to be willing to make tough decisions, based on objective, empirical analysis and without regard to political pressure. But, finally, we must also recognize that the Fed's ability to make and implement such decisions ultimately depends on the public's understanding and acceptance of our actions. For this reason, we must continue to emphasize two other essential values--transparency and accountability. We must do all that we can to explain our actions and to show how they serve the public interest. That's why we must welcome communication, broadly defined. Of course, we will continue to talk to economists and market participants, but that is not enough. Ultimately, the legitimacy of our policies rests on the understanding and support of the broader American public, whose interests we are working to serve. The ability of this institution to support a healthy economy--an economy with high levels of employment, low inflation, and a stable financial system--will require our continued efforts to engage in two-way communication--explaining our actions and, importantly, listening to what our fellow citizens have to say. Let me end by thanking the organizers of this event and, in particular, all of the past and present policymakers in attendance for helping us mark this centennial milestone in such a memorable fashion.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Federal banking regulators are seeking comment on supplemental guidance on income tax allocation agreements involving holding companies and insured depository institutions. An aim of the proposed guidance is to reduce confusion regarding ownership of any tax refunds. In 1998, federal banking regulators issued an interagency policy statement on income tax allocation, which stated that a holding company that receives a tax refund from a taxing authority obtains these funds as agent for its subsidiary insured depository institutions and other affiliates. The proposed guidance would supplement the 1998 policy statement by instructing insured depository institutions and their holding companies to review their tax allocation agreements to ensure the agreements expressly acknowledge that the holding company receives any tax refunds as an agent. In addition, all banking organizations would be asked to insert specific language in their tax allocation agreements to further clarify tax refund ownership. The proposed addendum would also clarify how sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act, which establish certain restrictions on and requirements for transactions between depository institutions and their affiliates, apply to tax allocation agreements. The federal banking regulators are proposing the guidance in response to disputes between holding companies in bankruptcy and failed depository institutions regarding ownership of tax refunds. Courts have come to differing conclusions regarding the ownership of tax refunds between holding companies and depository institutions based on their interpretation of language in tax allocation agreements. The Interagency Policy Statement on Income Tax Allocation in a Holding Company Structure can be found atwww.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-1998-11-23/pdf/98-31179.pdf. Comments on the proposed guidance should be provided on or before January 21, 2014. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDFComments on this proposal:Submit|View Board Votes
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemConsumer Financial Protection BureauFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencySecurities and Exchange Commission Six federal financial regulatory agencies announced today that they are extending the comment period for their proposed policy statement for assessing diversity policies and practices of the institutions they regulate to allow the public more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Commenters now have until February 7, 2014, to provide feedback on the proposed policy statement. Originally, comments were due December 24, 2013. The proposed policy statement, issued pursuant to section 342 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, is intended to promote transparency and awareness of diversity policies and practices within federally regulated financial institutions. The agencies that issued the proposal are the Federal Reserve Board, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Harvard College won the 10th annual national College Fed Challenge on Monday, a competition that encourages students to learn about the U.S. economy, monetary policymaking, and the role of the Federal Reserve System. The team, from Cambridge, Mass., represented the Boston Federal Reserve District and included Justin Katiraei, Kevin Li, Andreas Schaab, Daniel Tartakovsky, Eugene Wang, Samuel Young, and faculty adviser Benjamin Friedman. The finals were held in the Board Room at the Board of Governors as the capstone to five district competitions held around the country. The other national finalists were second place University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa., with honorable mentions for James Madison University, Harrisonburg, Va.; Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill.; and Pace University, New York, N.Y. College Fed Challenge is a team competition for undergraduate students. Teams analyze economic and financial conditions and formulate a monetary policy recommendation, modeling the Federal Open Market Committee. "Fed Challenge is an invaluable, hands-on opportunity for students to learn about monetary policymaking. I congratulate all of the participants on their hard work, and I hope this program increases their interest in economics and the Federal Reserve," said Federal Reserve Board Member Jeremy C. Stein, one of the judges for this year's competition. Teams competing in the finals gave 15-minute presentations and answered questions for a panel of judges. Teams were judged on economic analysis, responses to judges' questions, teamwork, and presentation. In addition to Governor Stein, judges for the finals this year were Jamie McAndrews, executive vice president and director of research, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and John Weinberg, senior vice president and director of research, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. Teams competed in their local Reserve Bank Districts, and top teams moved on to the finals in Washington, D.C.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday advised large financial institutions to carefully evaluate transactions intended to reduce risk to ensure that, if risks are shifted to a thinly capitalized counterparty or affiliated entity of the firm, any residual risk is effectively captured in the firm's internal capital adequacy assessment. Examiners will closely consider such transactions, and potential residual risks, when evaluating an institution's capital adequacy. Following inquiries from banking institutions and investors, the Board issued the guidance to clarify that while efforts to reduce risk can be positive, certain transactions can result in residual risks to the firm that may not be accounted for in risk-based capital measures. Institutions should be able to demonstrate that the residual risks are fully reflected in their internal assessment of capital adequacy and that they maintain sufficient capital to account for such risks. Supervisors will closely scrutinize risk-transfer transactions that result in substantial reductions in risk-weighted assets when assessing capital adequacy, including during the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review of the 30 largest financial institutions. SR Letter 13-23
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents for the December 17-18 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the December 17-18 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the designation of the chairs and deputy chairs of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks for 2014. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as chair and a second as deputy chair. Following are the names of the chairs and deputy chairs designated by the Board for 2014: BostonWilliam D. Nordhaus, Sterling Professor of Economics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, named Chair. John F. Fish, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Suffolk Construction Company, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts, named Deputy Chair. New YorkEmily K. Rafferty, President, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York, renamed Chair. Sara Horowitz, Executive Director, Freelancers Union, Brooklyn, New York, named Deputy Chair. PhiladelphiaJames E. Nevels, Founder and Chairman, The Swarthmore Group, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, named Chair. Michael Angelakis, Vice Chair and Chief Financial Officer, Comcast Corporation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, named Deputy Chair. ClevelandRichard K. Smucker, Chief Executive Officer, The J.M. Smucker Company, Orrville, Ohio, renamed Chair. Christopher M. Connor, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, The Sherwin-Williams Company, Cleveland, Ohio, renamed Deputy Chair. RichmondLinda D. Rabbitt, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Rand Construction Corporation, Washington, D.C., renamed Chair. Russell C. Lindner, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, The Forge Company, Washington, D.C., renamed Deputy Chair. AtlantaThomas I. Barkin, Director, McKinsey & Company, Atlanta, Georgia, renamed Chair. Thomas A. Fanning, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Southern Company, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chair. ChicagoJeffrey A. Joerres, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ManpowerGroup, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, renamed Chair. Greg Brown, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Motorola Solutions, Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chair. St. LouisSharon D. Fiehler, Executive Vice President and Chief Administrative Officer, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chair. George Paz, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Express Scripts, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chair. MinneapolisRandall J. Hogan, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Pentair, Minneapolis, Minnesota, named Chair. MayKao Y. Hang, President and Chief Executive Officer, Amherst H. Wilder Foundation, St. Paul, Minnesota, named Deputy Chair. Kansas CityBarbara Mowry, Chief Executive Officer, GoreCreek Advisors, Greenwood Village, Colorado, renamed Chair. Steve Maestas, Managing Partner, NAI Maestas and Ward, Albuquerque, New Mexico, renamed Deputy Chair. DallasMyron E. Ullman III, Chief Executive Officer, J.C. Penney Company, Inc., Plano, Texas, named Chair. Renu Khator, Chancellor and President, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, named Deputy Chair. San FranciscoPatricia E. Yarrington, Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Chevron Corporation, San Ramon, California, renamed Chair. Roy A. Vallee, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer (Retired), Avnet, Inc., Phoenix, Arizona, renamed Deputy Chair.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of an application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Ameris Bancorp, Moultrie, Georgia, to acquire The Prosperity Banking Company, St. Augustine, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday approved the application by Canara Bank, Bangalore, India, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, please call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the approval of an application by RBC Investor Services Bank S.A., Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the applications under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act, section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act for United Bankshares, Inc., Charleston, West Virginia, and its subsidiary, George Mason Bankshares, Inc., Fairfax, Virginia (collectively, "United"), to acquire Virginia Commerce Bancorp, Inc., Arlington, Virginia; and for United's subsidiary bank, United Bank, Fairfax, Virginia, to (1) merge with Virginia Commerce Bank ("VC Bank"), Arlington, Virginia, and (2) retain and operate branches at the locations of VC Bank's main office and branches. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of a notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Investors Bancorp, MHC, and Investors Bancorp, Inc., both of Short Hills, New Jersey, to acquire Roma Financial Corporation, MHC, Roma Financial Corporation, and Roma Bank, all of Robbinsville, New Jersey, and RomAsia Bank, South Brunswick Township, New Jersey. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of a notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Investors Bancorp, MHC, and Investors Bancorp, Inc., both of Short Hills, New Jersey, to acquire Gateway Community Financial, MHC, Gateway Community Financial Corporation, and GCF Bank, all of Sewell, New Jersey. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Attachment (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the proposal by Alamogordo Financial Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, to conduct a minority stock issuance pursuant to section 239.24 of the Board's Regulation MM, 12 CFR 239.24. Attached is the Board's letter relating to this action. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that banking entities covered by section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act will be required to fully conform their activities and investments to the statute and regulations by July 21, 2015. Section 619, commonly referred to as the "Volcker Rule," prohibits insured depository institutions and any company affiliated with an insured depository institution from engaging in short-term proprietary trading of certain securities, derivatives, and other financial instruments for the firm's own account, subject to certain exemptions, including market making and risk-mitigating hedging. It also imposes limits on banking entities' investments in, and other relationships with, hedge funds and private equity funds. The Board and other agencies on Tuesday adopted regulations for this section. The Dodd-Frank Act directed the Board to adopt rules governing the conformance period for section 619 and requires banking entities to conform by July 21, 2014, unless extended by the Board. To ensure effective compliance, the Board is extending the conformance period by one year. The Federal Reserve Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission will apply section 619 in accordance with the Board's conformance rule. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes Meeting Memoranda Open Board Meeting on December 10
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued a final rule that amends Regulation HH to set out the conditions and requirements for a Federal Reserve Bank to open and maintain accounts for and provide financial services to financial market utilities designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council. In addition, the final rule, which implements provisions of Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, would authorize a Reserve Bank to pay interest on the balances maintained by a designated financial market utility in accordance with the statute and other terms and conditions as the Board may prescribe. The final rule will become effective 60 days after it is published in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Register notice:HTML|PDF Board Votes For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve on Monday announced that it has not objected to re-submitted capital plans from The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. and JPMorgan Chase & Co. During the 2013 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), the Federal Reserve did not object to the capital plans from both institutions, but required them to submit new plans addressing weaknesses identified in their capital planning processes. The CCAR is an annual review to ensure that large financial institutions have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks, and to help ensure that they have sufficient capital to continue operations throughout times of economic and financial stress. The Federal Reserve began the 2014 CCAR in November of this year and will release summary results in March 2014. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: PathFinder Bancorp MHC and PathFinder Bancorp, Inc., both of Oswego, New YorkSupervisory Agreement issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated May 28, 2009Terminated November 26, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Parkway Bancorp, Inc., Harwood Heights, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated October 21, 2011Terminated November 27, 2013 Peoples, Inc. and Peoples Bank, both of Lawrence, KansasWritten Agreement dated January 27, 2010Terminated November 27, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday issued a consent order to cease and desist and a civil money penalty assessment of $50 million against the Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc (RBS Group) and the Royal Bank of Scotland plc (RBS plc), both of Edinburgh, Scotland. The order and penalty address unsafe and unsound practices related to insufficient oversight by RBS Group and RBS plc of its U.S. dollar clearing practices and economic sanctions compliance programs. These practices involved transactions that included funds transmissions with entities and individuals subject to U.S. sanctions regulations regarding Burma, Cuba, and Iran. Under the cease and desist order, RBS Group and RBS plc must improve their programs for compliance with U.S. economic sanctions. The United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority, the home country supervisor of RBS Group and RBS plc, has agreed to assist the Federal Reserve in the supervision of the cease and desist order. In separate actions, the New York State Department of Financial Services announced a settlement of $50 million with RBS plc. The U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control announced a settlement of $33 million, which is deemed satisfied by the civil money penalty announced by the Federal Reserve. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Farmers & Miners Bank (PDF), Pennington Gap, VirginiaOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated December 3, 2013 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued a final rule that makes technical changes to the Board's market risk capital rule to align it with the Basel III revised capital framework adopted by the Board earlier this year. The market risk capital rule is used by banking organizations with significant trading activities to calculate regulatory capital requirements for market risk. Technical changes to the rule reflect modifications by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development regarding country risk classifications. The final rule also clarifies criteria for determining whether underlying assets are delinquent for certain traded securitization positions. It clarifies disclosure deadlines, and modifies the definition of a covered position. Each of these changes makes the market risk capital rule consistent with the revised capital framework that will come into effect in January 2015. Also on Friday, the Federal Reserve made minor modifications to the Basel III revised capital framework to clarify the criteria for subordinated debt instruments that may be counted as tier 2 capital. Federal Registernotices:Risk-Based Capital Guidelines; Market Risk:HTML|PDFRegulatory Capital Rules:HTML|PDF Board Votes For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday approved a final rule clarifying the treatment of uninsured U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks under section 716 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, commonly known as the swaps push out provision. The final rule adopts without change the interim final rule issued by the Board on June 5, 2013. Section 716 of Dodd-Frank generally prohibits the provision of certain types of federal assistance, such as discount window lending and deposit insurance, to swaps entities. The provisions of section 716 became effective on July 16, 2013. Insured depository institutions that are swaps entities are eligible for a transition period of up to 24 months to comply and for certain statutory exceptions. The final rule clarifies that, for purposes of section 716, uninsured U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks are treated as insured depository institutions. Thus, they are eligible to apply for a transition period and are treated as insured depository institutions for purposes of the other provisions of section 716. The final rule also sets forth the process for state member banks and uninsured state branches or agencies of foreign banks to apply to the Board for the transition period. The final rule is effective January 31, 2014. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released guidance reminding financial institutions it supervises to exercise appropriate risk management and oversight when using service providers. The guidance describes factors financial institutions should consider when choosing a service provider and how service providers should be overseen. A service provider is defined as any organization or entity--such as a consultant--that enters into a contractual relationship with a financial institution to provide business functions or activities, such as accounting, auditing, loan review, compliance, and risk management. The guidance does not discourage financial institutions from outsourcing activities to service providers, but says firms should be aware of the potential risks. If service provider relationships are not managed effectively, they may expose financial institutions to risks that can result in reputational problems, financial loss, or regulatory actions, according to the guidance. Furthermore, the guidance states that the use of service providers does not relieve a financial institution's board of directors or senior managers of responsibility for the activities performed by service providers. Financial institutions are responsible for ensuring that all activities conducted by service providers comply with applicable laws and regulations and are consistent with safe and sound banking practices. The guidance is applicable to state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System, bank and savings and loan holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries, and U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations. SR letter 13-19/CA letter 13-21, "Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk" For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested public comment on proposed amendments to check collection and return rules to reflect the evolution of the nation's check collection system from one that is largely paper-based to one that is virtually all electronic. The check collection and return provisions in Regulation CC (Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks) currently apply only to paper checks. The Board is proposing that electronic checks and electronic returned checks that banks exchange by agreement also be subject to these rules unless otherwise agreed by the sending and receiving banks. In addition, the Board is requesting comments on alternative approaches to modify the current expeditious-return and notice of nonpayment requirements to encourage the few remaining banks demanding paper returns to accept electronic returns. The Board is also proposing a new indemnity for electronic items cleared through the check-collection system that did not originate as paper checks. Comments on the attached Federal Register notice are due by May 2, 2014. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Comments on this proposal:Submit|View Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday invited public comment on proposed amendments to Regulation A (Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks) to implement section 1101 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Section 1101 amended the Federal Reserve's emergency lending authority in section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. As required under the Dodd‑Frank Act, the proposed rule is designed to ensure that any emergency lending program or facility is for the purpose of providing liquidity to the financial system, and not to aid an individual failing financial company. The proposed rule has been developed in consultation with the Treasury Department. Comments on the proposal are due by March 7, 2014. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October indicates that economic activity is expanding at a moderate pace. Labor market conditions have shown further improvement; the unemployment rate has declined but remains elevated. Household spending and business fixed investment advanced, while the recovery in the housing sector slowed somewhat in recent months. Fiscal policy is restraining economic growth, although the extent of restraint may be diminishing. Inflation has been running below the Committee's longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic growth will pick up from its recent pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having become more nearly balanced. The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, and it is monitoring inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term. Taking into account the extent of federal fiscal retrenchment since the inception of its current asset purchase program, the Committee sees the improvement in economic activity and labor market conditions over that period as consistent with growing underlying strength in the broader economy. In light of the cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions, the Committee decided to modestly reduce the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in January, the Committee will add to its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $35 billion per month rather than $40 billion per month, and will add to its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $40 billion per month rather than $45 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee's sizable and still-increasing holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger economic recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with the Committee's dual mandate. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in further measured steps at future meetings. However, asset purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee's decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the Committee's outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. The Committee also reaffirmed its expectation that the current exceptionally low target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to 1/4 percent will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The Committee now anticipates, based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6-1/2 percent, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; James Bullard; Charles L. Evans; Esther L. George; Jerome H. Powell; Jeremy C. Stein; Daniel K. Tarullo; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the action was Eric S. Rosengren, who believes that, with the unemployment rate still elevated and the inflation rate well below the target, changes in the purchase program are premature until incoming data more clearly indicate that economic growth is likely to be sustained above its potential rate. Statement Regarding Purchases of Treasury Securities and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities
The Federal Reserve on Friday launched the History Web Gateway, a new online resource with biographies, images, and essays on key events in the Fed's 100-year history. The gateway is part of the Fed's effort during its centennial year to encourage a deeper reflection on its role in the nation's economy. "Looking back at our historical experience provides important insights to economists, historians, and policymakers about how the Fed can best meet its objectives, today and in the future, to promote a healthy economy and stable financial system," said Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. The History Web Gateway offers students, educators, researchers, and others information about the founding of the Fed and its purpose, more than 230 biographies of key individuals, essays on major events in the Fed's history, and access to various Fed archives. Additional content and features will be added over time. "By sharing information about our history and the lessons learned, we can make it easier for the public to learn more about who we are and what we do at the Fed," said Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond President Jeffrey M. Lacker, who serves as chairman of the Federal Reserve System Centennial Sponsoring Committee. The Fed's centennial year begins on December 23, 2013, the 100th anniversary of the signing of the Federal Reserve Act by President Woodrow Wilson. The Federal Reserve Board opened for business on August 10, 1914, and the Reserve Banks opened on November 16, 1914. The History Web Gateway can be found atwww.FederalReserveHistory.org. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The2013 Federal Reserve Payments Study,released today, shows that card payments--credit and debit--now account for more than two-thirds of all noncash payments, while the number of checks paid continued to decline. The Study, conducted triennially and available atwww.frbservices.org, examines noncash payment trends in the United States. The 2013 Study has been expanded to include new information related to various payment initiation methods and unauthorized payments. To provide perspective on consumer and business payment trends over the past decade, the results are compared to previous payment studies conducted in 2004, 2007, and 2010. The 2013 Study's highlights include: The study was made possible by broad-based industry support and information sharing. "Payments industry participants in the Study provided a robust response, affording the Federal Reserve the opportunity to review a full range of traditionally collected information on the number and value of noncash payment types, as well as new data on payment initiation methods, third-party fraud and other relevant noncash payment factors," said Jim McKee, senior vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which sponsored the Study. "Furthermore," he continued, "as part of the Fed's long-standing commitment to collaborate with the industry in making the payments system more efficient, we hope the longer-term, 10-year view provided in the 2013 Study offers increased insight into shifts in consumer and business payments choices." As in previous studies, the estimates reported are based on information gathered in three survey efforts: the2013 Depository and Financial Institutions Payments Survey (DFIPS),the2013 Network, Processors and Issuers Payments Surveys (NPIPS),and the2013 Check Sample Survey (CSS). The Federal Reserve partnered with McKinsey & Company and Lieberman Research Group, as its subcontractor, on the DFIPS, and with Blueflame Consulting and MH Consulting, as its subcontractor, on the NPIPS. McKinsey & Company reviewed a large random sample of images for the CSS. The information collected in each survey is combined with information about payments trends from previous studies and then analyzed and adjusted for seasonality to produce comprehensive estimates not available in other studies. "The objective of the study is to produce trend information valuable to the industry in serving the public interest to improve the U.S. payments system," McKee said. A more detailed report, anticipated in Spring 2014, will include a complete description of the methodologies used and data collected for the 2013 Payments Study. June GatesFSPC Spokesman(216) 579-2048[email protected]
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFinancial Crimes Enforcement Network The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), a bureau of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, and the Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced a final rule amending the definitions of "funds transfer" and "transmittal of funds" under regulations implementing the Bank Secrecy Act. The final rule adopts the amendments as proposed in November 2012. The amendments to the definitions maintain the current scope of funds transfers and transmittals of funds subject to the Bank Secrecy Act and are necessary in light of amendments to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act made by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF Board Votes
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Ceremony Commemorating the Centennial of the Federal Reserve Act, Washington, D.C. Paul and Alan have me at a disadvantage. Each of us was asked to reflect on our own term in office. But they have the benefit of perspective, whereas my term still has a short time to run. Moreover, work on some of the Federal Reserve's most important challenges of the past few years--notably, achieving a full economic recovery from the crisis and putting in place a new financial regulatory system--is still ongoing. Nonetheless, I will offer a few thoughts on the past very eventful eight years. The Federal Reserve's extraordinary response to the financial crisis and the Great Recession that followed was, in one sense, nothing new. We did what central banks have done for many years and what they were designed to do: We served as a source of liquidity and stability in financial markets, and, in the broader economy, we worked to foster economic recovery and price stability. However, in another sense, what we didwasvery new--it was unprecedented in both scale and scope, and it made use of a number of tools that were new, or at least not part of the standard central bank toolkit. We found that these new tools were necessary if we were to fulfill the classic functions of a central bank in the context of a 21st century economic and financial environment. When the financial system teetered near collapse in 2008 and 2009, we responded as the 19th century British essayist Walter Bagehot advised, by serving as liquidity provider of last resort to stressed financial firms and markets.1But we did so in an institutional environment that was very different, and in many ways much more complex, than the one that Bagehot knew. For example, the recent crisis involved runs on financial institutions, as occurred in classic panics. But in 2008, rather than a run of retail bank deposits, the runs occurred in various forms of short-term, uninsured wholesale funding, such as commercial paper and repurchase agreements. Moreover, although commercial banks suffered large losses and some came under significant pressure, the crisis hit particularly hard those nonbank institutions most dependent on wholesale funding, such as investment banks and securitization vehicles. Thus, the Fed lent not only to commercial banks, but also extended its liquidity facilities to critical nonbank institutions and key financial markets, such as the commercial paper market. To minimize the risk of strains abroad feeding back on U.S. dollar funding markets, the Fed also coordinated with foreign central banks to create a network of currency swap lines. Beyond the provision of liquidity, the Fed worked with other agencies both here and abroad to help restore public confidence in the financial system. Notably, we led the development of stress-testing large banking organizations' capital adequacy. The first stress tests, in 2009, and the public disclosure of their results made it possible for large U.S. banks to once again attract private capital. Since 2009, the stress tests and disclosures, together with other regulatory and supervisory actions, have contributed to a doubling in capital held by the largest U.S. financial institutions and the resumption of more-normal flows of credit. The Fed has also worked to draw the appropriate lessons from the crisis and to take the steps necessary to help avoid a similar event in the future. As those assembled here well know, the deliberations that led to the founding of the Federal Reserve were precipitated by a financial panic, the Panic of 1907. The preservation of financial stability was consequently a principal goal of the creators of the new central bank. In response to the Panic of 2008, the Federal Reserve has returned to its roots by restoring financial stability as a central objective alongside the traditional goals of monetary policy. We have refocused our supervision of financial institutions to take a more "macroprudential" approach that fosters systemic stability as well as the stability of individual institutions. We also more extensively monitor the financial system as a whole and, in cooperation with other agencies, have put in place stronger oversight of systemically important financial firms, including higher capital and liquidity requirements, tougher supervision, and a process for the orderly resolution of failed firms. We have also had to be innovative in finding ways to use monetary policy to help the economy recover from the deep recession that followed the crisis. Providing adequate monetary accommodation has not been a straightforward task because our principal monetary policy tool, the target for the federal funds rate, has been stuck near zero since the end of 2008. Consequently, we've had to find other ways to bring monetary policy to bear, notably including techniques designed to influence longer-term interest rates. For instance, the Fed, like several other central banks, has purchased longer-term securities to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, help ease financial conditions, and promote a stronger recovery. A significant aspect of finding innovative ways to execute our duties as a central bank in a new, more complex environment has been the ongoing revolution in communication and transparency. Part of that effort has involved formally defining our goals under the mandate for maximum employment and price stability given to us by the Congress. Two years ago, we established 2 percent as our inflation goal, and we regularly communicate policymakers' views of the level of unemployment expected to correspond to maximum sustainable employment over time. Additionally, our monetary policy has come to rely more heavily on "forward guidance." With our short-term policy rate about as low as it can practicably go, we have sought to ease financial conditions further and provide additional impetus to the recovery by communicating both quantitatively about the likely future path of our policy rate and qualitatively about the likely evolution of our balance sheet. Other central banks around the world have met the challenge of current conditions with similar innovations. And I would be remiss if I did not point out, especially with Paul and Alan here, that the Fed's recent communications innovations owe a great deal to developments like the monetary targeting framework devised under Chairman Volcker and the post-Federal Open Market Committee statement and qualitative forward guidance introduced under Chairman Greenspan. In summary, the financial crisis that the Fed confronted five years ago was in many ways analogous to the panics that central banks have faced for centuries. But, at the same time, the crisis and the deep recession that followed occurred in an economic and financial environment that was certainly different, and in many ways more complex, than in the past. The Federal Reserve found ways to carry out its traditional central bank functions in this environment, and we are working with other policymakers, domestically and internationally, to put in place a strengthened regulatory framework that will help preserve stability in the face of the complexity, interconnectedness, and innovation in our modern financial system. One of my personal objectives since I became Chairman has been to increase the transparency of the Fed--to more clearly explain how our policies are intended to work and the thinking behind our decisions. As I already noted, improved communication can help our policies work better, whether through the disclosure of bank stress-test results or by helping the public and market participants better understand how monetary policy is likely to evolve. Ultimately, however, the most important reason for transparency and clear communication is to help ensure the accountability of our independent institution to the American people and their elected representatives. Clarity, transparency, and accountability help build public confidence in the Federal Reserve, which is essential if it is to be successful in fostering stability and prosperity. 1.See Walter Bagehot ([1873] 1897),Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market(New York: Charles Scribner's Sons).Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Ceremony Commemorating the Centennial of the Federal Reserve Act, Washington, D.C. Paul and Alan have me at a disadvantage. Each of us was asked to reflect on our own term in office. But they have the benefit of perspective, whereas my term still has a short time to run. Moreover, work on some of the Federal Reserve's most important challenges of the past few years--notably, achieving a full economic recovery from the crisis and putting in place a new financial regulatory system--is still ongoing. Nonetheless, I will offer a few thoughts on the past very eventful eight years. The Federal Reserve's extraordinary response to the financial crisis and the Great Recession that followed was, in one sense, nothing new. We did what central banks have done for many years and what they were designed to do: We served as a source of liquidity and stability in financial markets, and, in the broader economy, we worked to foster economic recovery and price stability. However, in another sense, what we didwasvery new--it was unprecedented in both scale and scope, and it made use of a number of tools that were new, or at least not part of the standard central bank toolkit. We found that these new tools were necessary if we were to fulfill the classic functions of a central bank in the context of a 21st century economic and financial environment. When the financial system teetered near collapse in 2008 and 2009, we responded as the 19th century British essayist Walter Bagehot advised, by serving as liquidity provider of last resort to stressed financial firms and markets.1But we did so in an institutional environment that was very different, and in many ways much more complex, than the one that Bagehot knew. For example, the recent crisis involved runs on financial institutions, as occurred in classic panics. But in 2008, rather than a run of retail bank deposits, the runs occurred in various forms of short-term, uninsured wholesale funding, such as commercial paper and repurchase agreements. Moreover, although commercial banks suffered large losses and some came under significant pressure, the crisis hit particularly hard those nonbank institutions most dependent on wholesale funding, such as investment banks and securitization vehicles. Thus, the Fed lent not only to commercial banks, but also extended its liquidity facilities to critical nonbank institutions and key financial markets, such as the commercial paper market. To minimize the risk of strains abroad feeding back on U.S. dollar funding markets, the Fed also coordinated with foreign central banks to create a network of currency swap lines. Beyond the provision of liquidity, the Fed worked with other agencies both here and abroad to help restore public confidence in the financial system. Notably, we led the development of stress-testing large banking organizations' capital adequacy. The first stress tests, in 2009, and the public disclosure of their results made it possible for large U.S. banks to once again attract private capital. Since 2009, the stress tests and disclosures, together with other regulatory and supervisory actions, have contributed to a doubling in capital held by the largest U.S. financial institutions and the resumption of more-normal flows of credit. The Fed has also worked to draw the appropriate lessons from the crisis and to take the steps necessary to help avoid a similar event in the future. As those assembled here well know, the deliberations that led to the founding of the Federal Reserve were precipitated by a financial panic, the Panic of 1907. The preservation of financial stability was consequently a principal goal of the creators of the new central bank. In response to the Panic of 2008, the Federal Reserve has returned to its roots by restoring financial stability as a central objective alongside the traditional goals of monetary policy. We have refocused our supervision of financial institutions to take a more "macroprudential" approach that fosters systemic stability as well as the stability of individual institutions. We also more extensively monitor the financial system as a whole and, in cooperation with other agencies, have put in place stronger oversight of systemically important financial firms, including higher capital and liquidity requirements, tougher supervision, and a process for the orderly resolution of failed firms. We have also had to be innovative in finding ways to use monetary policy to help the economy recover from the deep recession that followed the crisis. Providing adequate monetary accommodation has not been a straightforward task because our principal monetary policy tool, the target for the federal funds rate, has been stuck near zero since the end of 2008. Consequently, we've had to find other ways to bring monetary policy to bear, notably including techniques designed to influence longer-term interest rates. For instance, the Fed, like several other central banks, has purchased longer-term securities to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, help ease financial conditions, and promote a stronger recovery. A significant aspect of finding innovative ways to execute our duties as a central bank in a new, more complex environment has been the ongoing revolution in communication and transparency. Part of that effort has involved formally defining our goals under the mandate for maximum employment and price stability given to us by the Congress. Two years ago, we established 2 percent as our inflation goal, and we regularly communicate policymakers' views of the level of unemployment expected to correspond to maximum sustainable employment over time. Additionally, our monetary policy has come to rely more heavily on "forward guidance." With our short-term policy rate about as low as it can practicably go, we have sought to ease financial conditions further and provide additional impetus to the recovery by communicating both quantitatively about the likely future path of our policy rate and qualitatively about the likely evolution of our balance sheet. Other central banks around the world have met the challenge of current conditions with similar innovations. And I would be remiss if I did not point out, especially with Paul and Alan here, that the Fed's recent communications innovations owe a great deal to developments like the monetary targeting framework devised under Chairman Volcker and the post-Federal Open Market Committee statement and qualitative forward guidance introduced under Chairman Greenspan. In summary, the financial crisis that the Fed confronted five years ago was in many ways analogous to the panics that central banks have faced for centuries. But, at the same time, the crisis and the deep recession that followed occurred in an economic and financial environment that was certainly different, and in many ways more complex, than in the past. The Federal Reserve found ways to carry out its traditional central bank functions in this environment, and we are working with other policymakers, domestically and internationally, to put in place a strengthened regulatory framework that will help preserve stability in the face of the complexity, interconnectedness, and innovation in our modern financial system. One of my personal objectives since I became Chairman has been to increase the transparency of the Fed--to more clearly explain how our policies are intended to work and the thinking behind our decisions. As I already noted, improved communication can help our policies work better, whether through the disclosure of bank stress-test results or by helping the public and market participants better understand how monetary policy is likely to evolve. Ultimately, however, the most important reason for transparency and clear communication is to help ensure the accountability of our independent institution to the American people and their elected representatives. Clarity, transparency, and accountability help build public confidence in the Federal Reserve, which is essential if it is to be successful in fostering stability and prosperity. 1.See Walter Bagehot ([1873] 1897),Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market(New York: Charles Scribner's Sons).Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Ceremony Commemorating the Centennial of the Federal Reserve Act, Washington, D.C. Paul and Alan have me at a disadvantage. Each of us was asked to reflect on our own term in office. But they have the benefit of perspective, whereas my term still has a short time to run. Moreover, work on some of the Federal Reserve's most important challenges of the past few years--notably, achieving a full economic recovery from the crisis and putting in place a new financial regulatory system--is still ongoing. Nonetheless, I will offer a few thoughts on the past very eventful eight years. The Federal Reserve's extraordinary response to the financial crisis and the Great Recession that followed was, in one sense, nothing new. We did what central banks have done for many years and what they were designed to do: We served as a source of liquidity and stability in financial markets, and, in the broader economy, we worked to foster economic recovery and price stability. However, in another sense, what we didwasvery new--it was unprecedented in both scale and scope, and it made use of a number of tools that were new, or at least not part of the standard central bank toolkit. We found that these new tools were necessary if we were to fulfill the classic functions of a central bank in the context of a 21st century economic and financial environment. When the financial system teetered near collapse in 2008 and 2009, we responded as the 19th century British essayist Walter Bagehot advised, by serving as liquidity provider of last resort to stressed financial firms and markets.1But we did so in an institutional environment that was very different, and in many ways much more complex, than the one that Bagehot knew. For example, the recent crisis involved runs on financial institutions, as occurred in classic panics. But in 2008, rather than a run of retail bank deposits, the runs occurred in various forms of short-term, uninsured wholesale funding, such as commercial paper and repurchase agreements. Moreover, although commercial banks suffered large losses and some came under significant pressure, the crisis hit particularly hard those nonbank institutions most dependent on wholesale funding, such as investment banks and securitization vehicles. Thus, the Fed lent not only to commercial banks, but also extended its liquidity facilities to critical nonbank institutions and key financial markets, such as the commercial paper market. To minimize the risk of strains abroad feeding back on U.S. dollar funding markets, the Fed also coordinated with foreign central banks to create a network of currency swap lines. Beyond the provision of liquidity, the Fed worked with other agencies both here and abroad to help restore public confidence in the financial system. Notably, we led the development of stress-testing large banking organizations' capital adequacy. The first stress tests, in 2009, and the public disclosure of their results made it possible for large U.S. banks to once again attract private capital. Since 2009, the stress tests and disclosures, together with other regulatory and supervisory actions, have contributed to a doubling in capital held by the largest U.S. financial institutions and the resumption of more-normal flows of credit. The Fed has also worked to draw the appropriate lessons from the crisis and to take the steps necessary to help avoid a similar event in the future. As those assembled here well know, the deliberations that led to the founding of the Federal Reserve were precipitated by a financial panic, the Panic of 1907. The preservation of financial stability was consequently a principal goal of the creators of the new central bank. In response to the Panic of 2008, the Federal Reserve has returned to its roots by restoring financial stability as a central objective alongside the traditional goals of monetary policy. We have refocused our supervision of financial institutions to take a more "macroprudential" approach that fosters systemic stability as well as the stability of individual institutions. We also more extensively monitor the financial system as a whole and, in cooperation with other agencies, have put in place stronger oversight of systemically important financial firms, including higher capital and liquidity requirements, tougher supervision, and a process for the orderly resolution of failed firms. We have also had to be innovative in finding ways to use monetary policy to help the economy recover from the deep recession that followed the crisis. Providing adequate monetary accommodation has not been a straightforward task because our principal monetary policy tool, the target for the federal funds rate, has been stuck near zero since the end of 2008. Consequently, we've had to find other ways to bring monetary policy to bear, notably including techniques designed to influence longer-term interest rates. For instance, the Fed, like several other central banks, has purchased longer-term securities to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, help ease financial conditions, and promote a stronger recovery. A significant aspect of finding innovative ways to execute our duties as a central bank in a new, more complex environment has been the ongoing revolution in communication and transparency. Part of that effort has involved formally defining our goals under the mandate for maximum employment and price stability given to us by the Congress. Two years ago, we established 2 percent as our inflation goal, and we regularly communicate policymakers' views of the level of unemployment expected to correspond to maximum sustainable employment over time. Additionally, our monetary policy has come to rely more heavily on "forward guidance." With our short-term policy rate about as low as it can practicably go, we have sought to ease financial conditions further and provide additional impetus to the recovery by communicating both quantitatively about the likely future path of our policy rate and qualitatively about the likely evolution of our balance sheet. Other central banks around the world have met the challenge of current conditions with similar innovations. And I would be remiss if I did not point out, especially with Paul and Alan here, that the Fed's recent communications innovations owe a great deal to developments like the monetary targeting framework devised under Chairman Volcker and the post-Federal Open Market Committee statement and qualitative forward guidance introduced under Chairman Greenspan. In summary, the financial crisis that the Fed confronted five years ago was in many ways analogous to the panics that central banks have faced for centuries. But, at the same time, the crisis and the deep recession that followed occurred in an economic and financial environment that was certainly different, and in many ways more complex, than in the past. The Federal Reserve found ways to carry out its traditional central bank functions in this environment, and we are working with other policymakers, domestically and internationally, to put in place a strengthened regulatory framework that will help preserve stability in the face of the complexity, interconnectedness, and innovation in our modern financial system. One of my personal objectives since I became Chairman has been to increase the transparency of the Fed--to more clearly explain how our policies are intended to work and the thinking behind our decisions. As I already noted, improved communication can help our policies work better, whether through the disclosure of bank stress-test results or by helping the public and market participants better understand how monetary policy is likely to evolve. Ultimately, however, the most important reason for transparency and clear communication is to help ensure the accountability of our independent institution to the American people and their elected representatives. Clarity, transparency, and accountability help build public confidence in the Federal Reserve, which is essential if it is to be successful in fostering stability and prosperity. 1.See Walter Bagehot ([1873] 1897),Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market(New York: Charles Scribner's Sons).Return to text