Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Five federal regulatory agencies today announced the approval of a joint notice of proposed rulemaking to amend regulations pertaining to loans secured by property located in special flood hazard areas. The proposed rule would implement provisions of the Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability Act of 2014 (HFIAA) relating to escrowing flood insurance payments and the exemption of certain detached structures from the mandatory flood insurance purchase requirement. HFIAA amends the escrow provisions of the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012 (the Biggert-Waters Act). In accordance with HFIAA, the proposed rule would require regulated lending institutions to escrow premiums and fees for flood insurance for loans secured by residential improved real estate or mobile homes that are made, increased, extended or renewed on or after January 1, 2016, unless the regulated lending institution or a loan qualifies for a statutory exception. In addition, the proposed rule would require institutions to provide borrowers of residential loans outstanding on January 1, 2016, the option to escrow flood insurance premiums and fees. The proposal includes new and revised sample notice forms and clauses concerning the escrow requirement and the option to escrow. Finally, the proposal would eliminate the requirement to purchase flood insurance for a structure that is a part of a residential property located in a special flood hazard area if that structure is detached from the primary residential structure and does not also serve as a residence. However, under HFIAA, lenders may nevertheless require flood insurance on the detached structures to protect the collateral securing the mortgage. In a separate rulemaking, the agencies will address other provisions of the Biggert-Waters Act for which the agencies have jurisdiction and that were not amended by HFIAA. The proposed rule is being issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Farm Credit Administration, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Comments will be due 60 days after the rule is published in theFederal Register,which is expected shortly. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Board Votes
On October 14, 2014, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.26000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: TDF Operation ID: F47 Total Amount Awarded: $110,029,000,000 Number of Participants: 67 The awarded deposits will settle on October 16, 2014, and will mature on October 23, 2014. The interest rate of 0.26000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On October 20, 2014, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.26000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: TDF Operation ID: F48 Total Amount Awarded: $171,861,000,000 Number of Participants: 66 The awarded deposits will settle on October 23, 2014, and will mature on October 30, 2014. The interest rate of 0.26000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On October 27, 2014, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.26000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on October 30, 2014, and will mature on November 6, 2014. The interest rate of 0.26000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation welcome the announcement today by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) of the agreement of a new resolution stay protocol. A significant portion of bilateral, over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives transactions with large banking organizations permit counterparties to liquidate, terminate, or accelerate the contract upon the banking organization's failure. Following the recent financial crisis, global financial regulators have focused on the potential for such contractual rights to disrupt the execution of an orderly resolution of a major global banking firm. This initiative is an important step toward mitigating the financial stability risks associated with the early termination of bilateral, OTC derivatives contracts triggered by the failure of a global banking firm with significant cross-border derivatives activities. Initially, 18 large banking organizations have agreed to sign onto the protocol. The protocol provides for temporary stays on certain default and early termination rights within standard ISDA derivatives contracts in the event one of the large banking organizations is subject to an insolvency or resolution proceeding in its home jurisdiction. The resolution stay amendments of the protocol are intended to facilitate an orderly resolution of a major global banking firm and reduce the potential negative impact of the resolution on financial stability by giving the bankruptcy court or resolution authority the ability to prevent early termination of financial contracts of the firm's global subsidiaries. The Federal Reserve and the FDIC are encouraged by this effort and look forward to the continuation of this important work.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the appointment of William English as adviser to the Board for Monetary Policy in the Office of Board Members. Mr. English has served as director of the Board's Division of Monetary Affairs and as secretary to the Federal Open Market Committee since July 2010 and will continue to serve in those roles until a successor is in place. "Over the last four years, as FOMC secretary and director of the Monetary Affairs Division, Bill has contributed immensely to the work of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Janet Yellen. "During a period in which monetary policy has been faced with exceptional challenges, Bill has helped the FOMC devise innovative strategies to achieve our dual mandate objectives and he has led the Committee work on policy normalization as well. I am enormously grateful for these contributions and for Bill's extraordinary dedication to public service." As an adviser to the Board, Mr. English will continue to contribute to the monetary policy process and help support work related to the FOMC and, in particular, the work of the subcommittee on communications. Mr. English began his career at the Board in 1992 as an economist. He was appointed to the Board's official staff in 2001. He was deputy director of the Monetary Affairs division from 2008-2010. During his career, he also has served as a visiting senior economist at the Bank for International Settlements and as a visiting senior economist at the President's Council of Economic Advisers. He has taught at the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business. He holds a B.A. in economics and mathematics from Yale University and a Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) and the president and vice president of the council for 2015. CDIAC advises the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues of interest to community depository institutions. Members are selected from representatives of commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils serves on CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. John B. Dicus, chairman, president, and chief executive officer of Capitol Federal Savings Bank, Topeka, Kan., will serve as president in 2015. Michael J. Castellana, president and chief executive officer of SEFCU, Albany, N.Y., will serve as vice president. The other members of CDIAC in 2015 are: Glenn D. BarksPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFirst Community Credit UnionChesterfield, Mo. S. Boyce BrownChairman, President, and Chief Executive OfficerExtraco CorporationWaco, Texas Janet GarufisPresident and Chief Executive OfficerMontecito Bank & TrustSanta Barbara, Calif. Chandler J. HowardPresident and Chief Executive OfficerLiberty BankMiddletown, Conn. Brian L. JohnsonChief Executive OfficerChoice Financial GroupGrand Forks, N.D. Thomas M. PetroPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFox Chase BankHatboro, Pa. Jeffrey PlaggePresident and Chief Executive OfficerNorthwest Financial Corp.Arnolds Park, Iowa Jan RochePresident and Chief Executive OfficerState Department FCUAlexandria, Va. Eddie SteinerPresident and Chief Executive OfficerThe Commercial and Savings Bank of Millersburg, OhioMillersburg, Ohio Douglas L. WilliamsPresident and Chief Executive OfficerAtlantic Capital BankAtlanta, Ga. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: BOV Holding Company, Versailles, Missouri; Bank of Versailles, Versailles, MissouriWritten Agreement issued July 26, 2010Terminated October 20, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the applications under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Central Bank of Audrain County, Mexico, Missouri, to acquire the Vandalia, Missouri branch of First State Community Bank, Farmington, Missouri, and to establish a branch at the location of the Vandalia, Missouri branch. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Fayette County Bank (PDF), St. Elmo, IllinoisPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated October 2, 2014 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: First Security Group, Inc., Chattanooga, TennesseeWritten Agreement issued September 7, 2010Terminated October 2, 2014 South Group Bancshares, Inc., Glennville, GeorgiaWritten Agreement issued August 31, 2010Terminated October 1, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Centennial Bank (PDF), Lubbock, TexasOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated October 22, 2014 Bank of Texas (PDF), Midland, TexasOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated October 27, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday issued a final rule that amends the Regulation HH risk-management standards for financial market utilities that have been designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council and for which the Board has standard-setting authority pursuant to Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The Board also announced final revisions to part I of theFederal Reserve Policy on Payment System Risk, which is applicable to financial market infrastructures more generally, including those operated by the Federal Reserve Banks. The amendments and revisions are based on and generally consistent with the international risk-management standards in the April 2012Principles for Financial Market Infrastructuresdeveloped jointly by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the International Organization of Securities Commissions.1Key amendments to the rule and revisions to the policy include establishing separate standards to address credit risk and liquidity risk, new requirements on recovery and orderly wind-down planning, a new standard on general business risk, a new standard on tiered participation arrangements, and heightened requirements on transparency and disclosure. The final rule and policy will become effective on December 31, 2014. Institutions subject to the rule or policy will be expected to be in compliance with the requirements by the effective date. Later compliance dates apply to several new or heightened requirements as explained in theFederal Registernotices. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Policy on Payment System Risk:PDF|HTML For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Board Votes 1.Effective September 1, 2014, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems changed its name to the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued a final rule to modify the regulations for capital planning and stress testing and released instructions for the 2015 capital planning cycle. The final rule adjusts the due date for bank holding companies (BHCs) with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more to submit their capital plans and stress test results. For the 2015 capital plan cycle, these BHCs are required to submit capital plans on or before January 5, 2015, unchanged from prior years. For subsequent cycles, beginning in 2016, participating BHCs will be required to submit their capital plans and stress testing results to the Federal Reserve on or before April 5. In addition to the timing change, the final rule includes modifications and clarifications to the existing capital plans and stress test rules. In particular, the final rule adopts the limitation on a BHC's ability to make capital distributions to the extent that the BHC's actual capital issuances are less than the amount indicated in its capital plan, with adjustments to address commenters' concerns. The final rule is largely identical to the proposed rule, with a few key adjustments, including certain technical revisions and clarifications made in response to comments from the public. The final rule marks another step in the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts to adapt and improve its capital planning and stress testing process as the program's fifth cycle begins. "Born of necessity during the depths of the financial crisis as part of an effort to restore confidence in the U.S. financial system, supervisory stress testing has become a cornerstone of a new approach to regulation and supervision of the nation's largest financial institutions," Gov. Daniel K. Tarullo said. "If supervisory stress testing and the associated review of capital planning processes are to give regulators, banks, and the public a dynamic view of the capital positions of large financial firms, they must respond to changes in the economy, the financial system, and risk-management capabilities." The Federal Reserve's capital planning and stress testing program includes the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) of large bank holding companies. The aim of the annual reviews is to ensure that large financial institutions have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks, and to help ensure that they have sufficient capital to continue operations throughout times of economic and financial stress. Capital is important to banking organizations, the financial system, and the economy broadly because it acts as a cushion to absorb losses and helps to ensure that losses are borne by shareholders, not taxpayers. The capital planning and stress testing program led by the Federal Reserve since the financial crisis has contributed to a significant increase in capital at the largest banking organizations in the United States. The 30 large BHCs that participated in CCAR last year have increased their aggregate tier 1 common capital to $971 billion as of the fourth quarter of 2013, from $460 billion as of the first quarter of 2009. The tier 1 common ratio for these firms has more than doubled during that time period to a weighted average of 11.1 percent from 5.3 percent. Thirty-one large BHCs are participating in CCAR in 2015. All but one of those firms, Deutsche Bank Trust Corporation, participated in CCAR in 2014. The instructions issued Friday for CCAR 2015 provide details regarding submission requirements, supervisory expectations for a capital adequacy process, and the supervisory assessments and disclosure. Further, for the first time, the instructions include a discussion of common strengths and shortcomings seen in the submissions by the participating BHCs in the prior year. The instructions are being provided ahead of the supervisory scenarios this year to provide firms with additional time for implementation. The Federal Reserve intends to provide the supervisory scenarios as soon as it is possible to incorporate the relevant data on economic and financial conditions as of the end of the third quarter, but no later than November 15, 2014. Ally Financial Inc. American Express Company Bank of America Corporation The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation BB&T Corporation BBVA Compass Bancshares, Inc. BMO Financial Corp. Capital One Financial Corporation Citigroup Inc. Comerica Incorporated Discover Financial Services Fifth Third Bancorp The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. HSBC North America Holdings Inc. Huntington Bancshares Inc. JPMorgan Chase & Co. KeyCorp M&T Bank Corporation Morgan Stanley MUFG Americas Holdings Corporation Northern Trust Corporation The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc. RBS Citizens Financial Group, Inc. Regions Financial Corporation Santander Holdings USA, Inc. State Street Corporation SunTrust Banks, Inc. U.S. Bancorp Wells Fargo & Co. Zions Bancorporation Deutsche Bank Trust Corporation Bank of America Corporation Citigroup Inc. The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. JPMorgan Chase & Co. Morgan Stanley Wells Fargo & Company Bank of America Corporation The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation Citigroup Inc. The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. JPMorgan Chase & Co. Morgan Stanley State Street Corporation Wells Fargo & Company Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2015 Summary Instructions and Guidance (PDF)|HTML Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First American International Corporation, Brooklyn, New YorkWritten Agreement issued March 18, 2011Terminated October 7, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on October 9 released answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs) regarding the competitive review process for bank acquisitions, mergers, and other transactions. The FAQs provide answers to questions often raised by banking organizations considering filing applications and explain changes to the application process mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The FAQs, which were developed jointly with the Department of Justice, also cover factors considered by both agencies in conducting competitive analysis for bank applications. By law, both the Federal Reserve and the Department of Justice are required to analyze bank merger applications to ensure, in part, that the proposed transactions do not raise competitive concerns. The Federal Reserve has the authority to deny applications on these or certain other grounds, while the Department of Justice can use its prosecutorial discretion to challenge specific applications that raise competitive concerns. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. FAQs How do the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Department of Justice, Antitrust Division, analyze the competitive effects of mergers and acquisitions under the Bank Holding Company Act, the Bank Merger Act and the Home Owners' Loan Act?
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued the supervisory scenarios that will be used in the 2015 capital planning and stress testing program. The program includes the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) of 31 bank holding companies with $50 billion or more of total consolidated assets. The aim of the annual reviews is to ensure that large financial institutions have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks, and to help ensure that they have sufficient capital to continue operations throughout times of economic and financial stress. Capital is important to banking organizations, the financial system, and the economy broadly because it acts as a cushion to absorb losses and helps to ensure that losses are borne by shareholders, not taxpayers. The Federal Reserve will require institutions to use the supervisory scenarios in both the stress tests conducted as part of the CCAR and in the stress tests that are part of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Some companies that are not part of CCAR, including state member bank subsidiaries of CCAR participants and some companies with between $10 billion and $50 billion in assets, also will use the supervisory scenarios for Dodd-Frank Act stress tests. The baseline, adverse, and severely adverse scenarios include 28 variables, including economic activity, unemployment, exchange rates, prices, incomes, and interest rates. The adverse and severely adverse scenarios describe hypothetical sets of events designed to assess the strength of banking organizations and their resilience to adverse economic environments. They are not forecasts. The baseline scenario follows a similar profile to the average projections from surveys of economic forecasters. It does not represent the forecast of the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve is publishing a narrative that describes the general conditions in the scenarios and changes in the scenarios from previous years. As in prior years, six bank holding companies with large trading operations will be required to factor in a global market shock as part of their scenarios. The Federal Reserve intends to provide the data for the global market shock scenario as soon as it is possible, but no later than December 1, 2014. In addition, for the second consecutive year, eight bank holding companies with substantial trading or custodial operations will be required to incorporate a counterparty default scenario. All 31 of the companies in the CCAR in 2015 must submit their capital plans on or before January 5, 2015. Ally Financial Inc. American Express Company Bank of America Corporation The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation BB&T Corporation BBVA Compass Bancshares, Inc. BMO Financial Corp. Capital One Financial Corporation Citigroup Inc. Comerica Incorporated Discover Financial Services Fifth Third Bancorp The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. HSBC North America Holdings Inc. Huntington Bancshares Incorporated JPMorgan Chase & Co. KeyCorp M&T Bank Corporation Morgan Stanley MUFG Americas Holdings Corporation Northern Trust Corporation The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc. RBS Citizens Financial Group, Inc. Regions Financial Corporation Santander Holdings USA, Inc. State Street Corporation SunTrust Banks, Inc. U.S. Bancorp Wells Fargo & Co. Zions Bancorporation Deutsche Bank Trust Corporation Bank of America Corporation Citigroup Inc. The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. JPMorgan Chase & Co. Morgan Stanley Wells Fargo & Company Bank of America Corporation The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation Citigroup Inc. The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. JPMorgan Chase & Co. Morgan Stanley State Street Corporation Wells Fargo & Company 2015 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF)|HTML 2015 Macro Scenario Tables (Excel) Stress Tests and Capital Planning For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September suggests that economic activity is expanding at a moderate pace. Labor market conditions improved somewhat further, with solid job gains and a lower unemployment rate. On balance, a range of labor market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources is gradually diminishing. Household spending is rising moderately and business fixed investment is advancing, while the recovery in the housing sector remains slow. Inflation has continued to run below the Committee's longer-run objective. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined somewhat; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators and inflation moving toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Although inflation in the near term will likely be held down by lower energy prices and other factors, the Committee judges that the likelihood of inflation running persistently below 2 percent has diminished somewhat since early this year. The Committee judges that there has been a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market since the inception of its current asset purchase program. Moreover, the Committee continues to see sufficient underlying strength in the broader economy to support ongoing progress toward maximum employment in a context of price stability. Accordingly, the Committee decided to conclude its asset purchase program this month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this target range, the Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The Committee anticipates, based on its current assessment, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time following the end of its asset purchase program this month, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. However, if incoming information indicates faster progress toward the Committee's employment and inflation objectives than the Committee now expects, then increases in the target range for the federal funds rate are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated. Conversely, if progress proves slower than expected, then increases in the target range are likely to occur later than currently anticipated. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Stanley Fischer; Richard W. Fisher; Loretta J. Mester; Charles I. Plosser; Jerome H. Powell; and Daniel K. Tarullo. Voting against the action was Narayana Kocherlakota, who believed that, in light of continued sluggishness in the inflation outlook and the recent slide in market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations, the Committee should commit to keeping the current target range for the federal funds rate at least until the one-to-two-year ahead inflation outlook has returned to 2 percent and should continue the asset purchase program at its current level. Statement Regarding Purchases of Treasury Securities and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities
On October 27, 2014, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF) that will incorporate an early withdrawal feature. This feature will allow depository institutions to obtain a return of funds prior to the maturity date subject to an early withdrawal penalty. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.26000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $15,000,000,000. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters TDF Operation ID: F49 Operation Format: Fixed-Rate Term: Seven-Day Interest Rate: 0.26000% Early withdrawal feature included: Yes Penalty rate for early withdrawal: 0.75000% Operation Date: Monday, October 27, 2014 Opening Time: 10:00 a.m. ET Closing Time: 2:00 p.m. ET Notification Date (summary results): Tuesday, October 28, 2014 Settlement Date: Thursday, October 30, 2014 Maturity Date: Thursday, November 6, 2014 Tender Parameters Maximum Number of Tenders: 1 Minimum Tender Amount: $10,000 Tender Increment: $10,000 Maximum Tender Amount (per institution): $15,000,000,000 Award Minimum Amount: $10,000 Award Maximum Amount: $15,000,000,000 Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's September 4, 2014,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On October 20, 2014, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF) that will incorporate an early withdrawal feature. This feature will allow depository institutions to obtain a return of funds prior to the maturity date subject to an early withdrawal penalty. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.26000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $10,000,000,000. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's September 4, 2014,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On October 14, 2014, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF) that will incorporate an early withdrawal feature. This feature will allow depository institutions to obtain a return of funds prior to the maturity date subject to an early withdrawal penalty. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.26000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $5,000,000,000. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's September 4, 2014,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On November 3, 2014, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF) that will incorporate an early withdrawal feature. This feature will allow depository institutions to obtain a return of funds prior to the maturity date subject to an early withdrawal penalty. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.26000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $20,000,000,000. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's September 4, 2014,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and Reserve Banks organized more than two dozen events for high school students and teachers across the country on Wednesday as part of the second Federal Reserve Financial Education Day. In the Washington, D.C., area, staff from the Board conducted workshops at four high schools where students learned about personal budgeting, responsible borrowing, and financing post-secondary education. The events highlighted personal finance skills as an essential element for college and career readiness among young people. "Equipping students with the tools they need to evaluate their options for life after high school helps them make wise choices about investing in education and planning for the future," said Sheila Clark, the Program Director for Diversity and Inclusion at the Board. "Whether a new graduate chooses to pursue college, technical training, a new job, or a combination of those, it's beneficial both for their own personal well-being, and for the health of our economy, for students to have information about how to achieve their financial and professional goals." Federal Reserve Financial Education Day events drew from lesson plans and resources offered by Reserve Banks that teach about topics including earning income, investing in education, saving and budgeting, use of credit, and financial institutions and services. Resources are free, ready for use in classrooms, and available atwww.federalreserveeducation.org. For media inquiries, please call 202-452-2955.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Conference, "Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry", New York, New York In the aftermath of the financial crisis, ongoing increases in capital buffers, reductions in funding vulnerabilities, improvements in risk management, and attention to orderly resolution are producing a substantially more resilient financial system. Yet even as the financial position of firms has been strengthened, headlines describing misconduct in financial firms have appeared with disturbing regularity. For a time, these stories were the legacy of pre-crisis errors and misdeeds, with a focus on the mortgages and mortgage-related products that lay at the heart of the crisis. But soon they were accompanied by allegations of post-crisis actions: rigging of LIBOR (London interbank offered rate) and foreign exchange rates, facilitation of tax evasion, inadequate controls on money laundering, and front running through dark pools, among others. A pattern of antitrust, market regulatory, and consumer protection problems would of course be troubling in any firm or industry. From a prudential regulatory perspective, such a pattern in financial institutions creates additional concerns, particularly as it poses a threat to continued progress toward a safer and more stable financial system. It is noteworthy that supervisory assessments of risks to the earnings and balance sheets of major financial institutions have, like those of many private analysts, placed increasing emphasis on exposure to public fines and private litigation losses. And senior management is surely diverted from the challenges of fashioning sound business strategies when major legal problems arise. Behind much of this malfeasance lies something other than the excessive credit and market risk that led to the crisis itself, although there may be some common roots of these problems. The hypothesis that this is all the result of "a few bad apples," an explanation I heard with exasperating frequency a year or two ago, has I think given way to a realization within many large financial firms that they have not taken steps sufficient to ensure that the activities of their employees remain within the law and, more broadly, accord with the values of probity, customer service, and ethical conduct that most of them espouse on their websites and in their television commercials. Today's conference addresses the sources of the problems and some of the corrective measures that have been, or might be, taken by both firms and regulators. While the title of the conference refers to both "culture" and "behavior," I am going to focus mostly on the behavior that regulators and the public can observe, since culture is a somewhat contested academic concept and, however defined, is difficult to observe and assess from the outside. It is the behavior of the employees of banking organizations with which we, as regulators, are ultimately concerned, since it is only through its employees that a firm can act. Where there is significant incidence of behavior that violates laws or regulations, or runs afoul of supervisory guidance, then we will need to consider some combination of tougher sanctions, additional regulation, or more intrusive supervisory oversight. After stating a few general premises relating to the manifold influences upon behavior in financial firms, I will briefly address two topics: first, what regulators have learned about the shaping of behavior within the firm from our work on risk management and, second, the role of reward and punishment systems in affecting employee behavior. Influences on BehaviorWithout attempting a rigorous definition of "culture" or "corporate culture," I think we can usefully posit that in every organization there is a set of norms that appear to inform behavior of those within the organization, even in the absence of explicit and specific rules or instructions. These norms are of course related to the rules, guidelines, structures, incentives, and punishments that the organization creates. Indeed, one important determinant of behavior is the shared expectation as to which of the stated values and rules of an organization will be supported and reinforced by management action, and which are generally regarded as window dressing. The identifiable norms may well differ within an organization, especially a large one in which different functions are performed in pursuit of overall organizational ends. Debates over the sources and nature of these norms are the stuff of the academic literature to which I referred a moment ago. I will not attempt to synthesize this learning, much less to fashion my own theory. Again, though, I think one can pragmatically note that these norms are shaped by both internal choices and external influences and constraints. For a private, profit-making corporation the most important internal choices are obviously made by management under the oversight of the board of directors. However, the revealed preferences and choices of employees will also affect a firm's culture. For a financial institution, external influences and constraints include shareholders and market analysts, regulators, prosecutors, elected officials, the media, and the public. Market conditions and the actions of competitors can also be significant. Nature of Risk ManagementFinancial risk-taking is arguably the fundamental activity of financial intermediaries.1Unlike most non-financial firms, a financial institution more or less continually makes risk decisions, whose implications can vary significantly based on the nature of the asset involved, market conditions, counterparty identity, and many other factors. The processes by which risk appetites are set and activity managed so as to conform to these risk appetite decisions are central to determining outcomes, and thus the firm's near-term profitability and longer-term stability. For these reasons, there is considerable regulatory interest in these processes, an interest that has been formalized in the Federal Reserve's annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) and informs the emphasis of our supervision throughout the year. Each year, in conjunction with our supervisory stress tests, we provide an assessment to every participating firm of their risk-management and capital planning processes, indicating where specific improvements are needed. The interactions between supervisors and firms on these matters are extensive, focused, and consequential. For this reason, I think we have gained considerable insight into, if not precisely the "culture" of the firms, then at least the attitudes of senior and mid-level management toward these risk functions. In some firms the attitude we perceive is one of a mere compliance exercise. The firm proceeds to address the deficiencies identified by the Fed in a discrete, almost check-the-box fashion. To oversimplify a bit, I would say that our sense is that management at these firms wants the hurdle to capital distribution removed, but once the specific problems have been remedied, they want to move on. If this is the attitude we perceive, I suspect the working level employees of such firms do the same. The supervisory reaction in such cases is quite likely to be an inclination toward greater scrutiny. Other firms, by contrast, seem to have internalized the aims of the risk-management processes and systems that we expect of them. In these firms the dialogue can be quite different, with supervisors observing that, even as a specific problem is addressed, such as deficiencies in estimating losses for a particular loan portfolio in a tail event, the firm has gone back to think about how the identified shortcomings fit into their overall risk decision-making and management processes. These firms will, on their own, then consider whether changes in other areas are needed. Again, I suspect that the line employees in these firms are also hearing a different message and presumably, to at least some degree, will behave in accordance with that message when they encounter risk-management issues not covered specifically by Fed communications. Needless to say, nothing here is meant to suggest that a focus on compliance is problematic. On the contrary, particularly as applied to areas like antitrust, securities laws, and consumer protection, well-crafted compliance programs are essential. But what we want to see is good compliance, not mere compliance. As in financial risk management, the perceived importance of what appear to be similar compliance efforts can vary greatly across firms. Are compliance programs put in place by risk managers or general counsels understood as a kind of background noise that should not drown out the voices urging employees to "make their numbers," or are they seen as reflecting the views and priorities of senior management? A related question is whether compliance with applicable law or regulations is understood to be just that, and that alone. Do employees understand their job to be maximizing revenues in any way possible so long as they do not do anything illegal, or do they understand their job to be maximizing revenues in a manner consistent with a broader set of considerations? In the former case, the message is that the law is a constraint to be observed, but that the purposes or values that underlie it have no additional importance for determining corporate activity. It may not be too great a leap from this attitude to a conscious weighing of the profitability of a particular practice that violates laws or regulations against the penalty that would be assessed for the violation, discounted by the probability of enforcement. In the latter case, the message to employees is that constraints on practices or products may be self-imposed as well as external. The potential sources of such internal constraints are manifold. For example, there might be a fear that always running close to the line will inevitably result in swerving over it at some point. Or management may worry that reputational harm will result if clients and customers believe the firm is always seeking an advantage over them that, literally or metaphorically, is buried in the fine print. This second concern recalls the much-discussed issue of whether a trading mentality has migrated to other parts of large financial firms, so that the position communicated by management to both employees and others is that the firm has no "customers" or "clients," only counterparties. While such an attitude is typical for trading in anonymous markets or with equally sophisticated institutions, it hardly seems designed to engender trust on the part of those who have ongoing relationships with the firm. This tendency may pose another challenge in managing complex banking organizations--the need to foster different kinds of norms and expectations across the different parts of the firm, which may do business with individuals and institutions of widely varying financial expertise. To encourage behavior among their employees that reflects something other than a narrow mentality of compliance and constraint, firms need to take tangible steps that reinforce stated norms such as respect for customers. Some interesting possibilities along these lines are suggested in a recent book by Thomas Huertas, a former U.K. banking regulator.2Although Huertas focuses directly on how banks can avoid suffering losses from conduct and operational risks, his proposals would also serve the purpose just noted. One idea is that firms develop a score for conduct risk. While analogous to long-established scoring systems for credit risk, this method would, in his words, "include ranking the business or product against factors that frequently give rise to conduct issues, including without limitation the sophistication of the customer, the complexity of the product, the level of training of the staff, and so on." A second, complementary idea is for the firm to have a formal system in place to, again in Huertas' words, "monitor adherence to the original product approval criteria, especially where the product is growing rapidly and/or is generating extraordinary profits." These particular ideas may or may not be best for specific firms. The point, though, is that some concrete organizational systems are needed for firms to carry into effective action the goals or values that they nominally espouse. Before leaving this topic, I want to observe that regulators can unwittingly reinforce what I have termed a mere compliance mentality. I would first note that the detail of many regulations means that attention to narrow issues of compliance is sometimes wholly understandable and, indeed, essential. Banks, like other regulated entities, need to be able to determine how a regulation actually applies to them. Beyond that kind of unavoidable focus on narrow compliance, however, management and line employees are more likely to adopt a mere compliance mentality where regulations appear to them to have been poorly drafted or implemented. Sometimes this too is unavoidable, since regulators may simply conclude that the public interest requires a form of regulation opposed by the firm and most of its employees. Sometimes regulated firms are really complaining about the type or purpose of regulation, even when they say they are only criticizing its specifics. But in cases where those inside a firm would stipulate the stated objective of the regulation and still find a regulation badly conceived or implemented, there will be less possibility of internalization or integration into a broader set of firm norms and expectations. This is an outcome that regulatorscanavoid, and something with which the regulated firms themselves can assist by pointing out what they would regard as more sensible methods for achieving stated regulatory purposes. Rewards and PunishmentsAn important determinant of behavior in any organization is the system of rewards and punishments applicable to its employees. Assuming that they are able to discern factors that generally explain patterns of hiring, raises, promotions, demotions, and dismissals, employees receive very strong signals as to what those running the organization actually value. This set of signals has, I suspect, considerably more influence on employee behavior than a corporate statement of values or purposes, particularly if the system of rewards and punishments appears at odds with that statement. Indeed, the significance of reward and punishment signals is probably magnified by their role in shaping the composition of the firm's workforce--by influencing which people are attracted to work at the firm in the first place, which acquire more authority over time, and which are asked to leave. To take one example: if a financial firm's recruitment of young professionals is driven almost entirely by promises of the large amounts of money they can make and the speed with which they can make it, then the firm should not be too surprised when those same young professionals give short shrift to values such as respect for customers, or skirt risk-management guidelines, or perhaps even ignore regulatory and legal compliance requirements. One topic within this broader area of reward and punishment that has received considerable attention is incentive compensation. The deleterious effects of many incentive compensation arrangements were recognized by firms well before regulators began to focus on them in earnest following the financial crisis, as reflected in a survey conducted early in 2009 on behalf of the Institute of International Finance,which reported that all but one of 37 large banking organizations believed that compensation practices were a factor underlying the crisis.3 Compensation arrangements that created high-powered incentives using rewards dominantly based on equity had their origins in efforts to align better management and shareholder interests. And compensation arrangements that rewarded incentives for loan officers to write more loans or traders to generate more trading revenue were grounded in efforts to increase firm profitability. But the revenues that served as the basis for calculating bonuses were generated immediately, while the risks associated with these revenues might not have been realized for months or years after the transactions were completed. When these or similarly misaligned incentive compensation arrangements were common in a firm, the very purpose of sound risk management could be undermined by the actions of employees seeking to maximize their own pay. Since the financial crisis, both firms and regulators have devoted considerable attention to incentive compensation practices for senior managers and others with substantial decision-making authority. Several years ago the bank regulatory agencies issued guidance on incentive compensation and then began a horizontal monitoring of practices at large banking organizations.4Prior to the crisis, incentive compensation arrangements at many firms incorporated virtually no adjustment for risk. Today, firms routinely take into consideration adverse outcomes. A greater proportion of pay is deferred, and a greater proportion of that pay is at risk of a variety of clawback and forfeiture provisions. There is still considerable work to be done in developing and implementing incentive compensation arrangements that truly give appropriate incentives to employees. In many cases risk metrics need to be better targeted to specific activities, and risk adjustments should be more consistently applied. And it is important that compensation arrangements, including clawback and forfeiture provisions, cover risks associated with market conduct and consumer protection, as well as credit and market risks. These kinds of improvements would give more precise signals to employees as to the risk calculus expected of them in making decisions that affect the firm. I hope the long-awaited interagency final rule implementing section 956 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act will be forthcoming in the not-too-distant future, so as to provide a common objective baseline for incentive compensation programs. Beyond regulatory and supervisory requirements, however, there is obviously more that firms can do to use their compensation practices to encourage certain practices and conduct by employees. For example, firms might reward employees with increased compensation or promotion not just for increasing revenues, but also for forestalling losses, such as by identifying non-obvious risks in proposed transactions or products. In order to be effective signals, though, the fact of these rewards, and the standards under which they were granted, need to be transparent. Punishment systems provide the complement of negative incentives to the positive incentives created by compensation and promotion practices (even where qualified by clawback or similar provisions). Here the role of the government differs. With respect to positive incentives, regulators affect individuals only by way of requirements or expectations for firms. When it comes to disincentivizing egregious bad behavior, however, the government can play a more direct role. Because of the required standard of proof and other constitutional protections, criminal prosecutions of individuals are harder to bring successfully than criminal prosecutions of firms. But, as I think was learned decades ago when individuals were criminally prosecuted and imprisoned for antitrust law violations, it is difficult to imagine a more effective deterrent to such conduct. Banking regulators do not have criminal enforcement powers, of course. But we can, and do, require dismissal of employees as part of our enforcement actions against firms. And we do have the authorities to remove malefactors from their positions in any institution that we regulate and to prohibit them from working in the banking industry. Somewhat like criminal prosecutions, these are not easy cases to make. But it is important that we be willing to expend the resources to initiate such actions in appropriate cases. For quite some time, large banking organizations usually dismissed employees who had engaged in significant misconduct or exercised very bad judgment in a quiet, almost surreptitious way. This was particularly true of someone in a responsible position, who would be ushered out the door discreetly, with no recognition internally or externally of the fact of dismissal, or the reasons behind it. Frequently, this person would turn up at another financial firm not long thereafter. The dismissing firm's reasoning was that any public awareness of the dismissal could hurt the reputation of the firm and perhaps cause customers or counterparties to rethink their willingness to do business with it. But the effect of this private way of doing things was to signal the rest of the firm's employees that dismissal, even for very serious reasons, carried quite manageable consequences. At least some firms are rethinking this traditional approach, though different banks seem to be reaching different conclusions about what to put in its place. Some are moving toward a more public system of dismissals, so as to let employees, regulators, and other potential employers know of the consequences of malfeasance and the identity of the responsible individual. Others are inclined toward the view that, because most serious infractions in a firm involve failures by many people and systems, there should not be excessive emphasis on the culpability of just one or two individuals. They are opting instead for a more transparent internal process to dissect the failures of action, judgment, and oversight that lay behind a significant problem, and then act more broadly in applying disciplinary or remedial measures. Whatever approach a firm takes, it is important that the consequences of violations of a firm's norms and expectations, much less regulations and laws, be well-specified and clearly communicated to employees. ConclusionIn these very selective remarks on the factors that affect employee behavior, I have intentionally concentrated on the roles of management and regulators. I realize, of course, that there are other forces at work. There is, for example, an interesting debate among corporate law professors as to the merits of giving shareholders more direct influence over firm policies, in order to reduce agency costs within the firm. Some fear that this would focus employees of financial firms even more on short-term equity market movements, with potential bad effects on both conventional risk management and the kinds of conduct problems noted at the outset of my remarks. Those broader concerns are relevant, to be sure, but they implicate a broader set of actors than the banks themselves, or even bank regulators. My expectation is that if banks do not take more effective steps to control the behavior of those who work for them, there will be both increased pressure and propensity on the part of regulators and law enforcers to impose more requirements, constraints, and punishments. 1.Intermediaries without sizeable balance sheets of their own, such as mutual funds, may not themselves be assuming risk, but they are creating it for their investors.Return to text 2.Thomas Huertas (2014),Safe to Fail(London: Palgrave Macmillan), pp. 158-59.Return to text 3.Institute of International Finance (2009),Compensation in Financial Services: Industry Progress and the Agenda for Change(Washington: IIF, March).Return to text 4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2010), "Federal Reserve, OCC, OTS, FDIC Issue Final Guidance on Incentive Compensation," press release, June 21.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for August 25 and September 15, 2014. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 16-17, 2014. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 16-17, 2014:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Webinar on Community Banking, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today about some of the key issues facing community banks. As the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board's community and regional bank subcommittee, I try to meet with groups of community bankers whenever I can to better understand what is on community bankers' minds. While today's webinar is no substitute for face-to-face meetings with bankers, it is a special treat to be able to leverage technology to speak to and hear from so many community bankers across the country at the same time. As all of you surely know, community banks play a vital role in the U.S. financial system. Community banks have strong links to the people and businesses in their communities, as well as direct knowledge of local economic conditions. These close ties give community bankers a clear advantage in understanding local needs and tailoring their products and services to meet those needs. My colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board and I are committed to making sure that we understand the issues that are most important to community banks as you strive to serve the financial needs of your communities. One way that we further our understanding is by talking to the bankers themselves in a variety of venues, such as this webinar and a community banking research conference that I attended last month in St. Louis, which was co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. And there is another opportunity to communicate with the Federal Reserve and our fellow regulators that I want to make sure you are aware of. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) of 1996 tasked financial regulators with reviewing regulations issued by the agencies at least every 10 years to identify outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome regulations. The agencies kicked off that process earlier this year, and in addition to collecting comments in writing, we are beginning a series of meetings with the public in December. One of the themes that we hear in our interactions with community bankers is concern that the regulatory environment could be tailored more effectively for community banks, and the EGRPRA process gives all interested parties a voice in identifying areas where regulatory requirements may be disproportionate to risk. I therefore encourage you to participate in this important process and hope you will raise any concerns and ideas you have. The Federal Reserve is committed to tailoring its supervisory practices as appropriate for community banks to reduce unnecessary burden, while still ensuring that community banks continue to operate in a safe and sound manner. I am looking forward to our conversation today and, in particular, am interested in hearing about topics that are of importance to you as you work to serve your customers, meet the credit needs of your communities, and thrive.
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Conference on Economic Opportunity and Inequality, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts Watch Live The distribution of income and wealth in the United States has been widening more or less steadily for several decades, to a greater extent than in most advanced countries.1This trend paused during the Great Recession because of larger wealth losses for those at the top of the distribution and because increased safety-net spending helped offset some income losses for those below the top. But widening inequality resumed in the recovery, as the stock market rebounded, wage growth and the healing of the labor market have been slow, and the increase in home prices has not fully restored the housing wealth lost by the large majority of households for which it is their primary asset. The extent of and continuing increase in inequality in the United States greatly concern me. The past several decades have seen the most sustained rise in inequality since the 19th century after more than 40 years of narrowing inequality following the Great Depression. By some estimates, income and wealth inequality are near their highest levels in the past hundred years, much higher than the average during that time span and probably higher than for much of American history before then.2It is no secret that the past few decades of widening inequality can be summed up as significant income and wealth gains for those at the very top and stagnant living standards for the majority. I think it is appropriate to ask whether this trend is compatible with values rooted in our nation's history, among them the high value Americans have traditionally placed on equality of opportunity. Some degree of inequality in income and wealth, of course, would occur even with completely equal opportunity because variations in effort, skill, and luck will produce variations in outcomes. Indeed, some variation in outcomes arguably contributes to economic growth because it creates incentives to work hard, get an education, save, invest, and undertake risk. However, to the extent that opportunity itself is enhanced by access to economic resources, inequality of outcomes can exacerbate inequality of opportunity, thereby perpetuating a trend of increasing inequality. Such a link is suggested by the "Great Gatsby Curve," the finding that, among advanced economies, greater income inequality is associated with diminished intergenerational mobility.3In such circumstances, society faces difficult questions of how best to fairly and justly promote equal opportunity. My purpose today is not to provide answers to these contentious questions, but rather to provide a factual basis for further discussion. I am pleased that this conference will focus on equality of economic opportunity and on ways to better promote it. In my remarks, I will review trends in income and wealth inequality over the past several decades, then identify and discuss four sources of economic opportunity in America--think of them as "building blocks" for the gains in income and wealth that most Americans hope are within reach of those who strive for them. The first two are widely recognized as important sources of opportunity: resources available for children and affordable higher education. The second two may come as more of a surprise: business ownership and inheritances. Like most sources of wealth, family ownership of businesses and inheritances are concentrated among households at the top of the distribution. But both of these are less concentrated and more broadly distributed than other forms of wealth, and there is some basis for thinking that they may also play a role in providing economic opportunities to a considerable number of families below the top. In focusing on these four building blocks, I do not mean to suggest that they account for all economic opportunity, but I do believe they are all significant sources of opportunity for individuals and their families to improve their economic circumstances. Income and Wealth Inequality in the Survey of Consumer FinancesI will start with the basics about widening inequality, drawing heavily on a trove of data generated by the Federal Reserve's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), the latest of which was conducted in 2013 and published last month.4The SCF is broadly consistent with other data that show widening wealth and income inequality over the past several decades, but I am employing the SCF because it offers the added advantage of specific detail on income, wealth, and debt for each of 6,000 households surveyed.5This detail from family balance sheets provides a glimpse of the relative access to the four sources of opportunity I will discuss. While the recent trend of widening income and wealth inequality is clear, the implications for a particular family partly depend on whether that family's living standards are rising or not as its relative position changes. There have been some times of relative prosperity when income has grown for most households but inequality widened because the gains were proportionally larger for those at the top; widening inequality might not be as great a concern if living standards improve for most families. That was the case for much of the 1990s, when real incomes were rising for most households. At other times, however, inequality has widened because income and wealth grew for those at the top and stagnated or fell for others. And at still other times, inequality has widened when incomes were falling for most households, but the declines toward the bottom were proportionally larger. Unfortunately, the past several decades of widening inequality has often involved stagnant or falling living standards for many families. Since the survey began in its current form in 1989, the SCF has shown a rise in the concentration of income in the top few percent of households, as shown infigure 1.6By definition, of course, the share of all income held by the rest, the vast majority of households, has fallen by the same amount.7This concentration was the result of income and living standards rising much more quickly for those at the top. After adjusting for inflation, the average income of the top 5 percent of households grew by 38 percent from 1989 to 2013, as we can see infigure 2. By comparison, the average real income of the other 95 percent of households grew less than 10 percent. Income inequality narrowed slightly during the Great Recession, as income fell more for the top than for others, but resumed widening in the recovery, and by 2013 it had nearly returned to the pre-recession peak.8 The distribution of wealth is even more unequal than that of income, and the SCF shows that wealth inequality has increased more than income inequality since 1989. As shown infigure 3, the wealthiest 5 percent of American households held 54 percent of all wealth reported in the 1989 survey. Their share rose to 61 percent in 2010 and reached 63 percent in 2013. By contrast, the rest of those in the top half of the wealth distribution--families that in 2013 had a net worth between $81,000 and $1.9 million--held 43 percent of wealth in 1989 and only 36 percent in 2013. The lower half of households by wealth held just 3 percent of wealth in 1989 and only 1 percent in 2013. To put that in perspective,figure 4shows that the average net worth of the lower half of the distribution, representing 62 million households, was $11,000 in 2013.9About one-fourth of these families reported zero wealth or negative net worth, and a significant fraction of those said they were "underwater" on their home mortgages, owing more than the value of the home.10This $11,000 average is 50 percent lower than the average wealth of the lower half of families in 1989, adjusted for inflation. Average real wealth rose gradually for these families for most of those years, then dropped sharply after 2007.Figure 5shows that average wealth also grew steadily for the "next 45" percent of households before the crisis but didn't fall nearly as much afterward. Those next 45 households saw their wealth, measured in 2013 dollars, grow from an average of $323,000 in 1989 to $516,000 in 2007 and then fall to $424,000 in 2013, a net gain of about one-third over 24 years. Meanwhile, the average real wealth of families in the top 5 percent has nearly doubled, on net--from $3.6 million in 1989 to $6.8 million in 2013. Housing wealth--the net equity held by households, consisting of the value of their homes minus their mortgage debt--is the most important source of wealth for all but those at the very top.11It accounted for three-fifths of wealth in 2013 for the lower half of families and two-fifths of wealth for the next 45. But housing wealth was only one-fifth of total wealth for the top 5 percent of families. The share of housing in total net worth for all three groups has not changed much since 1989. Since housing accounts for a larger share of wealth for those in the bottom half of the wealth distribution, their overall wealth is affected more by changes in home prices. Furthermore, homeowners in the bottom half have been more highly leveraged on their homes, amplifying this difference. As a result, while the SCF shows that all three groups saw proportionally similar increases and subsequent declines in home prices from 1989 to 2013, the effects on net worth were greater for those in the bottom half of households by wealth. Foreclosures and the dramatic fall in house prices affected many of these families severely, pushing them well down the wealth distribution.Figure 6shows that homeowners in the bottom half of households by wealth reported 61 percent less home equity in 2013 than in 2007. The next 45 reported a 29 percent loss of housing wealth, and the top 5 lost 20 percent. Fortunately, rebounding housing prices in 2013 and 2014 have restored a good deal of the loss in housing wealth, with the largest gains for those toward the bottom. Based on rising home prices alone and not counting possible changes in mortgage debt or other factors, Federal Reserve staff estimate that between 2013 and mid-2014, average home equity rose 49 percent for the lowest half of families by wealth that own homes.12The estimated gains are somewhat less for those with greater wealth.13Homeowners in the bottom 50, which had an average overall net worth of $25,000 in 2013, would have seen their net worth increase to an average of $33,000 due solely to home price gains since 2013, a 32 percent increase. Another major source of wealth for many families is financial assets, including stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and private pensions.14Figure 7shows that the wealthiest 5 percent of households held nearly two-thirds of all such assets in 2013, the next 45 percent of families held about one-third, and the bottom half of households, just 2 percent. This figure may look familiar, since the distribution of financial wealth has concentrated at the top since 1989 at rates similar to those for overall wealth, which we saw in figure 3.15 Those are the basics on wealth and income inequality from the SCF. Other research tells us that inequality tends to persist from one generation to the next. For example, one study that divides households by income found that 4 in 10 children raised in families in the lowest-income fifth of households remain in that quintile as adults.16Fewer than 1 in 10 children of families at the bottom later reach the top quintile. The story is flipped for children raised in the highest-income households: When they grow up, 4 in 10 stay at the top and fewer than 1 in 10 fall to the bottom. Research also indicates that economic mobility in the United States has not changed much in the last several decades; that mobility is lower in the United States than in most other advanced countries; and, as I noted earlier, that economic mobility and income inequality among advanced countries are negatively correlated.17 Four Building Blocks of OpportunityAn important factor influencing intergenerational mobility and trends in inequality over time is economic opportunity. While we can measure overall mobility and inequality, summarizing opportunity is harder, which is why I intend to focus on some important sources of opportunity--the four building blocks I mentioned earlier. Two of those are so significant that you might call them "cornerstones" of opportunity, and you will not be surprised to hear that both are largely related to education. The first of these cornerstones I would describe more fully as "resources available to children in their most formative years." The second is higher education that students and their families can afford. Two additional sources of opportunity are evident in the SCF. They affect fewer families than the two cornerstones I have just identified, but enough families and to a sufficient extent that I believe they are also important sources of economic opportunity. The third building block of opportunity, as shown by the SCF, is ownership of a private business.18This usually means ownership and sometimes direct management of a family business. The fourth source of opportunity is inherited wealth. As one would expect, inheritances are concentrated among the wealthiest families, but the SCF indicates they may also play an important role in the opportunities available to others. Resources Available for ChildrenFor households with children, family resources can pay for things that research shows enhance future earnings and other economic outcomes--homes in safer neighborhoods with good schools, for example, better nutrition and health care, early childhood education, intervention for learning disabilities, travel and other potentially enriching experiences.19Affluent families have significant resources for things that give children economic advantages as adults, and the SCF data I have cited indicate that many other households have very little to spare for this purpose. These disparities extend to other household characteristics associated with better economic outcomes for offspring, such as homeownership rates, educational attainment of parents, and a stable family structure.20 According to the SCF, the gap in wealth between families with children at the bottom and the top of the distribution has been growing steadily over the past 24 years, but that pace has accelerated recently.Figure 8shows that the median wealth for families with children in the lower half of the wealth distribution fell from $13,000 in 2007 to $8,000 in 2013, after adjusting for inflation, a loss of 40 percent.21These wealth levels look small alongside the much higher wealth of the next 45 percent of households with children. But these families also saw their median wealth fall dramatically--by one-third in real terms--from $344,000 in 2007 to $229,000 in 2013. The top 5 percent of families with children saw their median wealth fall only 9 percent, from $3.5 million in 2007 to $3.2 million in 2013, after inflation. For families below the top, public funding plays an important role in providing resources to children that influence future levels of income and wealth. Such funding has the potential to help equalize these resources and the opportunities they confer. Social safety-net spending is an important form of public funding that helps offset disparities in family resources for children. Spending for income security programs since 1989 and until recently was fairly stable, ranging between 1.2 and 1.7 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), with higher levels in this range related to recessions. However, such spending rose to 2.4 percent of GDP in 2009 and 3 percent in 2010.22Researchers estimate that the increase in the poverty rate because of the recession would have been much larger without the effects of income security programs.23 Public funding of education is another way that governments can help offset the advantages some households have in resources available for children. One of the most consequential examples is early childhood education. Research shows that children from lower-income households who get good-quality pre-Kindergarten education are more likely to graduate from high school and attend college as well as hold a job and have higher earnings, and they are less likely to be incarcerated or receive public assistance.24Figure 9shows that access to quality early childhood education has improved since the 1990s, but it remains limited--41 percent of children were enrolled in state or federally supported programs in 2013. Gains in enrollment have stalled since 2010, as has growth in funding, in both cases because of budget cuts related to the Great Recession. These cuts have reduced per-pupil spending in state-funded programs by 12 percent after inflation, and access to such programs, most of which are limited to lower-income families, varies considerably from state to state and within states, since local funding is often important.25In 2010, the United States ranked 28th out of 38 advanced countries in the share of four-year-olds enrolled in public or private early childhood education.26 Similarly, the quality and the funding levels of public education at the primary and secondary levels vary widely, and this unevenness limits public education's equalizing effect. The United States is one of the few advanced economies in which public education spending is often lower for students in lower-income households than for students in higher-income households.27Some countries strive for more or less equal funding, and others actually require higher funding in schools serving students from lower-income families, expressly for the purpose of reducing inequality in resources for children. A major reason the United States is different is that we are one of the few advanced nations that funds primary and secondary public education mainly through subnational taxation. Half of U.S. public school funding comes from local property taxes, a much higher share than in other advanced countries, and thus the inequalities in housing wealth and income I have described enhance the ability of more-affluent school districts to spend more on public schools. Some states have acted to equalize spending to some extent in recent years, but there is still significant variation among and within states. Even after adjusting for regional differences in costs and student needs, there is wide variation in public school funding in the United States.28 Spending is not the only determinant of outcomes in public education. Research shows that higher-quality teachers raise the educational attainment and the future earnings of students.29Better-quality teachers can help equalize some of the disadvantages in opportunity faced by students from lower-income households, but here, too, there are forces that work against raising teacher quality for these students. Research shows that, for a variety of reasons, including inequality in teacher pay, the best teachers tend to migrate to and concentrate in schools in higher-income areas.30Even within districts and in individual schools, where teacher pay is often uniform based on experience, factors beyond pay tend to lead more experienced and better-performing teachers to migrate to schools and to classrooms with more-advantaged students.31 Higher Education that Families Can AffordFor many individuals and families, higher education is the other cornerstone of economic opportunity. The premium in lifetime earnings because of higher education has increased over the past few decades, reflecting greater demand for college-educated workers. By one measure, the median annual earnings of full-time workers with a four-year bachelor's degree are 79 percent higher than the median for those with only a high school diploma.32The wage premium for a graduate degree is significantly higher than the premium for a college degree. Despite escalating costs for college, the net returns for a degree are high enough that college still offers a considerable economic opportunity to most people.33 Along with other data, the SCF shows that most students and their families are having a harder time affording college. College costs have risen much faster than income for the large majority of households since 2001 and have become especially burdensome for households in the bottom half of the earnings distribution. Rising college costs, the greater numbers of students pursuing higher education, and the recent trends in income and wealth have led to a dramatic increase in student loan debt. Outstanding student loan debt quadrupled from $260 billion in 2004 to $1.1 trillion this year. Sorting families by wealth, the SCF shows that the relative burden of education debt has long been higher for families with lower net worth, and that this disparity has grown much wider in the past couple decades.Figure 10shows that from 1995 to 2013, outstanding education debt grew from 26 percent of average yearly income for the lower half of households to 58 percent of income.34The education debt burden was lower and grew a little less sharply for the next 45 percent of families and was much lower and grew not at all for the top 5 percent.35 Higher education has been and remains a potent source of economic opportunity in America, but I fear the large and growing burden of paying for it may make it harder for many young people to take advantage of the opportunity higher education offers. Opportunities to Build Wealth through Business OwnershipFor many people, the opportunity to build a business has long been an important part of the American dream. In addition to housing and financial assets, the SCF shows that ownership of private businesses is a significant source of wealth and can be a vital source of opportunity for many households to improve their economic circumstances and position in the wealth distribution. While business wealth is highly concentrated at the top of the distribution, it also represents a significant component of wealth for some other households.36Figure 11shows that slightly more than half of the top 5 percent of households have a share in a private business. The average value of these holdings is nearly $4 million. Only 14 percent of families in the next 45 have ownership in a private business, but for those that do, this type of wealth constitutes a substantial portion of their assets--the average amount of this business equity is nearly $200,000, representing more than one-third of their net worth. Only 3 percent of the bottom half of households hold equity in a private business, but it is a big share of wealth for those few.37The average amount of this wealth is close to $20,000, 60 percent of the average net worth for these households.38 Owning a business is risky, and most new businesses close within a few years. But research shows that business ownership is associated with higher levels of economic mobility.39However, it appears that it has become harder to start and build businesses. The pace of new business creation has gradually declined over the past couple of decades, and the number of new firms declined sharply from 2006 through 2009.40The latest SCF shows that the percentage of the next 45 that own a business has fallen to a 25-year low, and equity in those businesses, adjusted for inflation, is at its lowest point since the mid-1990s. One reason to be concerned about the apparent decline in new business formation is that it may serve to depress the pace of productivity, real wage growth, and employment.41Another reason is that a slowdown in business formation may threaten what I believe likely has been a significant source of economic opportunity for many families below the very top in income and wealth. InheritancesAlong with other economic advantages, it is likely that large inheritances play a role in the fairly limited intergenerational mobility that I described earlier.42But inheritances are also common among households below the top of the wealth distribution and sizable enough that I believe they may well play a role in helping these families economically. Figure 12shows that half of the top 5 percent of households by wealth reported receiving an inheritance at some time, but a considerable number of others did as well--almost 30 percent of the next 45 percent and 12 percent of the bottom 50. Inheritances are concentrated at the top of the wealth distribution but less so than total wealth. Just over half of the total value of inheritances went to the top 5 percent and 40 percent went to households in the next 45. Seven percent of inheritances were shared among households in the bottom 50 percent, a group that together held only 1 percent of all wealth in 2013.43 The average inheritance reported by those in the top 5 percent who had received them was $1.1 million. That amount dwarfs the $183,000 average among the next 45 percent and the $68,000 reported among the bottom half of households. But compared with the typical wealth of these households, the additive effect of bequests of this size is significant for the millions of households below the top 5 that receive them. The average age for receiving an inheritance is 40, when many parents are trying to save for and secure the opportunities of higher education for their children, move up to a larger home or one in a better neighborhood, launch a business, switch careers, or perhaps relocate to seek more opportunity. Considering the overall picture of limited resources for most families that I have described today, I think the effects of inheritances for the sizable minority below the top that receive one are likely a significant source of economic opportunity. ConclusionIn closing, let me say that, with these examples, I have only just touched the surface of the important topic of economic opportunity, and I look forward to learning more from the work presented at this conference. As I noted at the outset, research about the causes and implications of inequality is ongoing, and I hope that this conference helps spur further study of economic opportunity and its effects on economic mobility. Using the SCF and other sources, I have tried to offer some observations about how access to four specific sources of opportunity may vary across households, but I cannot offer any conclusions about how much these factors influence income and wealth inequality. I do believe that these are important questions, and I hope that further research will help answer them. 1.See Salvatore Morelli, Timothy Smeeding, and Jeffrey Thompson (2014), "Post-1970 Trends in Within-Country Inequality and Poverty: Rich and Middle Income Countries (PDF)," IRP Discussion Paper Series 1419-14 (Madison, Wis.: Institute for Research on Poverty, March).Return to text 2.For income inequality in the past 100 years, see Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez (2011), "Top Incomes in the Long Run of History (PDF),"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 49 (March), pp.3-71. For wealth inequality, see Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman (2014), "Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data," working paper and slides (October, 14, 2014). For income inequality before 1913, see Peter H. Lindert and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2012), "American Incomes 1774-1860," NBER Working Paper Series 18396 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September).Return to text 3.See Alan B. Krueger (2012), "The Rise and Consequences of Inequality in the United States (PDF)," speech delivered at the Center for American Progress, Washington, January 12.Return to text 4.Asset questions in the SCF are based on the value at the time of the survey. Since most interviews were completed between April and December 2013, some of the asset values do not reflect price increases experienced in late 2013, and none reflect increases in 2014. Income questions in the SCF refer to the prior calendar year, so the 2013 survey reports 2012 income. See Jesse Bricker, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Kevin B. Moore, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A. Windle (2014), "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2010 to 2013: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,"Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 100 (September), pp. 1-41.Return to text 5."Households" and "families" are used interchangeably in these remarks because the SCF uses both interchangeably to describe its respondents.Return to text 6.The share of income that went to the top 5 percent of households--a threshold of $230,000 in gross income in 2013--rose from 31 percent of income reported by all respondents in 1989 to 37 percent in 2007. The income share for this group fell in the financial crisis, to 34 percent in 2010, then rose in the recovery, regaining a 37 percent share in 2013.Return to text 7.The top half of the distribution, except for the top 5 percent, earned 53 percent of all income in 1989 but only 51 percent in 2010. In 2013, households in the "next 45 percent" had incomes between $47,000 and $230,000. While income has rebounded for the top 5 percent in the recovery, the share that went to the next 45 percent declined further to 49 percent in 2013. The bottom half of the distribution saw their share of income fall from 16 percent in 1989 to 15 percent in 2007, edge up in 2010, and then reach a new low for the survey last year at 14 percent.Return to text 8.Largely because of losses in income from financial holdings, the share of total income received by the top 5 percent of households fell 3 percentage points from 2007 to 2010, with the next 45 percent and lower half of households each gaining about half of that share. Some of the nominal income losses for households below the top 5 percent were offset by larger-than-normal transfer payments during the recession.Return to text 9.All SCF income and wealth data prior to the 2013 survey are adjusted for inflation by expressing the values in 2013 dollars.Return to text 10.In the 2013 SCF, 17 percent of all families reporting zero or negative net worth also reported they were underwater on their home mortgages.Return to text 11.Housing wealth includes the net equity in primary residences and other residential real estate.Return to text 12.The house price data used are from CoreLogic, and data track price changes at the Core Based Statistical Area level between the survey month in 2013 and June 2014. The average increase in home prices over this period was 8 percent. No adjustments are made to account for possible changes in mortgage leverage.Return to text 13.Home price gains in 2013 and 2014 are estimated to have raised the home equity of home-owning households in the next 45 percent of households in the wealth distribution by 12 percent, and by 9 percent for home-owning households in the top 5 percent of the wealth distribution.Return to text 14.The SCF defines financial assets as liquid assets, certificates of deposit, directly held pooled investment funds, stocks, bonds, quasi-liquid assets (including retirement accounts), savings bonds, whole life insurance, other managed assets, and other financial assets.Return to text 15.In 1989, the top 5 percent of households held 54 percent of financial assets, the next 45 percent (that is, home-owning households in the 50th through 95th percentiles of the wealth distribution) held 42 percent, and the bottom half held 4 percent.Return to text 16.See Pew Charitable Trusts (2012),Pursuing the American Dream: Economic Mobility across Generations(PDF)(Washington: PCT, July).Return to text 17.See Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez, and Nicholas Turner (2014), "Is the United States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility," NBER Working Paper Series 19844 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January (revised May 2014)). See also Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2010), "A Family Affair: Intergenerational Social Mobility across OECD Countries (PDF)," inEconomic Policy Reforms: Going for Growth 2010,pp.183-200 (Paris: OECD); and Alan B. Krueger (2012), "The Rise and Consequences of Inequality in the United States (PDF)," speech delivered at the Center for American Progress, Washington, January 12.Return to text 18.Business assets in the SCF include both actively and "non-actively" managed businesses but do not include ownership of publicly traded stock.Return to text 19.See, for example, Janet Currie and Douglas Almond (2011), "Human Capital Development before Age Five," ch. 15 in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds.,Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4 (Holland: Elsevier), pp. 1315-1486.Return to text 20.Homeownership by parents is strongly associated with economic success for children; see Thomas P. Boehm and Alan M. Schlottmann (1999), "Does Home Ownership by Parents Have an Economic Impact on Their Children?"Journal of Housing Economics,vol. 8 (September), pp. 217-32. Ninety-seven percent of top-earning families with children own a home, compared with fewer than half of the bottom 50 percent of families with children; educational attainment of parents is strongly predictive of outcomes for children that determine earnings. See Ayana Douglas-Hall and Michelle Chau (2007), "Parents' Low Education Leads to Low Income, Despite Full-Time Employment" (New York: National Center for Children in Poverty, Columbia University, November). A considerable body of literature establishes the correlation between educational attainment of parents and their children. Other research has identified that this relationship is causal; see, for example, Philip Oreopoulos, Marianne E. Page, and Ann Huff Stevens (2006), "The Intergenerational Effects of Compulsory Schooling,"Journal of Labor Economics,vol. 24 (October), pp. 729-60. Eighty-six percent of top-earning households in the SCF with children are headed by a college graduate, compared with 12 percent in the bottom half of households with children; children raised by a single parent earn less as adults. See Mary Ann Powell and Toby L. Parcel (1997), "Effects of Family Structure on the Earnings Attainment Process: Differences by Gender,"Journal of Marriage and Family,vol. 59 (May), pp. 419-33. Only 4 percent of top-earning households with children are headed by unmarried parents, compared with 47 percent for the lower half of households with children.Return to text 21.Distributional statistics for families with children are based on a sorting of only families with children.Return to text 22.Congressional Budget Office historic budget data. Income security programs include UI, SSI, SNAP EITC, and other family support and nutrition programs.Return to text 23.See Jeffrey P. Thompson and Timothy M. Smeeding (2013), "Inequality and Poverty in the United States: The Aftermath of the Great Recession (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-51 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July).Return to text 24.See James J. Heckman, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz (2010), "The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program,"Journal of Public Economics, vol. 94(12), pp. 114-28; and Clive R. Belfield, Milagros Nores, Steve Barnett, and Lawrence Schweinhart (2006), "The High/Scope Perry Preschool Program: Cost-Benefit Analysis Using Data from the Age-40 Followup,"Journal of Human Resources, vol. 41(Winter), pp. 162-90.Return to text 25.The share of four-year-olds in state-funded pre-K programs increased from 14 percent in 2002 to 27 percent in 2010 but has been 28 percent since. Head Start enrollments have been fairly steady since 2005. Forty-one percent of four-year-olds were enrolled in federally funded Head Start or state-funded pre-K education programs in 2013. See National Institute for Early Education Research (2013),The State of Preschool 2013: State Preschool Yearbook(PDF)(New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers Graduate School of Education). For analysis of Head Start enrollment by age, see theAnnie E. Casey Foundation KIDS COUNT Data Center.Return to text 26.See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2013), "How Do Early Childhood Education and Care (ECEC) Policies, Systems and Quality Vary across OECD Countries? (PDF)" Education Indicators in Focus Series 11 (Paris: OECD, February).Return to text 27.See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2013),Education at a Glance 2013: OECD Indicators(PDF)(Paris: OECD).Return to text 28.SeeEducation Week(2014),Quality Counts 2014: District Disruption and Revival(Bethesda, Md.: Editorial Projects in Education, January).Return to text 29.See Eric A. Hanushek (2011), "The Economic Value of Higher Teacher Quality,"Economics of Education Review,vol. 30 (June), pp. 466-79; or, for estimates of the future earnings students gain by having a better teacher, see Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff, "The Long-Term Impacts of Teachers: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood," unpublished paper, Harvard University.Return to text 30.See Eric Isenberg, Jeffrey Max, Philip Gleason, Liz Potamites, Robert Santillano, Heinrich Hock, and Michael Hansen (2013),Access to Effective Teaching for Disadvantaged Students(PDF), report NCEE 2014-4001, prepared for the Institute of Education Sciences (Washington: U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance); and Kati Haycock and Eric A. Hanushek (2010), "An Effective Teacher in Every Classroom: A Lofty Goal, But How to Do It? (PDF)"Education Next,vol. 10 (Summer), pp. 46-52.Return to text 31.Better and more-experienced teachers tend to move to better-resourced schools, including those with more active outside funding, or those with more-advantaged students, such as magnet schools. Even within schools, more experienced and higher performing teachers are more likely to teach Advanced Placement classes which tend to serve more advantaged students. The result is that lower income and lower achieving students are more likely to be taught by less experienced and lower performing teachers. See Charles Clotfelter, Helen Ladd, Jacob Vigdor, and Justin Wheeler (2007), "High Poverty Schools and the Distribution of Teachers and Principals,"North Carolina Law Review,vol. 85 (2), pp. 1345-79; Charles Clotfelter, Helen Ladd, and Jacob Vigdor (2005), "Who Teaches Whom? Race and the Distribution of Novice Teachers,"Economics of Education Review,vol. 24 (August), pp. 377-92; and Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff (2002), "Teacher Sorting and the Plight of Urban Schools: A Descriptive Analysis,"Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis,vol. 37 (Spring), pp. 37-62.Return to text 32.See Sandy Baum (2014),Higher Education Earnings Premium: Value, Variation, and Trends(PDF)(Washington: Urban Institute, February).Return to text 33.Taking into account the cost of paying for education and years spent in college and not working, economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York estimate that the lifetime return to a college degree is 15 percent. See Jaison R. Abel and Richard Deitz (2014), "Do the Benefits of College Still Outweigh the Costs? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 20 (3).Return to text 34.Education debt in the SCF reflects the total amount of debt outstanding at the time of the survey.Return to text 35.Education debt-to-income ratio is calculated based on what SCF respondents reported as their usual income. Numbers are for families with education debt.Return to text 36.The SCF does not ask households whether they started businesses that closed, so reported business ownership and wealth is largely related only to those businesses that succeed.Return to text 37.Distributional statistics for business ownership and assets exclude outliers with large negative net worth.Return to text 38.Business wealth took a big hit due to the recession and has only partly recovered for most families. For the bottom half of the distribution, the $20,000 average in business wealth in 2013 was down from $29,000, after adjusting for inflation, in 2007. The nearly $200,000 held by the next 45 percent with businesses was down from $228,000 in 2007. The $4 million in business wealth of the top 5 percent in 2013 was down, in real terms, from $4.4 million in 2007.Return to text 39.See, for example, Robert Fairlie (2004), "Earnings Growth among Young Less-Educated Business Owners,"Industrial Relations,vol. 43 (July), pp. 634-59; Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Harvey S. Rosen, and Robert Weathers (2000), "Horatio Alger Meets the Mobility Tables,"Small Business Economics,vol. 14, pp. 243-74; and Vincenzo Quadrini (2000), "Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility,"Review of Economic Dynamics,vol. 3 (January), pp. 1-40.Return to text 40.SeeBusiness Dynamics Statistics, U.S. Census Bureau. For analysis documenting the decline in new and young firms, see John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2012),Where Have All the Young Firms Gone?(PDF)Business Dynamics Statistics Briefing, May. For a discussion of the link between a decline in young firms and constrained credit access, see Michael Siemer (2014), "Firm Entry and Employment Dynamics in the Great Recession (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-56 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July).Return to text 41.See Steven J. Davis and John Haltiwanger (2014), "Labor Market Fluidity and Economic Performance (PDF)," paper prepared for "Re-Evaluating Labor Market Dynamics," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 21-23.Return to text 42.This topic is discussed extensively in Thomas Piketty (2014),Capital in the 21st Century,trans. Arthur Goldhammer (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press).Return to text 43.Reported inheritances can have been received at any point in the respondent's life. As with other forms of wealth cited in these remarks, inheritances have been adjusted for inflation and are expressed in 2013 dollars.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemDepartment of Housing and Urban DevelopmentFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Housing Finance AgencyOffice of Comptroller of the CurrencySecurities and Exchange Commission Six federal agencies approved a final rule requiring sponsors of securitization transactions to retain risk in those transactions. The final rule implements the risk retention requirements in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). The final rule is being issued jointly by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. As provided under the Dodd-Frank Act, the Secretary of the Treasury, as Chairperson of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, played a coordinating role in the joint agency rulemaking. The final rule largely retains the risk retention framework contained in the proposal issued by the agencies in August 2013 and generally requires sponsors of asset-backed securities (ABS) to retain not less than five percent of the credit risk of the assets collateralizing the ABS issuance. The rule also sets forth prohibitions on transferring or hedging the credit risk that the sponsor is required to retain. As required by the Dodd-Frank Act, the final rule defines a "qualified residential mortgage" (QRM) and exempts securitizations of QRMs from the risk retention requirement. The final rule aligns the QRM definition with that of a qualified mortgage as defined by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The final rule also requires the agencies to review the definition of QRM no later than four years after the effective date of the rule with respect to the securitization of residential mortgages and every five years thereafter, and allows each agency to request a review of the definition at any time. The final rule also does not require any retention for securitizations of commercial loans, commercial mortgages, or automobile loans if they meet specific standards for high quality underwriting. The final rule will be effective one year after publication in the Federal Register for residential mortgage-backed securitizations and two years after publication for all other securitization types. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Meeting Memoranda Open Board Meeting on October 22, 2014 Board Votes
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Per Jacobsson Foundation Lecture, 2014 Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group, Washington, D.C. It is a great honor to deliver the Per Jacobsson Foundation Lecture, and I thank the organizers for inviting me.1Per Jacobsson, a Swede, was the third Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), serving from 1956 to 1963. During his tenure, the fund supported the return to convertibility of the major European currencies, increased its resources by securing the General Arrangements to Borrow, and established the Compensatory Financing Facility to help member countries cope with temporary fluctuations in international payments. It is a particular pleasure to be delivering this lecture at the IMF. My service in the IMF was a highlight of my professional career. But I speak now as a central banker, one who faces a new set of responsibilities. My lecture today is on the special challenges that face the Federal Reserve and the global economy in an increasingly interconnected world. Over the past 50 years, global trade has more than tripled relative to world gross domestic product (GDP), and the ratio of total exports to global GDP now stands at about 30 percent. International trade has not loomed as large in the U.S. national accounts as it has for many other countries, but it is an increasingly important driver of the U.S. economy, with the share of trade in U.S. GDP currently at about 15 percent. Although the U.S. share of world GDP has gradually declined since the mid-20th century, the broader importance of the United States to the global economy has diminished less, or possibly not at all, as a result of increasing financial linkages over the same period. In particular, U.S. residents' ownership of foreign assets has risen to nearly $25 trillion (more than 140 percent of annual U.S. GDP), reflecting the leading role of U.S. capital markets in cross-border finance. Total foreign investment in the United States is even larger, at more than $30 trillion. U.S. Treasury securities are a key component of these external liabilities: As the world's favorite safe asset, they are the preferred form of collateral for a range of financial contracts, and they also account for more than half of other countries' foreign reserves. In a progressively integrating world economy and financial system, a central bank cannot ignore developments beyond its country's borders, and the Fed is no exception. This is true even though the Fed's statutory objectives are defined as specific goals for the U.S. economy. In particular, the Federal Reserve's objectives are given by its dual mandate to pursue maximum sustainable employment and price stability, and our policy decisions are targeted to achieve these dual objectives.2Hence, at first blush, it may seem that there is little need for Fed policymakers to pay attention to developments outside the United States. But such an inference would be incorrect. The state of the U.S. economy is significantly affected by the state of the world economy. A wide range of foreign shocks affect U.S. domestic spending, production, prices, and financial conditions. To anticipate how these shocks affect the U.S. economy, the Federal Reserve devotes significant resources to monitoring developments in foreign economies, including emerging market economies (EMEs), which account for an increasingly important share of global growth. The most recent available data show 47 percent of total U.S. exports going to EME destinations. And of course, actions taken by the Federal Reserve influence economic conditions abroad. Because these international effects in turn spill back on the evolution of the U.S. economy, we cannot make sensible monetary policy choices without taking them into account. In this lecture, I would like to emphasize both aspects of our global connectedness--spillovers from the United States to foreign economies and the effect of foreign economies on the United States. I will first review the effect of the Fed's monetary policies on the rest of the global economy, particularly the EMEs, which has received considerable attention in recent years. Prior to the spring of 2013, this attention was focused on the international spillover of the Fed's accommodative policies, especially our asset purchases. But beginning last year, the focus has shifted to the normalization of our policies, as exemplified by last summer's "taper tantrum."3 Although the effect of the U.S. economy on other countries is of vital importance to this audience, I will briefly digress to remind you that developments in other economies also can have significant spillovers to the United States, which in turn prompt reactions from U.S. policymakers. For example, in the past few years, the deflationary environment in Japan, together with the fallout from the euro-area fiscal crisis, has entailed persistent weakness in those economies, which historically have been among our most important trading partners, are major recipients of our foreign investments, and loom large in the international credit exposures of U.S. banks. These effects have weighed on global growth, which needs to be taken into account in the setting of U.S. monetary policy. Returning to spillovers from the United States, in the second part of the lecture, I will address prospective outcomes and possible risks associated with the normalization of our policies. In determining the pace at which our monetary accommodation is removed, we will, as always, be paying close attention to the path of the rest of the global economy and its significant consequences for U.S. economic prospects. In the third part, toward the end of the lecture, I will discuss the responsibilities of the Fed in the world economy. Like other national central banks, we must answer first to our own citizens and taxpayers. But, because of our size, developments in the U.S. economy will always affect foreign economies. And, since the U.S. dollar is the most widely used currency in the world, our interests in ensuring a well-functioning financial system inevitably have an international dimension. I. International Transmission of Monetary PoliciesThe recognition that a change in interest rates in one nation can spill over to other countries dates back at least to the 18th-century writings of David Hume on the international effect of changes in the money supply.4The standard models incorporating the international transmission of monetary policy were developed in Per Jacobsson's tenure at the IMF--the pioneering research in the early 1960s by IMF staffer Marcus Fleming and Robert Mundell, which extended standard macroeconomic models to the analysis of an open international economy--work that we know now as the Mundell-Fleming model. In the Mundell-Fleming framework, as well as in modern developments of the same theme, a shift toward a more accommodative monetary policy in the United States spills over to foreign economies by causing their interest rates to fall--though typically by less than in the United States--and their currencies to appreciate against the dollar. At the same time, international capital flows tend to shift toward foreign economies in response to their relatively more attractive interest rates. The pass-through of changes in U.S. policy rates abroad depends importantly on how foreign monetary authorities respond. A decline in U.S. policy rates has a relatively large effect on foreign policy rates in economies that opt to limit exchange rate fluctuations, at least for economies with reasonably open capital accounts. Thus, for example, a fall in U.S. policy rates has a commensurate effect on interest rates in Hong Kong. By contrast, the central bank in an economy with a freely floating exchange rate might choose to lower its interest rate by a much smaller amount than in the United States if it believes that domestic conditions so warrant. In this case, the country's exchange rate would appreciate as investors rebalance their portfolios in favor of assets denominated in its currency in response to the higher interest rate differential.5 Moving beyond the Mundell-Fleming framework, there is also evidence that monetary policy actions can influence investors' willingness to hold risky assets, the so-called risk-taking channel.6Such effects seem to be most potent when financial conditions are stressed. And countries that offer high prospective returns but have weak policy frameworks or other structural vulnerabilities may be particularly sensitive to fluctuations in international investment associated with global risk factors.7 International spillovers from monetary policy have been a contentious issue going back at least to the 1920s. To facilitate the United Kingdom's return to the gold standard at its pre-war parity in 1925, which valued the pound above purchasing power parity, the Fed cut interest rates substantially. Britain's subsequent departure from gold created further challenges for the Federal Reserve; tight U.S. money policy in the wake of the exit of the sterling bloc from gold in the fall of 1931 helped keep the United States on gold until 1933 but exacted high economic costs on the United States and other countries remaining on gold.8During the Bretton Woods period, overly expansionary U.S. monetary policy starting in the second half of the 1960s was exported to trading partners through the system of fixed exchange rates. More than a decade later, the Fed's aggressive tightening under newly appointed Chairman Paul Volcker had unwelcome contractionary effects on other economies. However, the Fed's success in achieving a permanent reduction in inflation through tight monetary policy bolstered the credibility of policies focused on achieving low and stable inflation, and many other countries followed. Turning to more recent events, I'll next assess the effects of the Fed's quantitative easing and other unconventional monetary policies pursued by central banks in advanced economies since 2008. Effects of Monetary Accommodation since the Global Financial CrisisDuring the period of extensive monetary accommodation after the 2007-08 global financial crisis, there has been heightened concern about the international spillovers of monetary policies--and of ours, in particular. Some EME critics argued that U.S. policy accommodation contributed to a surge of capital inflows and excessive credit growth in their economies, creating risks of financial instability. But, as time wore on, most EMEs seemed glad to receive those flows. There is little doubt that the aggressive actions the Federal Reserve took to mitigate the effects of the global financial crisis significantly affected asset prices at home and abroad as well as international capital flows. While the Fed's asset purchases were composed wholly of Treasury, agency, and agency-backed securities (for legal and practical reasons), the program also aimed to boost the prices of riskier assets and ease financial conditions for the private sector.9(And this is what the textbooks say the program should have done.) The preponderance of evidence suggests that the Fed's asset purchases raised the prices of the assets purchased and close substitutes as well as those of riskier assets.10 Importantly, evidence--including the evidence of our eyes--shows that foreign asset markets have been significantly affected by the Fed's purchase programs.11For example, event studies of announcements associated with the Fed's purchase programs have found that they prompted inflows into investment funds holding both foreign debt and foreign equity securities. For asset prices, the strongest evidence came in the form of reduced foreign bond yields, but valuations of foreign currencies and stock prices also increased appreciably in some cases. The largest market reactions occurred after announcements in late 2008 and early 2009 associated with the initial program of quantitative easing, commonly referred to as QE1, likely at least in part because global financial conditions were extremely stressed at that time, but also perhaps because QE1 demonstrated that it was still possible to ease policy, even when the federal funds rate was constrained by its effective lower bound.12 Although much of the recent commentary on spillovers has focused on the United States, it bears mentioning that other countries' monetary policy announcements can leave an imprint on international asset prices, with market reactions to new initiatives announced by the European Central Bank (ECB) in the past few weeks the most recent example.13However, event studies tend to find larger international interest rate spillovers for U.S. policy announcements than for those of other central banks.14 It is also worth emphasizing that asset purchases are merely one form of monetary accommodation, made necessary when policy interest rates hit their zero lower bound. Earlier studies of the international effects of conventional U.S. monetary policy--namely, changes in the policy rate--have also found significant spillovers to asset prices in other countries.15Studies that have compared the spillovers of monetary policy across conventional and unconventional measures generally conclude that the effects on global financial markets are roughly similar.16 Given the relatively fast recovery of many EMEs from the crisis, post-crisis monetary accommodation in the United States and other advanced economies created policy challenges for many EMEs.17If they resisted currency appreciation pressures by lowering their policy rates, they risked over stimulating domestic demand, exacerbating financial excesses, and overheating their economies. If, instead, they reduced their policy rates less than the US had done while intervening to resist currency appreciation, capital inflows could have increased further, thus partially offsetting their attempts to stabilize their economies. And, if they allowed currency appreciation pressures to pass through to their full extent, this could threaten their recoveries by hurting exports. In the event, EMEs tried to make the best of a difficult set of tradeoffs by allowing some exchange rate appreciation, partially reducing their interest rates, and in some countries also using capital controls. Along with the boost from U.S. monetary policy during this period, many other factors contributed to the easing of global financial conditions between 2009 and 2012, including macroeconomic policy in a number of other countries and other measures that supported stabilization of the global financial system. EME sovereign yields declined by more during that period than can be explained by movements in U.S. Treasury yields alone, and there was a worldwide recovery in markets for riskier assets.18 I would also argue strongly that U.S. monetary policies were not beggar thy neighbor policies in that, on balance, they generally did not drain demand from other economies. Federal Reserve staff analysis finds that an easing of monetary policy in the United States benefits foreign economies from both stronger U.S. activity and improved global financial conditions. It also has an offsetting contractionary effect on foreign economies because their currencies appreciate against the dollar. But, on average, model-based estimates imply that the net effect on foreign economies appears to be both modest in magnitude and most likely positive, on net, for most countries.19Moreover, because these models do not fully capture benefits from the role of Federal Reserve policies in alleviating the financial market stress and boosting confidence, positive spillovers abroad are likely to be somewhat larger than implied by the models, especially under conditions of extreme financial market stress. The taper tantrum of 2013We should also expect spillovers when monetary policy is tightened. Central bank communications can be a tricky business, but it has long been understood that shifting perceptions of policy can have an immediate effect on market prices and investors' portfolio decisions. Indeed, financial markets reacted strongly to the first statements by Chairman Bernanke in the spring of 2013 that the Fed's asset purchases were likely to decelerate in the near future and come to an end not long after that. Some market participants clearly understood these statements to be broadly in line with previous guidance about the eventual normalization of policy as recovery of the U.S. economy took hold. But others may have grown accustomed to continuing asset purchases; the most recent purchase program, QE3, had been first announced less than a year before and was proceeding at a steady pace of $85 billion per month. The onset of the taper tantrum went well beyond a roiling of U.S. financial markets. Spillovers to other advanced-economy financial markets included stock price declines, significant increases in sovereign yields, higher overnight interest swap rates in the United Kingdom and euro area, and rising credit spreads in some countries. The ECB and Bank of England responded by using so-called forward guidance to push short-term yields back down in an effort to foster recovery.20Spillovers to EME asset markets were significantly stronger. Inflows to EME investment funds reversed sharply, EME currencies depreciated, and other asset prices declined.21 II. Normalization of Monetary PoliciesThe cumulative effects over half of a decade of the extraordinary actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks will need to be unwound in the coming years, as progress toward economic recovery makes it necessary to withdraw our substantial monetary accommodation. In the normalizing of its policy, just as when loosening policy, the Federal Reserve will take account of how its actions affect the global economy. The taper tantrum episode notwithstanding, most EMEs have generally weathered the wind-down of our asset purchases reasonably well so far. The actual raising of policy rates could trigger further bouts of volatility, but my best estimate is that the normalization of our policy should prove manageable for the EMEs. We have done everything we can, within the limits of forecast uncertainty, to prepare market participants for what lies ahead. Some critics of our policies have argued that, by continuing for so long with quantitative easing, the United States fueled a global boom in asset prices and credit growth that could provide the seeds of the next financial crisis, with the removal of monetary accommodation serving as an eventual trigger. But I am much more hopeful. First, the Federal Reserve and other central banks are going to great lengths to communicate policy intentions and strategies clearly. Given this, markets should not be greatly surprised by either the timing or the pace of normalization. In fact, it bears mentioning that, following the taper tantrum, when the Fed started to taper its purchases, there was little reaction from markets. Second, the tightening of U.S. policy will begin only when the U.S. expansion has advanced far enough, in terms both of reducing the output gap and of moving the inflation rate closer to our 2percent goal. Thus, tightening should occur only against the backdrop of a strengthening U.S. economy and in an environment of improved household and business confidence. The stronger U.S. economy should directly benefit our foreign trading partners by raising the demand for their exports, and perhaps also indirectly, by boosting confidence globally. And if foreign growth is weaker than anticipated, the consequences for the U.S. economy could lead the Fed to remove accommodation more slowly than otherwise. Third, the EMEs themselves have generally done a good job of reducing their financial and economic vulnerabilities over the past couple of decades, which should bolster their resilience should normalization lead to financial market stresses. Since the 1990s, many EMEs have made remarkable progress on reducing inflation, improving government debt ratios, building foreign reserves, and better regulating and capitalizing their banking systems. In addition, the development of local-currency debt markets has made EMEs less vulnerable to exchange rate fluctuations. To be sure, some EMEs continue to face a wide array of structural and policy challenges, including, prominently, rapid credit growth. But it does not seem that the overall risks to global financial stability are unusually elevated at this time, and they are very likely substantially less than they were going into the financial crisis. Nevertheless, it could be that some more vulnerable economies, including those that pursue overly rigid exchange rate policies, may find the road to normalization somewhat bumpier. This gives all the more reason for the Fed and other major central banks to communicate policy intentions clearly and for EMEs to continue to strengthen their policy frameworks and to consider their own policy responses to the forthcoming normalization in the United States and some other advanced economies. III. The Fed's Responsibility to the Global EconomySo far, I have focused on the immediate spillovers of U.S. monetary policy abroad and the feedback of those effects to the U.S. economy. More tacitly than explicitly stated has been my view that the United States is not just any economy and, thus, the Federal Reserve not just any central bank. The U.S. economy represents nearly one-fourth of the global economy measured at market rates and a similar share of gross capital flows. The significant size and international linkages of the U.S. economy mean that economic and financial developments in the United States have global spillovers--something that the IMF is well aware of and has reflected in its increased focus on multilateral surveillance. In this context and in this venue, it is, therefore, important to ask, what is the Federal Reserve's responsibility to the global economy? First and foremost, it is to keep our own house in order. Economic and financial volatility inanycountry can have negative consequences for the world--no audience knows that more than this one--but sizable and significant spillovers are almost assured from an economy that is large. There is no question that sharp declines in U.S. output or large deviations of U.S. inflation from its target level would have adverse effects on the global economy. Conversely, strong and stable U.S. growth in the context of inflation close to our policy objective has substantial benefits for the world. Thus, as part of our efforts to achieve our congressionally mandated objective of maximum sustainable employment and price stability, the Federal Reserve will also seek to minimize adverse spillovers and maximize the beneficial effect of the U.S. economy on the global economy. As the recent financial crisis showed all too clearly, to achieve this objective, we must take financial stability into account. For half a decade, we have been working to understand and better guard against the financial disruptions that were the genesis of the Great Recession. These efforts have spawned many speeches, including some of my own, which testify to our efforts.22In these speeches, we often emphasize that, given the integration of global capital markets, what happens in one market affects others. Thus, our efforts to stabilize the U.S. financial system also have positive spillovers abroad. These financial stability responsibilities do not stop at our borders, given the size and openness of our capital markets and the unique position of the U.S. dollar as the world's leading currency for financial transactions. For example, the global financial crisis highlighted the extent of borrowing and lending in U.S. dollars by foreign financial institutions. When these institutions came under pressure, their actions contributed to the strains in both foreign and domestic dollar funding markets. To achieve financial stability domestically and maintain the flow of credit to American households and businesses, we took action. Importantly, we developed swap facilities with central banks in countries that represented major financial markets or trading centers in order to facilitate the provision of dollar liquidity to these markets. We did so in recognition of the scope of dollar markets and dollar-denominated transactions outside of our country, the benefits they provide to U.S. households and firms, and the adverse consequences to our financial markets if these centers lose access to dollar liquidity. We have continued to maintain swap facilities with a number of central banks. Although usage is currently very low, these facilities represent an important backstop in the event of a resurgence in global financial tensions. But I should caution that the responsibility of the Fed is not unbounded. My teacher Charles Kindleberger argued that stability of the international financial system could best be supported by the leadership of a financial hegemon or a global central bank.23But I should be clear that the U.S. Federal Reserve System is not that bank. Our mandate, like that of virtually all central banks, focuses on domestic objectives. As I have described, to meet those domestic objectives, we must recognize the effect of our actions abroad, and, by meeting those domestic objectives, we best minimize the negative spillovers we have to the global economy. And because the dollar features so prominently in international transactions, we must be mindful that our markets extend beyond our borders and take precautions, as we have done before, to provide liquidity when necessary. That said, as will be discussed in many venues this weekend and beyond, the world is not without resources to guard against adverse economic and financial spillovers. Most obviously, the IMF has played and will continue to play a critical role in providing liquidity and financial support to member countries. To that end, I hope that the 2010 agreement to increase IMF quotas will be fulfilled. In this regard, we also should be realistic about what a backstop is. Any global backstop or liquidity facility should have certain features--accountability and monitoring, some degree of stigma in good times, and a high hurdle for usage. In other words, backstops are not built to be liked. In the United States, we are working to ensure that our financial institutions and other market participants are prepared for the normalization of monetary policy and the return to a world of higher interest rates. It is equally important that individuals, businesses, and institutions around the world do the same. For our part, the Federal Reserve will promote a smooth transition by communicating our assessment of the economy and our policy intentions as clearly as possible. IV.Concluding RemarksTo summarize and conclude, the Fed's statutory objectives are defined by its dual mandate to pursue maximum sustainable employment and price stability in the U.S. economy. But the U.S. economy and the economies of the rest of the world have important feedback effects on each other. To make coherent policy choices, we have to take these feedback effects into account. The most important contribution that U.S. policymakers can make to the health of the world economy is to keep our own house in order--and the same goes for all countries. Because the dollar is the primary international currency, we have, in the past, had to take action--particularly in times of global economic crisis--to maintain order in international capital markets, such as the central bank liquidity swap lines extended during the global financial crisis. In that case, we were acting in accordance with our dual mandate, in the interest of the U.S. economy, by taking actions that also benefit the world economy. Going forward, we will continue to be guided by those same principles. ReferencesAhmed, Shaghil, and Andrei Zlate (forthcoming). "Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World?"Journal of International Money and Finance. Avdjiev, Stefan, and Eld Takts (2014). "Cross-Border Bank Lending during the Taper Tantrum: The Role of Emerging Market Fundamentals (PDF),"BIS Quarterly Review,September, pp. 49-60. Bank of England (2013).Inflation Report (PDF). London: BOE, August. Bernanke, Ben S. (2010a). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, August 27.  (2010b). "Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress,"statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, July 21.  (2012). "U.S. Monetary Policy and International Implications," speech delivered at "Challenges of the Global Financial System: Risks and Governance under Evolving Globalization," a seminar sponsored by the Bank of Japan and the International Monetary Fund, Tokyo, Japan, October 14.  (2014). "The Federal Reserve: Looking Back, Looking Forward," speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Philadelphia, January 3. Borio, Claudio, and Haibin Zhu (2012). "Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy: A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?"Journal of Financial Stability, vol. 8 (December), pp. 236-51. Bowman, David, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza (2014). "U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1109. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin (forthcoming). "Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity,"Review of Economic Studies. Chen, Qianying, Andrew Filardo, Dong He, and Feng Zhu (2012). "International Spillovers of Central Bank Balance Sheet Policies (PDF)," BIS Papers Series 66p. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, October. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol.108 (May), pp. 425-48. Draghi, Mario, and Vitor Constncio (2013). "Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A)," speech delivered at the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, July 4. Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher (2005). "Equal Size, Equal Role? Interest Rate Interdependence between the Euro Area and the United States,"Economic Journal,vol. 115 (October), pp. 930-50.  (2009). "Global Financial Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks,"Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, vol. 71 (December), pp. 739-59. Eichengreen, Barry (2013). "Does the Federal Reserve Care about the Rest of the World?"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 27 (Fall), pp. 87-104. Federal Open Market Committee (2014).Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF). Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 28. Fischer, Stanley (2014). "Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We?" speech delivered at the Martin Feldstein Lecture at the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. Fleming, J. Marcus (1962). "Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under Floating Exchange Rates,"International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, vol. 9 (November), pp. 369-80. Fratzscher, Marcel (2012). "Capital Flows, Push versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 88 (November), pp. 341-56. Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013). "On the International Spillovers of U.S. Quantitative Easing (PDF)," Working Paper Series1557. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, June. Furceri, Davide, Stephanie Guichard, and Elena Rusticelli (2011). "Medium-Term Determinants of International Investment Positions: The Role of Structural Policies," OECD Economics Department Working Paper Series 863. Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, May. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). "Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review,vol. 17 (May), pp. 41-59. Glick, Reuven, and Sylvain Leduc (2013). "The Effects of Unconventional and Conventional U.S. Monetary Policy on the Dollar (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2013-11. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44 (February), pp. 3-46. Hanson, Samuel, and Jeremy Stein (forthcoming). "Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates,"Journal of Financial Economics. Hausman, Joshua, and Jon Wongswan (2011). "Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements,"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 30 (April), pp. 547-71. Hume, David (1742). "Of Interest,"Political Discourses,essay IV, in Eugene F. Miller, ed.,Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, Inc. (1987). International Monetary Fund (2013).IMF Multilateral Policy Issues Report:2013 Spillover Report (PDF). Washington: IMF, August. Joyce, Michael A.S., Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011). "The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7 (September), pp. 113-61. Kindleberger, Charles P. (1986).The World in Depression, 1929-1939.Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press. Luca, Oana, and Nikola Spatafora (2012). "Capital Inflows, Financial Development, and Domestic Investment: Determinants and Inter-Relationships (PDF)," IMF Working Paper Series WP/12/120. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May. Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2014). "Risk-Taking Channel of Monetary Policy: A Global Game Approach (PDF)," working paper, Princeton University, January. Mundell, Robert A. (1963). "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates,"Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science, vol. 29 (November), pp. 475-85. Neely, Christopher J. (2011). "The Large-Scale Asset Purchases Had Large International Effects (PDF)," Working Paper Series2010-018C. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, January. Powell, Jerome H. (2013). "Advanced Economy Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Economies," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2013 Asia Economic Policy Conference, San Francisco, November 4. Rey, Hlne (2013). "Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence (PDF)," paper presented at "Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 22-24. Rogers, John H., Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright (2014). "Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Comparison (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1101. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Sahay, Ratna, Vivek Arora, Thanos Arvanitis, Hamid Faruqee, Papa N'Diaye, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, and an IMF Team. (2014). "Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from the Taper Tantrum (PDF)," IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/14/09. Washington: International Monetary Fund, September. Takts, Eld, and Abraham Vela (2014). "International Monetary Policy Transmission (PDF)," BIS Papers Series 78. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, August. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2014). "Stress Testing after Five Years," speech delivered at the Third Annual Stress Test Modeling Symposium, sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, June 25. Yellen, Janet L. (2014). "Monetary Policy and Financial Stability," speech delivered at the 2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, July 2. 1.I am grateful to John Ammer, Christopher Erceg, Joseph Gruber, and Beth Anne Wilson of the Federal Reserve Board's staff for their assistance in preparing this lecture.Return to text 2.The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has judged that 2 percent inflation in the price of personal consumption expenditures is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate. For more information, see Federal Open Market Committee (2014). The Fed also has separate responsibilities for promoting financial stability (some of which are spelled out in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010) that are, in many respects, complementary to the dual mandate. See Yellen (2014) for further discussion.Return to text 3.See Powell (2013) for an earlier discussion of many of these topics.Return to text 4.See Hume (1742).Return to text 5.See Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962). One key implication of the Mundell-Fleming framework is that a central bank can exercise full control over both the exchange rate and the domestic interest rate only when there are significant barriers to the international capital mobility. Accordingly, policymakers face the constraint of the "impossible trinity," which states that a country cannot simultaneously have an independent monetary policy, free capital movement, and a fixed exchange.Return to text 6.Several recent papers discuss risk-taking channels through which monetary policy influences financial conditions more broadly than the level of safe interest rates. See Borio and Zhu (2012), Rey (2013), Morris and Shin (2014), Bruno and Shin (forthcoming), and the Hanson and Stein (forthcoming) "reaching for yield" concept.Return to text 7.Studies using panel data typically have found that country-specific factors help explain cross-sectional differences in international investment and capital flows. See, for example, Furceri, Guichard, and Rusticelli (2011); Fratzscher (2012); and Luca and Spatafora (2012). Avdjiev and Takts's (2014) study of cross-border bank lending during the taper tantrum shows a larger pullback for countries with weaker current account balances, and Sahay and others (2014) find that country-specific market reactions during this period also were affected by high inflation, weak growth prospects, and relatively low reserves.Return to text 8.See Eichengreen (2013).Return to text 9.See, for example, Bernanke (2010a, 2010b).Return to text 10.See, for example, D'Amico and King (2013); Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2011); Hamilton and Wu (2012); and Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014).Return to text 11.See Neely (2011); Fratscher, Lo Duca, and Straub (2013); Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014); and Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2014). Also, Ahmed and Zlate (forthcoming) show that both conventional and nonconventional U.S. monetary expansion have driven capital flows into EMEs.Return to text 12.See Neely (2011); Fratscher, Lo Duca, and Straub (2013); Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014); and Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2014).Return to text 13.See Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014) and Chen, Filardo, He, and Zhu (2012) for more systematic evidence.Return to text 14.See, for example, Rogers, Scotti, and Wright's (2014) recent event study of central bank announcement effects on sovereign yields in different countries. Similarly, earlier work by Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005) finds larger reactions in euro-area interest rates to U.S. rate changes than vice versa.Return to text 15.See, for example, Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2009) and Hausman and Wongswan (2011).Return to text 16.Among studies of spillovers from conventional versus unconventional U.S. monetary policy, Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014) report no significant differences in relative announcement effects on advanced foreign economy asset prices and Treasury yields; Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2014) find similar EME asset price responses; Takts and Vela (2014) report mixed results for EMEs, with a weaker post-2007 relationship in levels of EME policy rates with U.S. rates but a stronger post-2008 relationship in levels of five-year yields; and Glick and Leduc (2013) also report similar spillovers to exchange rates. The effects of the Bank of England's quantitative easing program on corporate bond yields and sterling exchange rates are similar to predictions from a model estimated over an earlier period by Joyce, Lasaosa, Stevens, and Tong (2011).Return to text 17.See the discussion in Bernanke (2012).Return to text 18.See Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2014). And, over a longer sample, Ahmed and Zlate (forthcoming) show that capital flows to EMEs are affected by factors other than relative interest rates, including relative growth prospects and global risk sentiment.Return to text 19.Simulations of the Federal Reserve Board's econometric models of the global economy suggest that the effects are roughly offsetting, so that accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies do not appear, on net, to have adverse consequences for output and exports in the emerging market economies. Similar results are obtained model analysis presented in International Monetary Fund (2013).Return to text 20.See Draghi and Constncio (2013) and Bank of England (2013). The success of forward guidance, of course, depends crucially on the ability of policymakers to make informative statements about their intentions without a formal commitment device.Return to text 21.Powell (2013) notes that EMEs with larger current account deficits experienced both greater depreciations of their currencies and larger increases in their bond yields in mid-2013, suggesting that, while a reassessment of U.S. monetary policy may have triggered the retrenchment from EME assets, investor concerns about underlying vulnerabilities appear to have amplified the reactions.Return to text 22.Bernanke (2014), Fischer (2014), and Tarullo (2014) also discuss concrete steps that U.S. authorities have taken in the past five years to implement financial reform of large financial institutions (including introducing a systematic framework for stress-testing, stronger capital and liquidity requirements, and progress on resolution mechanisms for failed institutions), of financial market infrastructures, and in short-term funding markets.Return to text 23.See Kindleberger (1986).Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the National Summit on Diversity in the Economics Profession, Washington, D.C. I am very pleased that the American Economic Association (AEA) and the Federal Reserve Board have organized this conference on an important issue for our profession. In trying to raise awareness of diversity in the economics profession, I am aided by the fact that economists are well acquainted with the concept of diversity from their work. When conducting a survey, economists understand that the results will be more meaningful when the diversity of the sample approaches the diversity of the population being studied. In finance, we know that diversity is fundamentally important in spreading risk. History shows that economies develop and become more stable through diversification. Often, in the things economists study and the methods we use, diversity is a good thing. To cite another example, research by economists and other social scientists supports the view that considering a diversity of perspectives and ideas leads to better decisions in an organization. I believe decisions by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee are better because of the range of views and perspectives brought to the table by my fellow policymakers, and I have encouraged this approach to decisionmaking at all levels and throughout the Fed System. One way to promote diversity of ideas is to promote diversity among the people we rely on for those ideas, including more than 300 Ph.D. economists who serve at the Board and more than 400 serving at the Fed's 12 Reserve Banks. At the Board, our Office of Diversity and Inclusion coordinates this effort, but everyone involved in the recruiting, hiring, management, and promotion of economists is engaged in it as well. When I was Vice Chair, I knew that promoting diversity among Fed economists was a priority for Chairman Bernanke, and it continues to be a priority for me. In 1977, when I joined the Board staff, I was one of relatively few women economists here. Since then, there have been significant gains in diversity at the Board and throughout the System. The Federal Reserve is committed to achieving further progress, and to better understanding the challenges to improving diversity throughout the economics profession. As an employer, the Fed is very serious about meeting its obligation to provide equal opportunity, and I also believe that diversity makes the Fed more effective in carrying out its mission, for reasons such as the one I mentioned a moment ago. But this conference offers an important opportunity to investigate all of the possible factors that influence the extent of diversity among economists at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere, including those factors that are affecting the education and advancement of economists everywhere in the United States. As a longtime member of the AEA, I am proud of the work our association has done to collect data and study diversity in the economics profession. Among the questions raised by the AEA's work on this topic is why relatively few women and minorities seem to consider economics as a concentration in college. The evidence is fairly clear that majoring in economics offers relatively high returns to college graduates whether or not they pursue further education in economics. It is worth knowing, for example, what undergrads who might consider concentrating in economics think about the curriculum and the employment prospects for economics majors compared with what those prospects actually are. To what extent might the lack of diversity among economics majors reflect a more general need to make basic economics more relevant and otherwise appealing to undergrads? The AEA has also done important work documenting and investigating the "leaky pipeline," trying to determine why some groups are more likely to abandon economics education and work before, and even after, receiving Ph.D.s. In reviewing the data on the representation and advancement of certain groups in the profession, there are differences in outcomes for women and minorities. To what extent are these disparities caused by differences in the experiences of those groups or due to broader and more general challenges faced in academia? Do the leaks from the pipeline that may be more noticeable for some groups reflect a broader lack of opportunity in academia? When economists delve into why there isn't more diversity among them, they end up asking about what is being taught in college, how economists are being trained in graduate school, and other questions that bear on the health and the future of the economics profession in general. These are not idle questions. All of you know that there has been a fair amount of public debate in recent years about the health of the economics profession, prompted in part by the failure of many economists to comprehend the dire threats and foresee the damage of the financial crisis. When the public asks whether economists did all they could have to understand those threats, in part they are asking whether our profession did enough over the years to test ideas and assumptions that turned out in some cases to have been mistaken or misplaced. And part of that question is this one: Did the economics profession recruit and promote the individuals best able to bring the energy, the fresh insights, and the renewal that every field and every body of knowledge needs to remain healthy? When this question is asked again someday, when economics is tested by future challenges, I hope that our profession will be able to say that we have done all we could to attract the best people and the best ideas. That, I believe, is the very worthy goal of this conference, and I look forward to seeing it advanced by today's discussions and by the continuing commitment demonstrated by the AEA to diversity. Thank you to those who organized the conference and to the distinguished members of our profession who have come here today to take part in it.