Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) on Tuesday adopted a final rule to strengthen the leverage ratio standards for the largest, most interconnected U.S. banking organizations. The final rule applies to U.S. top-tier bank holding companies with more than $700 billion in consolidated total assets or more than $10 trillion in assets under custody (covered BHCs) and their insured depository institution (IDI) subsidiaries. Covered BHCs must maintain a leverage buffer greater than 2 percentage points above the minimum supplementary leverage ratio requirement of 3 percent, for a total of more than 5 percent, to avoid restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments. IDI subsidiaries of covered BHCs must maintain at least a 6 percent supplementary leverage ratio to be considered "well capitalized" under the agencies' prompt corrective action framework. The final rule, which has an effective date of January 1, 2018, currently applies to eight large U.S. banking organizations that meet the size thresholds and their IDI subsidiaries. The final rule is substantively the same as the rule proposed by the banking agencies in July 2013. As noted in the final rule, maintenance of a strong base of capital among the largest, most interconnected U.S. banking organizations is particularly important because capital shortfalls at these institutions have the potential to result in significant adverse economic consequences and to contribute to systemic distress on both a domestic and an international scale. Higher capital standards for these institutions place additional private capital at risk before the federal deposit insurance fund and the federal government's resolution mechanisms would be called upon, and reduce the likelihood of economic disruptions caused by problems at these institutions. The banking agencies on Tuesday also issued a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) that would modify the denominator calculation for the supplementary leverage ratio in a manner consistent with recent changes agreed to by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The revisions in the NPR would apply to all internationally active banking organizations, including those subject to the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio final rule. The agencies believe the denominator changes in the NPR would more appropriately measure leverage capital requirements and would, in aggregate, increase the requirements across these institutions. The agencies also issued a separate NPR proposing a technical correction to the definition of "eligible guarantee" in the agencies' risk-based capital rules. Comments on both NPRs will be welcomed through June 13, 2014. In a separate action, the FDIC Board also adopted as final its Basel III interim final rule, which is substantively identical to the final rules adopted by the Federal Reserve Board and the OCC in July 2013. Regulatory Capital Rules: Regulatory Capital, Enhanced Supplementary Leverage Ratio Standards for Certain Bank Holding Companies and their Subsidiary Insured Depository InstitutionsHTML|PDF Regulatory Capital Rules: Regulatory Capital, Proposed Revisions to the Supplementary Leverage RatioHTML|PDF Regulatory Capital Rules: Advanced Approaches Risk-Based Capital Rule, Proposed Revisions to the Definition of Eligible GuaranteeHTML|PDF Board Votes Meeting Memoranda Open Board Meeting on April 8, 2014
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on recent rulemakings and other actions by the Federal Reserve. In my testimony, I will discuss some of the actions that the Federal Reserve has completed or has under way to implement the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) and other reforms to promote a stable financial system and to strengthen the resiliency of banking organizations. The Federal Reserve is committed to strengthening the safety and soundness of the financial companies it supervises so that these organizations have the ability to meet their financial obligations and continue to make a broad variety of financial products and services available to households and businesses even in times of economic difficulty. The Federal Reserve has made significant progress in implementing the Dodd-Frank Act reforms, which were designed to improve the resiliency of financial firms and the system as a whole. At the same time, we recognize that regulatory compliance can impose a disproportionate burden on smaller institutions. Smaller institutions tend to lend in neighborhoods where the institutions' depositors live and work, helping to ensure that local communities maintain access to credit. In addition to overseeing large banking firms, the Federal Reserve supervises approximately 800 state-chartered community banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System and several thousand small bank holding companies. The Federal Reserve has strived and will continue to strive to ensure that its regulations and supervisory framework are not unnecessarily burdensome for community banking organizations so they can continue their important function of safe and sound lending to local communities. Recent Regulatory Actions Taken to Increase the Resiliency and Safety and Soundness of the Banking Industry Implementation of Basel IIIIn July 2013, the Federal Reserve, together with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), approved final rules implementing the Basel III capital framework, as well as related changes required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The new capital rules strengthen the safety and soundness of banking organizations both by improving the quality of what constitutes regulatory capital and by requiring banking organizations to hold more capital. Specifically, the minimum tier 1 capital ratio was raised from 4 to 6 percent of risk-weighted assets, and a new minimum common equity tier 1 capital ratio of 4.5 percent of risk-weighted assets was established. The rules also require a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets to ensure that banking organizations build capital when they are able to do so. The rules also introduced a more risk-sensitive standardized approach for calculating risk-weighted assets. In adopting the final capital rules, the banking agencies sought to strengthen the quality and quantity of bank capital without imposing unnecessary burden on community banks. To achieve this goal, the banking agencies in the final rule made changes to the proposal to address concerns about regulatory burden on community banks. Many of the Basel III requirements will not apply to smaller banks--including the countercyclical capital buffer, supplementary leverage ratio, trading book reforms, accumulated other comprehensive income flow through, higher capital requirements for counterparty credit risk on derivatives, and disclosure requirements. The Federal Reserve and the other banking regulators also issued a Community Bank Guide to the new capital rules to help non-complex community banking organizations understand the applicability of the new rules to their operations. Stress Testing and Capital Planning Requirements for Large Banking OrganizationsThe comprehensive stress testing conducted by the Federal Reserve, pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act and in connection with the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), is one of the Federal Reserve's most important tools for ensuring the resiliency of banking firms during periods of financial or economic stress. This exercise and the accompanying rules apply to the largest banking organizations, and recognize the greater risk these firms pose to financial stability in times of stress. Last month, the Federal Reserve published the results of its annual stress tests, which demonstrated that the largest banking institutions in the United States are collectively much better positioned to continue to lend to households and businesses and to meet their financial commitments in a severe economic downturn than they were five years ago. The stress tests this year were the fourth round led by the Federal Reserve since 2009. This year, in addition to the 18 institutions that have been part of previous stress tests, an additional 12 firms with assets greater than $50 billion were included. The quantitative results from the scenarios in the supervisory stress tests are one component of the Federal Reserve's analysis of the capital adequacy at the largest financial institutions during the CCAR. The Federal Reserve also evaluates each institution's capital planning process, in particular the firm's ability to account for the idiosyncratic risks of the firm and the firm's ability to maintain sufficient capital to continue to operate through times of financial and economic stress given those firm-specific risks. Last month the Federal Reserve approved the capital plans of 25 bank holding companies participating in the CCAR. The Federal Reserve objected to the plans of the remaining five participating firms--four based on qualitative concerns and one because it did not meet a minimum post-stress capital requirement. All but two of the 30 participants in this year's CCAR are expected to build capital from the second quarter of 2014 through the first quarter of 2015. Overall, this exercise has resulted in the 18 largest banking firms increasing their tier 1 common equity by more than $500 billion since 2008. That means that the strongest form of loss absorbing capital at the largest banking firms has more than doubled since the financial crisis. Enhanced Prudential StandardsThe Federal Reserve recently finalized a rule implementing section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act to establish enhanced prudential standards for large banking firms. This rule applies to bank holding companies and foreign banking organizations with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more. The final rule establishes a number of enhanced prudential standards designed to increase the resiliency of the operations of large banking firms and mitigate the risk that the material financial distress or failure of these firms would pose to the financial stability of the United States. These standards include liquidity, risk management, and capital. In addition, the rule requires foreign banking organizations with U.S. non-branch assets of $50 billion or more to form a U.S. intermediate holding company and imposes enhanced risk-based and leverage capital, liquidity, risk-management, and stress-testing requirements on the U.S. intermediate holding company. Community banking organizations are not subject to the Federal Reserve's enhanced prudential standards for larger banking firms, such as capital plans, stress testing, resolution plans, single-counterparty credit limits, and capital surcharges for systemically important financial firms. Leverage RatioIn July 2013, the Federal Reserve, together with the FDIC and the OCC, issued a proposed rule to strengthen the leverage ratio standards for the most systemically significant financial institutions by establishing a new leverage buffer for bank holding companies with more than $700 billion in consolidated assets or $10 trillion in assets under custody. The proposal currently would apply to the eight most systemically significant U.S. bank holding companies and their insured depository institution subsidiaries. The proposal would require these bank holding companies to maintain a tier 1 capital leverage buffer of at least 2 percent above the minimum Basel III supplementary leverage ratio of 3 percent to avoid restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments. In addition, the insured depository institution subsidiaries of covered bank holding companies would be required to satisfy an enhanced leverage ratio of 6 percent to be considered "well capitalized" for purposes of the agencies' prompt corrective action regulations. A strong capital base is particularly important at these organizations because capital shortfalls have the potential to result in significant adverse economic consequences and contribute to systemic distress both domestically and internationally, which could impair credit availability to businesses and consumers. Higher capital standards for these organizations will place additional private capital at risk before the federal deposit insurance fund and the federal government's resolution mechanisms would be called upon, and reduce the likelihood of economic disruptions caused by problems at these organizations. Later today, the Board is scheduled to consider a final rule that would implement the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio for the eight most systemic U.S. banking firms. In addition, the Board is scheduled to consider an interagency proposal that would modify the definition of total leverage exposure (the denominator of the supplementary leverage ratio) in the agencies' final capital rules. Liquidity Coverage RatioIn October 2013, the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies issued a proposed rule that would create a standardized minimum liquidity requirement for large and internationally active banking organizations and systemically important, non-bank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (Council). These institutions would be required to hold minimum amounts of high-quality, liquid assets, such as central bank reserves and government and corporate debt, that can be converted easily and quickly into cash. Each institution would be required to hold liquidity in an amount equal to or greater than its projected new cash outflow during a short-term stress period. Liquidity standards for large U.S. banking firms will help promote lending during periods of financial or economic stress, as they work in concert with capital standards, stress testing, and other enhanced prudential standards to help ensure that banking organizations have a liquidity risk profile that is strong enough to prevent runs by bank creditors and counterparties. The Board's proposal would apply in full only to bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies that do not have significant insurance or commercial operations, but that have $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets or $10 billion or more in on-balance-sheet foreign exposures. For bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies not subject to the interagency proposal, the Board also proposed a modified liquidity coverage ratio standard for bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies without significant insurance or commercial operations that, in each case, have more than $50 billion in total assets. The agencies are in the process of reviewing comments on the proposal. Resolution of Large, Interconnected Financial FirmsOne of the ways in which the Dodd-Frank Act seeks to address the problems of too-big-to-fail is by reducing the potential damage to the financial system and the economy from the failure of the largest, most complex financial firms. In this regard, the Federal Reserve and the FDIC are working jointly to improve the bankruptcy resolution planning of large banking firms. In addition, the Federal Reserve is assisting the FDIC in making large banking firms more resolvable under the Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA) of the Dodd-Frank Act. The Dodd-Frank Act requires all bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial companies designated by the Council for supervision by the Federal Reserve to develop, maintain, and periodically submit resolution plans to regulators that would facilitate these entities' resolution under the Bankruptcy Code. Each plan must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. Companies subject to the resolution plan requirement filed their initial resolution plans on a staggered schedule. The first group of 11 companies, generally those bank holding companies with $250 billion or more in total nonbank assets (or total U.S. nonbank assets in the case of a foreign-based company), submitted initial plans in July 2012 and their second annual plans in October 2013. These companies' second plans responded to guidance provided by the Federal Reserve and FDIC. The second group, generally those bank holding companies with $100 billion or more, but less than $250 billion, in total nonbank assets (or total U.S. nonbank assets in the case of a foreign-based company), submitted their initial plans in July 2013. The third group, generally all other bank holding companies with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets, filed their initial resolution plans on December 31, 2013. The Federal Reserve and FDIC are reviewing all submissions received during 2013. In implementing OLA, the FDIC proposed the single point of entry (SPOE) resolution approach, which is intended to concentrate losses on the shareholders and long-term unsecured debt holders of the parent holding company. Under the SPOE approach, a well-capitalized bridge holding company would be created in place of the failed parent by converting long-term debt holders of the parent into equity holders of the bridge. The new parent would recapitalize the critical operating subsidiaries of the failed firm, to the extent necessary, thereby allowing their operations to continue. Successful execution by the FDIC of its preferred SPOE approach in OLA depends on the availability of a sufficient combined amount of equity and loss-absorbing debt at the parent holding company of the failed firm. Therefore, the Federal Reserve is consulting with the FDIC on a regulatory proposal that would require the largest, most complex U.S. banking firms to maintain a minimum amount of outstanding long-term, unsecured debt in addition to the regulatory capital those companies already are required to maintain. Risk RetentionSection 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act requires firms generally to retain credit risk in securitization transactions they sponsor. This requires that securitizers retain some of the credit risk of the assets they securitize (sometimes referred to as "skin in the game"). Retaining credit risk creates incentives for securitizers to monitor closely the quality of the assets underlying a securitization transaction and discourages unsafe and unsound underwriting practices by originators. In August 2013, the Federal Reserve, along with a number of other agencies, revised a proposal from 2011 to implement section 941. The comment period on this re-proposal recently closed, and we are working with the other agencies charged by the Dodd-Frank Act with implementing this rule to complete this rulemaking. Federal Reserve Rulemaking ProcessThe Federal Reserve for many years has believed that our regulatory efforts should be designed to minimize regulatory burden consistent with the effective implementation of our statutory responsibilities. For example, to become informed about benefits and costs of a regulatory proposal, we often collect information directly from those that we expect would be affected and conduct meetings with interested parties and their representatives prior to designing the proposal. We also specifically seek comment on the costs and benefits of our proposed approach as well as invite comment on alternative approaches. We provide the public a minimum of 60 days to comment on all significant rulemaking proposals, with longer periods permitted for especially complex or significant proposals, such as our capital rules. In issuing a final rule, we seek to adopt the approach that faithfully reflects the underlying statutory provisions while minimizing regulatory burden. All of the rules described earlier have been issued or proposed in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). A rule issued under the APA creates legally enforceable duties and is binding on the issuing agency, courts, and the private parties it affects. Agencies, including the Federal Reserve, also frequently issue guidance to supervised entities. Unlike an agency rule, guidance is not legally enforceable. Instead, guidance interprets or clarifies the nature of duties created by a statute or a rule. While we are not required to do so under the APA, the Federal Reserve typically invites the public to comment on significant statements of supervisory guidance. For example, we invited public comment on guidance regarding supervisory expectations for stress tests conducted by financial companies with total consolidated assets between $10 billion and $50 billion, supervisory guidance to help ensure that financial institutions provide leveraged financing to creditworthy borrowers only in a safe and sound manner, and guidance related to income tax allocation agreements involving holding companies and insured depository institutions. In addition, we make available to the public our examination manuals, transaction approvals and denials, and other matters of interest to the public related to our regulatory responsibilities. In the process of adopting a rule, we conduct an assessment that takes appropriate account of the potential impact a rule may have on small businesses, small governmental jurisdictions, and small organizations affected by the rule, in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act. We pay particular attention to reducing the regulatory burden on community banking organizations whenever possible and rely on our ongoing dialogue with such institutions when considering rules. For example, the Federal Reserve has established Community Depository Institution Advisory Councils at each of the 12 Federal Reserve banks. These councils regularly collect input from community depository organizations on a number of topics, including ways to reduce regulatory burden and to improve the efficiency of our supervision. A representative from each of these 12 advisory councils serves on a national council that meets semiannually with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C. The Federal Reserve also has established a community bank subcommittee of our Committee on Bank Supervision that oversees the supervision of community banks and reviews regulatory proposals to help ensure they are appropriately tailored for community banks. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve has made significant progress in implementing the Dodd-Frank Act and other measures designed to improve the resiliency of banking organizations and the financial system. The Federal Reserve will continue to work with other U.S. financial regulatory agencies and the institutions we supervise to ensure that these institutions operate in a safe and sound manner and are able to provide credit even during economic downturns. We are committed to promoting a stable financial system in a manner that does not impose a disproportionate burden on smaller institutions. To help us achieve this goal, we will continue to seek the views of these organizations and the public as we further develop regulatory and supervisory programs to strengthen the ability of banking organizations to lend to households and businesses. Thank you for inviting me to present the Federal Reserve's views on these important matters. I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Old National Bancorp, Evansville, Indiana, to merge with Tower Financial Corporation and thereby indirectly acquire Tower Bank and Trust Company, both of Fort Wayne, Indiana. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the approval of an application by The Joyo Bank, Ltd., Mito City, Japan, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application filed by Umpqua Holdings Corporation, Portland, Oregon, to acquire Sterling Financial Corporation and thereby indirectly acquire Sterling Savings Bank, both of Spokane, Washington. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by PacWest Bancorp, Los Angeles, California, CapGen Capital Group II LP and CapGen Capital Group II LLC, both of New York, New York, to acquire CapitalSource Inc. and thereby indirectly acquire CapitalSource Bank, both of Los Angeles. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Prohibition against Darryl Woods, the former President and Chairman of the board of directors of Calvert Financial Corporation, Ashland, Missouri, a registered bank holding company, and the former Chief Financial Officer and Chairman of the board of directors of Mainstreet Bank, Ashland, Missouri, a state-member bank. Woods consented to the issuance of the order, which is based on his participation in unsafe and unsound practices, breaches of fiduciary duty, and violations of law and regulation in connection with his and the company's use of funds through the Troubled Asset Relief Program ("TARP"). The purpose of TARP was to provide capital to financial institutions to enable them to build their capital base and to increase the flow of financing to businesses and individuals. In addition to the Board's order, Woods has pled guilty to a criminal charge in connection with the use of the TARP funds. On March 27, he was sentenced to a term of incarceration by the United States District Court for the United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Attachment (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board announced today that it intends to exercise its authority to give banking entities two additional one-year extensions to conform their ownership interests in and sponsorship of certain collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) covered by section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, commonly referred to as the Volcker rule. CLOs are securitization vehicles backed predominantly by commercial loans. Section 619 generally prohibits insured depository institutions and any company affiliated with an insured depository institution from engaging in proprietary trading and from acquiring or retaining ownership interests in, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with a hedge fund or private equity fund. These prohibitions are subject to a number of statutory exemptions, restrictions, and definitions. Section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Act directed the Board to adopt rules for the conformance period and the Board previously extended the conformance period for all activities and investments by one year to July 21, 2015. To ensure effective compliance, the Board intends to grant banking entities two additional one-year extensions, which together would extend until July 21, 2017, to conform their ownership interests in and sponsorship of CLOs to the statute. Only CLOs in place as of December 31, 2013, that do not qualify for the exclusion in the final rule for loan securitizations would be eligible for the extension. The Board intends to act on these extensions in August of this year and the next year. A banking entity would not have to include ownership interests in CLOs to determine its investment limits under the final rule, and a banking entity would not be required to deduct CLO investments from tier 1 capital under the final rule until the end of the relevant conformance period. The Federal Reserve Board consulted with staffs of the other agencies charged with enforcing the requirements of section 619, including the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and the agencies plan to administer their oversight of banking entities under their respective jurisdictions in accordance with the Board's conformance rule, including any extension of the conformance period applicable to CLOs. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced it is requiring Bank of America Corporation to resubmit its capital plan and to suspend planned increases in capital distributions. The decision relates to the disclosure by Bank of America that the banking organization incorrectly reported data used in the calculation of regulatory capital ratios and submitted as inputs for the most recent stress tests conducted by the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve can require a banking organization that is part of the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) program to resubmit its capital plan at any time if there is a material change that could potentially lead to an alteration in a firm's capital position. Bank of America will be required to resubmit its capital plan within 30 days, unless that time is extended by the Federal Reserve. Bank of America must address the quantitative errors in its regulatory capital calculations as part of the resubmission and must undertake a review of its regulatory capital reporting to help ensure there are no further errors. Until receiving notice that the Federal Reserve has not objected to the new capital plan, Bank of America will not be able to increase its capital distributions, including those increases approved during the 2014 CCAR exercise last month. The Federal Reserve in CCAR evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest bank holding companies, including the firms' proposed capital actions such as dividend payments and share buybacks and issuances. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Flagler Bank, West Palm Beach, FloridaWritten Agreement dated November 12, 2009Terminated March 27, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Freedom Bancorporation, Inc., Lindstrom, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated April 22, 2013Terminated March 27, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Cornerstone Bancorp, Inc., St. Petersburg, FloridaWritten Agreement dated July 23, 2012Terminated April 24, 2014 Liberty Bancorp and Liberty Bank, both of South San Francisco, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated October 25, 2011Terminated April 25, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcementactions listed below: Farmers Bancorporation, Inc., Buhl, IdahoWritten Agreement dated April 28, 2010Terminated April 21, 2014 Great River Holding Company, Baxter, MinnesotaCease and Desist Order issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated December 6, 2010Terminated April 21, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: NBRS Financial Bank (PDF), Rising Sun, MarylandPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated April 7, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Uinta Bank (PDF), Mountain View, WyomingOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated April 10, 2014 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: PGB Holdings, Inc. and Pacific Global Bank, both of Chicago, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated June 30, 2011Terminated April 9, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that growth in economic activity has picked up recently, after having slowed sharply during the winter in part because of adverse weather conditions. Labor market indicators were mixed but on balance showed further improvement. The unemployment rate, however, remains elevated. Household spending appears to be rising more quickly. Business fixed investment edged down, while the recovery in the housing sector remained slow. Fiscal policy is restraining economic growth, although the extent of restraint is diminishing. Inflation has been running below the Committee's longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions will continue to improve gradually, moving toward those the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as nearly balanced. The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, and it is monitoring inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term. The Committee currently judges that there is sufficient underlying strength in the broader economy to support ongoing improvement in labor market conditions. In light of the cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions since the inception of the current asset purchase program, the Committee decided to make a further measured reduction in the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in May, the Committee will add to its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $20 billion per month rather than $25 billion per month, and will add to its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $25 billion per month rather than $30 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee's sizable and still-increasing holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger economic recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with the Committee's dual mandate. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in further measured steps at future meetings. However, asset purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee's decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the Committee's outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The Committee continues to anticipate, based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Richard W. Fisher; Narayana Kocherlakota; Sandra Pianalto; Charles I. Plosser; Jerome H. Powell; Jeremy C. Stein; and Daniel K. Tarullo. Statement Regarding Purchases of Treasury Securities and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities
Jeremy C. Stein submitted his resignation Thursday as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, effective May 28, 2014. Stein, who has been a member of the Board since May 30, 2012, submitted his letter of resignation to President Obama and plans to return to his teaching position in Harvard University's department of economics. "Jeremy has made important contributions and served as an intellectual leader during his time at the Board," said Federal Reserve Chair Janet L. Yellen. "His understanding of monetary policy and markets as well as his expertise in banking and financial regulation has proven invaluable in his service to the Federal Reserve and the country. My colleagues and I will miss him." Stein, 53, was appointed to the Board by President Obama to fill an unexpired term that ends January 31, 2018. During his time on the Board, he served on the Committee on Bank Supervision and Regulation, and as co-chair of the Financial Stability Board's Official Sector Steering Group on reforming interest-rate benchmarks. This international group of regulators has been charged with developing alternative reference rates and transition strategies in the wake of the well-documented problems with LIBOR. While at the Board, Dr. Stein has been on leave from his position as the Moise Y. Safra Professor of Economics at Harvard University, where he taught courses in finance in the undergraduate and Ph.D. programs. From February to July 2009, Dr. Stein served in the Obama administration as a senior adviser to the Secretary of the Treasury and on the staff of the National Economic Council. Before joining the Harvard faculty in 2000, Dr. Stein taught finance at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan School of Management. Prior to joining the MIT faculty, Dr. Stein was an assistant professor of finance at the Harvard Business School from 1987 to 1990. A copy of his resignation letter is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the 23rd Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference: Stabilizing Financial Systems for Growth and Full Employment, Washington, D.C. In the more than five years that I have been a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, it has been hard not to concentrate on near-term economic prospects. The severe decline in the economy precipitated by the financial crisis and the magnitude of job and production loss in the Great Recession that followed have made a focus on recovery both understandable and imperative. But as I have prepared for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings every six to seven weeks by examining incoming data and the analyses of our own staff and of outside economists, I have been struck by the evidence of longer-term challenges to the American economy that poke through shorter-term discussions. There is considerable ongoing debate about whether the financial crisis and recession amplified changes already afoot in the economy, accelerated them, or simply revealed them more clearly. Whatever one's view on that question, the confluence of some apparently secular trends raises important questions about our nation's future growth potential and our ability to provide opportunity for all of our people. Indeed, these changes reflect serious challenges not only to the functioning of the American economy over the coming decades, but also to some of the ideals that undergird the nation's democratic heritage. This evening I will address in some detail four particularly important developments: After detailing these trends, I will turn briefly to both the role and the limits of monetary policy in countering them.1 Structural Challenges for the American Economy Lagging productivity growthOver the long term, the pace at which our standards of living increase depends on the growth of labor productivity--that is, the increase in the amount of economic value that a worker can generate during each hour on the job. Unfortunately, the data on productivity growth in recent years have been disappointing. Although output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose about 2-3/4 percent per year from the end of World War II through 1971, productivity has risen just 1-1/2 percent per year since then, excluding a brief burst of rapid growth that occurred roughly between 1996 and 2004. Just as it took economists a long time to identify the sources of the surge in productivity that began nearly two decades ago, they are only now beginning to grapple with the more recent slowdown. Some have argued that the burst of productivity growth that began in the mid-1990s was the anomaly, and that the more pedestrian pace of growth over the past decade represents a return to the norm.2In this view, the long period of rapid productivity growth that ended in the 1970s grew out of the technological innovations of the first and second Industrial Revolutions. But now, despite continued technological advances, a return to that pace of performance is thought unlikely. In particular, these authors argue that the information technology revolution of the past several decades--including the diffusion of computers, the development of the Internet, and improvements in telecommunications--is unlikely to generate the productivity gains prompted by earlier innovations such as electrification and mass production. This somewhat pessimistic perspective is far from being conventional wisdom. While productivity has increased less rapidly in recent years than during the first three-fourths of the 20th century, per capita income (a statistic available over a longer time span) is still rising more quickly than it was even during the second Industrial Revolution. Indeed, some have argued that the problem with new technology is not with productivity growth but with our ability to capture the productivity in our statistics. Moreover, many economists and technophiles remain optimistic that we have yet to fully realize the potential of the information revolution, and that technological change will continue to bring inventions and productivity enhancements that we cannot imagine today.3This view holds that there is no reason productivity could not continue to rise in line with its long-term historical average.4 It must be noted that, even among the productivity optimists, there are differences over how the expected progress will affect job creation and income distribution. In particular, some in this camp believe that we are likely to see a continuation of the pattern by which recent productivity growth seems to have mostly benefited relatively skilled workers. It may also have favored returns to capital investment, as opposed to labor, in greater proportion than past productivity gains. While there is some reason for optimism about the prospects for technological progress, there are grounds for concern over the decline in the dynamism of the U.S. labor market, an attribute that has contributed to productivity growth in the past and has traditionally distinguished the United States from many other advanced economies. Historically, the U.S. labor market has been characterized by substantial geographic mobility. Our high rates of geographic mobility are one facet of the overall dynamism of our labor market, which is also manifest in the continual churning of jobs through hirings and separations, as well as firm expansions and contractions--a process that the economist Joseph Schumpeter called "creative destruction."5To give a sense of the magnitude of this process, whilenetjob gains and losses are typically measured in the hundreds of thousands each calendar quarter,grossjob creation and destruction commonly run at a pace of roughly7 millionjobs each quarter. Creative destruction has been shown to improve productivity as jobs that have low productivity are replaced with jobs that yield greater productivity.6 However, a variety of data indicate that this feature of labor market dynamism has diminished. Since the 1980s, internal migration in the United States over both long and short distances has declined. To give an example, the rate of cross-state migration was less than half as large in 2011 as its average over the period from 1948 to 1971.7And, while we still see the level of employment rising and falling over the business cycle, the gross flows of people between jobs and of jobs across firms that underlie the observed aggregate changes have fallen over the past 15 years. At this point, we do not have a full understanding of the factors contributing to the decline in labor market dynamism. As a number of economists who have studied the issue have pointed out, some of the explanations may be benign or even positive.8For instance, the aging of the population accounts for some of the decline in migration and job churning, as older individuals are less likely to move and change jobs; such demographic factors probably do not represent an adverse reduction in dynamism. Moreover, some of the decline in turnover could be the result of individuals and firms finding productive job matches more quickly than before. For many employers and workers, the Internet has reduced the cost of posting job openings and the cost of searching for jobs. This more efficient process could result in better matches between firms and workers and thus fewer separations. Similarly, a reduction in firm uncertainty about the costs and benefits of investing could reduce firm-level churning in jobs. In both cases, workers and firms are able to achieve a good outcome with less turnover and presumably no loss of productivity. While it seems possible that improved information could be a force behind the reduction in geographic mobility and labor turnover, there are less benign possibilities as well. For instance, an increase in the costs to firms of hiring and firing individuals or an increase in the costs to individuals of changing jobs could lead to fewer productivity-enhancing job changes. Alternatively, the reduction in churning could itself be a function of slower productivity growth, as slower productivity growth implies lower benefits to forming new matches. One recent trend that is particularly disturbing is stagnation in the formation of new firms. Statistics from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) show that the number of establishments in operation for less than one year rose between the mid-1990s, when the data start, and the early 2000s. But, smoothing through the ups and downs of the business cycle, new firm formation has been roughly flat since then. Moreover, the number of individuals working at such firms stands almost 2 million below its peak in 1999. Given the role of innovation by entrepreneurs and the well-documented importance of successful young firms in creating jobs, these trends are disheartening. The lagging share of national income accruing to workersA second adverse development in recent years has been the apparent reduction in the share of overall national income that accrues to workers. Here I will be brief and suggestive because the scholarship is far from settled. But the basic trends in the data are troubling. Labor's share of total income generated in the nonfarm business sector has been on a downtrend since the 1980s and has fallen sharply since the turn of the millennium. It stood at 56 percent at the end of 2013, the lowest level since the BLS began collecting data on the measure in 1948. To be sure, various conceptual and measurement challenges make it difficult to compute labor's share of income with any degree of precision. However, taken at face value, these data have significant implications for the distribution of income in our society, given how skewed the holdings of capital are. Economists have focused less attention on the factors underlying the apparent decline in labor's share of income than they have on the rise in income inequality in general, but among the candidates are technological change, which has allowed for the substitution of capital for labor in the handling of routine tasks, an increase in firm bargaining power, and perhaps a decline in competition in product markets. The increase in inequalityOf the trends I have identified, the one that has received the largest amount of press attention recently is the rise in income inequality. While income inequality has been increasing since the 1970s, over the past two decades the process has been characterized by what some have called polarization, with those at the top of the distribution accumulating a significantly larger share of income, those at the bottom of the distribution experiencing modest relative gains, and those in the middle of the income distribution falling further behind in relative terms. Gauging by one fairly comprehensive measure of income used by the Congressional Budget Office, the share of income garnered by those in the top 1 percent of the distribution more than doubled between 1979 and 2007 to about 17 percent, while the share accruing to those in the 1st through 80th percentiles fell 9 percentage points.9And while it is true that those at the upper end of the income distribution were disproportionately affected during the financial crisis, with the result that inequality actually fell a bit in the wake of the recession, high earners also appear to be benefiting disproportionately from the recovery. Thus, the crisis does not seem really to have changed the trajectory of inequality. As interesting as these statistics on inequality are, they obscure a key part of the story--one that has been an important part of our identity as Americans: whether a family has the ability, through hard work, to attain a better standard of living. And on that point, we find that households in the middle and lower parts of the earnings distribution have experienced, at best, only modest improvements in inflation-adjusted income.10Between 1979 and 2007, households in the middle quintile of the income distribution--a functional definition of the middle class--saw their real labor income (adjusted for household size) rise only about 3 percent. Meanwhile, households in the bottom one-fifth of the distribution did a bit better, experiencing about a 24 percent rise, although this figure reflects an improvement of just 1 percent per year, and that from a very low base. In contrast, income rose more than 70 percent among households in the top one-fifth of the earnings distribution. The polarization of the labor income distribution has been mirrored in the types of jobs we are creating. Since the 1990s, job gains have been concentrated at the upper and lower ends of the earnings distribution. There have been healthy gains in employment in highly paid occupations, such as computer and information systems managers, and a rise in low-paid jobs, such as home health-care workers, but growth has been much slower in occupations with earnings in the middle of the distribution, such as machinists. This trend accelerated during the Great Recession and the ensuing recovery. For example, food services, retail, and employment services, all low-wage industries, accounted for nearly 45 percent of net employment growth from the start of the recovery through early 2012, while employment in a number of industries that offer good jobs for mid-wage workers--including construction, manufacturing, and finance, insurance, and real estate--did not grow in those years or grew too slowly to make up for their job losses during the recession.11 There is no single explanation for the rise in inequality and the decline in the share of jobs that provide a middle-class standard of living. Economists generally agree that technological change and globalization have played a role.12Both of these forces have reduced the demand for workers whose jobs had involved routine work that can easily be mechanized or offshored while, at the same time, increasing the productivity of higher-skilled workers. However, it is less clear whether technology and globalization are sufficient explanations for the increased share of income going to those at the very top of the income distribution. It may be that by increasing the effective size of the markets for their skills, technological change and globalization can also explain some of the large increase in earnings of top athletes, musicians, and even chief executive officers. In the popular press, the phenomenon of the very few reaping enormous windfalls has become known as the winner-take-all economy. However, other researchers have noted that a large share of the top earners is found in industries such as finance and law, suggesting that deregulation, corporate governance, and tax policy may have also played a role in the trend toward rising inequality. Economic mobility has not increased to mitigate higher inequalityDespite the fact that rising inequality has compounded the stakes associated with one's position in the income distribution, mobility up and down the economic ladder from one generation to the next in the United States has been stagnant. Work by Raj Chetty and his coauthors using income tax data has shown that a child who was born in the early 1990s had about the same chance of moving up in the income distribution as a child born in the 1970s.13Combining these results with previous research suggests that mobility has not increased in the postwar era. And, despite the long-held view of the United States as the land of opportunity, we actually fall short of other advanced economies in terms of intergenerational mobility. In the United Kingdom, for example, about 30 percent of sons with low-income parents end up being low-income themselves, while in the United States the comparable figure is over 40 percent.14 The Role of Monetary PolicyAs must be apparent, the challenges I have discussed are not susceptible to easy or rapid solution. It is equally apparent that monetary policy cannot be the only, or even the principal, tool in addressing these challenges. But that is not to say it is irrelevant. There is not as sharp a demarcation between cyclical and structural problems as is sometimes suggested. Monetary policies directed toward achieving the statutory dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability can help reduce underemployment associated with low aggregate demand. And, to the degree that monetary policy can prevent cyclical phenomena such as high unemployment and low investment from becoming entrenched, it might be able to improve somewhat the potential growth rate of the economy over the medium term.15 More generally, reducing labor market slack can help lay the foundation for a more sustained, self-reinforcing cycle of stronger aggregate demand, increased production, renewed investment, and productivity gains. Similarly, a stronger labor market can provide a modest countervailing factor to income inequality trends by leading to higher wages at the bottom rungs of the wage scale. The very accommodative monetary policy of the past five years has contributed significantly to the extended, moderate recoveries of gross domestic product (GDP) and employment. To this point, however, there has not been a corresponding upturn in wages. To be sure, there have been notable wage increases in specific areas of the country enjoying economic growth much higher than the national average. And, as is nearly always the case, labor shortages in discrete skilled job categories may be placing some upward pressures on wages for those jobs (though, judging by such aggregate data as we have, not by as much as one might have thought based on the widespread anecdotal reports of skilled labor shortages). But one sees only the earliest signs of a much-needed, broader wage recovery. Compensation increases have been running at the historically low level of just over 2 percent annual rates since the onset of the Great Recession, with concomitantly lower real wage gains. The reasons for the lag in wage gains in the context of continuing moderate growth are not totally clear. Nominal wage rigidity on the downside may have played a role to the extent that employers were reluctant to cut nominal wages even in the period from late 2008 to early 2009, when they were eliminating jobs in staggering numbers. The secular labor market factors mentioned earlier are also likely relevant. There is, of course, also a debate around the question of how much of current unemployment--particularly long-term unemployment--is structural and thus how much slack still exists in labor markets. Last week Chair Yellen explained why substantial slack very likely remains. I would add to her explanation only the observation that, in the face of some uncertainty as to how best to measure slack, we are well advised to proceed pragmatically. We should remain attentive to evidence that labor markets have actually tightened to the point that there is demonstrable inflationary pressure that would place at risk maintenance of the FOMC's stated inflation target (which, of course, we are currently not meeting on the downside). But we should not rush to act preemptively in anticipation of such pressures based on arguments about the potential increase in structural unemployment in recent years. In this regard, the issue of how much structural damage has been suffered by the labor market is of less immediate concern today in shaping monetary policy than it might have been had we experienced a period of rapid growth during the recovery. Remember that, just a few years ago, many forecasters--in and out of the Federal Reserve--were projecting growth rates at an annualized rate of 4 percent or greater for at least a year. That expectation raised the question of whether a reasonably rapid tightening in monetary policy might at some point be needed. But now, in part because we did not have such a spike in the early stages of recovery and instead have had modest growth in place for several years, it seems less likely that we will experience a growth spurt in the next couple of years that would engender concerns about rapid wage pressures and changes in inflation expectations. The Importance of a National Investment AgendaIn short, by promoting maximum employment in a stable inflation environment around the FOMC target rate, monetary policy can help set the stage for a vibrant and dynamic economy. But there are limits to what monetary policy can do in counteracting the longer-term trends I have discussed. In economic research and in policy debates, we need more focus on these issues and more attention to concrete proposals to address them. I would suggest that one element, though by no means the only one, in such a program is a well-formulated government investment agenda. A pro-investment policy agenda by the government could help address some of our nation's long-term challenges by promoting investment in human capital, particularly for those who have seen their share of the economic pie shrink, and by encouraging research and development and other capital investments that increase the productive capacity of the nation. There is already a well-known list of investments that have been shown to be successful. For instance, early childhood education can increase the educational attainment of children from low-income families as well as improve other outcomes.16In addition, recent innovations in job training programs, which more tightly link the training to the needs of employers in sectors of the economy with a demand for workers, have been shown to increase both the employment and wages of participants.17 Investment in basic research by the federal government is another area in which greater investments could yield significant returns and in which a public policy role is warranted because of externalities. Econometric studies suggest that the rates of return to this type of investment can be very high.18And a range of policy commentators agree that there is a continuing role for government investment in infrastructure, including various forms of transportation, as a way to enhance productivity. Not too long ago, the American Society of Civil Engineers gave the United States a rating of D on its roads and bridges. Improving that system, both by doing necessary maintenance to maintain safety and functionality and by reducing congestion could yield substantial benefits.19 This agenda might sound ambitious. In fact, spending in these areas is currently not a very large proportion of federal outlays. For example, the entire federal budget for nondefense research programs--including expenditures on health research, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the National Science Foundation--is only 2 percent of federal spending (or less than 0.4 percent of GDP), well below the share in the 1960s, when we last made a significant effort to advance our capacities in math and science during the era of space exploration. Moreover, spending in these areas has been the target of much of the budget restraint in recent years. Even in the area of physical infrastructure, we have fallen behind past efforts. After a surge associated with fiscal stimulus during the recent recession, public spending on infrastructure has tumbled, resulting in the slowest growth (1 percent) in the state and local capital stock since WWII. I certainly am not intending here to join the broader debate on fiscal policy, either short or longer term. But I do note that fiscal policymakers could promote the longer-term prospects of the nation by increased spending in areas that are likely to yield increases in living standards. The amount of increased investment spending that could reasonably be absorbed would be quite modest in comparison with the very large amounts associated with major fiscal issues such as health-care expenses. And even a strong investment agenda would not be a complete response to the economic challenges I have discussed. But, like monetary policy, it could play a useful role. ConclusionThe longer-term challenges to the American economy that I have identified this evening are real. But I certainly do not regard a continuation of these trends as inevitable. On the contrary, the American economy is still possessed of great advantages and potential that, while always and necessarily evolving, have served us well over the years.20My principal aims this evening have been, first, to echo those who have been drawing attention to these challenges in recent years and, second, to encourage more discussion and debate of the specific policies that can best help us meet these challenges. As should be apparent in my remarks on monetary policy and an investment agenda, I believe that there are policies already developed and available to us that can contribute to this effort. My hope is that such policies will be pursued and that others, perhaps yet to be developed, will follow. 1.Stephanie Aaronson of the Board's staff contributed substantially to these remarks.Return to text 2.See, for example, Tyler Cowen (2011),The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better(New York: Dutton); Robert J. Gordon (2010), "Revisiting U.S. Productivity Growth over the Past Century with a View of the Future," NBER Working Paper Series 15834 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March); and Robert J. Gordon (2012), "Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds," NBER Working Paper Series 18315 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August).Return to text 3.See, for example, Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2011),Race Against the Machine: How the Digital Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy(Lexington, Mass.: Digital Frontier Press); Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2014),The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies(New York: W.W. Norton & Company); and Martin Neil Baily, James Manyika, and Shalabh Gupta (2013), "U.S. Productivity Growth: An Optimistic Perspective,"International Productivity Monitor,no. 25 (Spring), pp. 3-12. See also Ben Bernanke (2013), "Economic Prospects for the Long Run," speech delivered at Bard College at Simon's Rock, Great Barrington, Mass., May 18.Return to text 4.See, for example, David M. Byrne, Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel (2013), "Is the Information Technology Revolution Over?"International Productivity Monitor, no. 25 (Spring), pp. 20-36.Return to text 5.Joseph A. Schumpeter (1942),Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy(New York: Harper & Brothers).Return to text 6.See, for example, Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2001), "Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence," in Edward Dean, Michael Harper, and Charles Hulten, eds.,New Developments in Productivity Analysis(Chicago: University of Chicago Press); and Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2006), "Market Selection, Reallocation, and Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 88 (November), pp. 748-58.Return to text 7.For more information on the rate of cross-state migration, see Raven Molloy, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak (2013), "Declining Migration within the U.S.: The Role of the Labor Market," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-27 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text 8.For additional details on the decline in labor market dynamism, see Henry R. Hyatt and James R. Spletzer (2013), "The Recent Decline in Employment Dynamics (PDF)," Center for Economic Studies Working Paper Series 13-03 (Washington: U.S. Census Bureau, March).Return to text 9.This measure of income accounts for total compensation, including health benefits, and capital income, government transfers, and taxes while also adjusting for household size. See Congressional Budget Office (2011),Trends in the Distribution of Household Income between 1979 and 2007(Washington: CBO, October).Return to text 10.This measure of income covers total compensation, including benefits, and adjusts for household size. See Congressional Budget Office,Trends in the Distribution of Household Income,in note 9.Return to text 11.For more information on this trend, see National Employment Law Project (2012), "The Low-Wage Recovery and Growing Inequality (PDF)," data brief (New York: NELP, August).Return to text 12.The literature on the reasons for the rise in inequality is extensive, but one recent work that tries to address the issue is David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013), "Untangling Trade and Technology: Evidence from Local Labor Markets," NBER Working Paper Series 18938 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April).Return to text 13.For a discussion of mobility in income distribution, see Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez, and Nicholas Turner (2014), "Is the United States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility," NBER Working Paper Series 19844 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January).Return to text 14.For more information on intergenerational mobility, see Markus Jntti, Bernt Bratsberg, Knut Red, Oddbjrn Raaum, Robin Naylor, Eva sterbacka, Anders Bjrklund, and Tor Eriksson (2006), "American Exceptionalism in a New Light: A Comparison of Intergenerational Earnings Mobility in the Nordic Countries, the United Kingdom, and the United States (PDF)," IZA Discussion Paper Series 1938 (Bonn, Germany: Institute for the Study of Labor, January).Return to text 15.For details on the potential growth rate of the economy, see Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2013), "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-77 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).Return to text 16.For more information on the effect of early childhood education, see James J. Heckman, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz (2010), "The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program,"Journal of Public Economics, vol. 94 (February), pp. 114-28; James Heckman, Rob Grunewald, and Arthur Reynolds (2006), "The Dollars and Cents of Investing Early: Cost-Benefit Analysis in Early Care and Education,"Zero to Three, vol. 26 (July), pp. 10-17; and Elizabeth U. Cascio and Diane Schanzenbach (forthcoming), "The Impacts of Expanding Access to High-Quality Preschool Education,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.Return to text 17.For a discussion of such rates of return, see, for example, Sheila Maguire, Joshua Freely, Carol Clymer, Maureen Conway, and Deena Schwartz (2010),Tuning in to Local Labor Markets: Findings from the Sectoral Employment Impact Study(Philadelphia:Public/Private Ventures).Return to text 18.See Zvi Griliches (1992), "The Search for R&D Spillovers,"Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 94 (Supplement), pp. S29-S47; and Charles I. Jones (2002), "Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas,"American Economic Review, vol. 92 (March), pp. 220-39.Return to text 19.For more details on the U.S. infrastructure, see American Society of Civil Engineers (2013),2013 Report Card for America's Infrastructure (PDF)(Reston, Va.: ASCE); and Her Majesty's Treasury (2006),The Eddington Transport Study--The Case for Action: Sir Rod Eddington's Advice to Government (PDF)(London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office).Return to text 20.These advantages--such as the country's substantial natural resources, a stable but adaptive legal framework for economic activity, a dynamic labor market, and a fostering of entrepreneurship--have contributed to productivity growth that is estimated to have averaged about 2-1/4 percent over the past 140 years. See David M. Bryne, Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel (2013), "Is the Information Technology Revolution Over?"International Productivity Monitor, No. 25 (Spring), pp. 20-36.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from February 10 through March 17, 2014.The minutes are attached. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on March 18-19, 2014 and of the conference call held on March 4, 2014. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 4 and March 18-19, 2014:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York Nearly five years into the expansion that began after the financial crisis and the Great Recession, the recovery has come a long way. More than 8 million jobs have been added to nonfarm payrolls since 2009, almost the same number lost as a result of the recession. Led by a resurgent auto industry, manufacturing output has also nearly returned to its pre-recession peak. While the housing market still has far to go, it seems to have turned a corner. It is a sign of how far the economy has come that a return to full employment is, for the first time since the crisis, in the medium-term outlooks of many forecasters. It is a reminder of how far we have to go, however, that this long-awaited outcome is projected to be more than two years away. Today I will discuss how my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and I view the state of the economy and how this view is likely to shape our efforts to promote a return to maximum employment in a context of price stability. I will start with the FOMC's outlook, which foresees a gradual return over the next two to three years of economic conditions consistent with its mandate. While monetary policy discussions naturally begin with a baseline outlook, the path of the economy is uncertain, and effective policy must respond to significant unexpected twists and turns the economy may take. My primary focus today will be on how the FOMC's monetary policy framework has evolved to best support the recovery through those twists and turns, and what this framework is likely to imply as the recovery progresses. The Current Economic OutlookThe FOMC's current outlook for continued, moderate growth is little changed from last fall. In recent months, some indicators have been notably weak, requiring us to judge whether the data are signaling a material change in the outlook. The unusually harsh winter weather in much of the nation has complicated this judgment, but my FOMC colleagues and I generally believe that a significant part of the recent softness was weather related. The continued improvement in labor market conditions has been important in this judgment. The unemployment rate, at 6.7 percent, has fallen three-tenths of 1 percentage point since late last year. Broader measures of unemployment that include workers marginally attached to the labor force and those working part time for economic reasons have fallen a bit more than the headline unemployment rate, and labor force participation, which had been falling, has ticked up this year. Inflation, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, has slowed from an annual rate of about 2-1/2 percent in early 2012 to less than 1 percent in February of this year.1This rate is well below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective. Many advanced economies are observing a similar softness in inflation. To some extent, the low rate of inflation seems due to influences that are likely to be temporary, including a deceleration in consumer energy prices and outright declines in core import prices in recent quarters. Longer-run inflation expectations have remained remarkably steady, however. We anticipate that, as the effects of transitory factors subside and as labor market gains continue, inflation will gradually move back toward 2 percent. In sum, the central tendency of FOMC participant projections for the unemployment rate at the end of 2016 is 5.2 to 5.6 percent, and for inflation the central tendency is 1.7 to 2 percent.2If this forecast was to become reality, the economy would be approaching what my colleagues and I view as maximum employment and price stability for the first time in nearly a decade. I find this baseline outlook quite plausible. Of course, if the economy obediently followed our forecasts, the job of central bankers would be a lot easier and their speeches would be a lot shorter. Alas, the economy is often not so compliant, so I will ask your indulgence for a few more minutes. Three Big Questions for the FOMCBecause the course of the economy is uncertain, monetary policymakers need to carefully watch for signs that it is diverging from the baseline outlook and then respond in a systematic way. Let me turn first to monitoring and discuss three questions I believe are likely to loom large in the FOMC's ongoing assessment of where we are on the path back to maximum employment and price stability. Is there still significant slack in the labor market?The first question concerns the extent of slack in the labor market. One of the FOMC's objectives is to promote a return to maximum employment, but exactly what conditions are consistent with maximum employment can be difficult to assess. Thus far in the recovery and to this day, there is little question that the economy has remained far from maximum employment, so measurement difficulties were not our focus. But as the attainment of our maximum employment goal draws nearer, it will be necessary for the FOMC to form a more nuanced judgment about when the recovery of the labor market will be materially complete. As the FOMC's statement on longer-term goals and policy strategy emphasizes, these judgments are inherently uncertain and must be based on a wide range of indicators.3 I will refer to the shortfall in employment relative to its mandate-consistent level as labor market slack, and there are a number of different indicators of this slack. Probably the best single indicator is the unemployment rate. At 6.7 percent, it is now slightly more than 1 percentage point above the 5.2 to 5.6 percent central tendency of the Committee's projections for the longer-run normal unemployment rate. This shortfall remains significant, and in our baseline outlook, it will take more than two years to close.4 Other data suggest that there may be more slack in labor markets than indicated by the unemployment rate. For example, the share of the workforce that is working part time but would prefer to work full time remains quite high by historical standards. Similarly, while the share of workers in the labor force who are unemployed and have been looking for work for more than six months has fallen from its peak in 2010, it remains as high as any time prior to the Great Recession.5There is ongoing debate about why long-term unemployment remains so high and the degree to which it might decline in a more robust economy. As I argued more fully in a recent speech, I believe that long-term unemployment might fall appreciably if economic conditions were stronger.6 The low level of labor force participation may also signal additional slack that is not reflected in the headline unemployment rate. Participation would be expected to fall because of the aging of the population, but the decline steepened in the recovery. Although economists differ over what share of those currently outside the labor market might join or rejoin the labor force in a stronger economy, my own view is that some portion of the decline in participation likely represents labor market slack.7 Lastly, economists also look to wage pressures to signal a tightening labor market. At present, wage gains continue to proceed at a historically slow pace in this recovery, with few signs of a broad-based acceleration. As the extent of slack we see today diminishes, however, the FOMC will need to monitor these and other labor market indicators closely to judge how much slack remains and, therefore, how accommodative monetary policy should be. Is inflation moving back toward 2 percent?A second question that is likely to figure heavily in our assessment of the recovery is whether inflation is moving back toward the FOMC's 2 percent longer-run objective, as envisioned in our baseline outlook. As the most recent FOMC statement emphasizes, inflation persistently below 2 percent could pose risks to economic performance. The FOMC strives to avoid inflation slipping too far below its 2 percent objective because, at very low inflation rates, adverse economic developments could more easily push the economy into deflation. The limited historical experience with deflation shows that, once it starts, deflation can become entrenched and associated with prolonged periods of very weak economic performance.8 A persistent bout of very low inflation carries other risks as well. With the federal funds rate currently near its lower limit, lower inflation translates into a higher real value for the federal funds rate, limiting the capacity of monetary policy to support the economy.9Further, with longer-term inflation expectations anchored near 2 percent in recent years, persistent inflation well below this expected value increases the real burden of debt for households and firms, which may put a drag on economic activity. I will mention two considerations that will be important in assessing whether inflation is likely to move back to 2 percent as the economy recovers. First, we anticipate that, as labor market slack diminishes, it will exert less of a drag on inflation. However, during the recovery, very high levels of slack have seemingly not generated strong downward pressure on inflation. We must therefore watch carefully to see whether diminishing slack is helping return inflation to our objective.10Second, our baseline projection rests on the view that inflation expectations will remain well anchored near 2 percent and provide a natural pull back to that level. But the strength of that pull in the unprecedented conditions we continue to face is something we must continue to assess. Finally, the FOMC is well aware that inflation could also threaten to rise substantiallyabove2 percent. At present, I rate the chances of this happening as significantly below the chances of inflation persisting below 2 percent, but we must always be prepared to respond to such unexpected outcomes, which leads us to my third question. What factors may push the recovery off track?Myriad factors continuously buffet the economy, so the Committee must always be asking, "What factors may be pushing the recovery off track?" For example, over the nearly 5 years of the recovery, the economy has been affected by greater-than-expected fiscal drag in the United States and by spillovers from the sovereign debt and banking problems of some euro-area countries. Further, our baseline outlook has changed as we have learned about the degree of structural damage to the economy wrought by the crisis and the subsequent pace of healing. Let me offer an example of how these issues shape policy. Four years ago, in April 2010, the outlook appeared fairly bright. The emergency lending programs that the Federal Reserve implemented at the height of the crisis had been largely wound down, and the Fed was soon to complete its first large-scale asset purchase program. Private-sector forecasters polled in the April 2010 Blue Chip survey were predicting that the unemployment rate would fall steadily to 8.6 percent in the final quarter of 2011.11 This forecast proved quite accurate--the unemployment rate averaged 8.6 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011. But this was not the whole story. In April 2010, Blue Chip forecasters not only expected falling unemployment, they also expected the FOMC to soon begin raising the federal funds rate. Indeed, they expected the federal funds rate to reach 1.3 percent by the second quarter of 2011.12By July 2010, however, with growth disappointing and the FOMC expressing concerns about softening in both growth and inflation, the Blue Chip forecast of the federal funds rate in mid-2011 had fallen to 0.8 percent, and by October the forecasters expected that the rate would remain in the range of 0 to 25 basis points throughout 2011, as turned out to be the case.13Not only did expectations of policy tightening recede, the FOMC also initiated a new $600 billion asset purchase program in November 2010. Thus, while the reductions in the unemployment rate through 2011 were roughly as forecast in early 2010, this improvement only came about with the FOMC providing a considerably higher level of accommodation than originally anticipated. This experience was essentially repeated the following year. In April 2011, Blue Chip forecasters expected the unemployment rate to fall to 7.9 percent by the fourth quarter of 2012, with the FOMC expected to have already raised the federal funds rate to near 1 percent by mid-2012.14 As it turned out, the unemployment rate forecast was once more remarkably accurate, but again this was associated with considerably more accommodation than anticipated. In response to signs of slowing economic activity, in August 2011 the FOMC for the first time expressed its forward guidance in terms of the calendar, stating that conditions would likely warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. The following month, the Committee added to accommodation by adopting a new balance sheet policy known as the maturity extension program.15 Thus, in both 2011 and 2012, the unemployment rate actually declined by about as much as had been forecast the previous year, but only after unexpected weakness prompted additional accommodative steps by the Federal Reserve. In both cases, I believe that the FOMC's decision to respond to signs of weakness with significant additional accommodation played an important role in helping to keep the projected labor market recovery on track.16These episodes illustrate what I described earlier as a vital aspect of effective monetary policymaking: monitor the economy for signs that events are unfolding in a materially different manner than expected and adjust policy in response in a systematic manner. Now I will turn from the task of monitoring to the policy response. Policy Challenges in an Unprecedented RecoveryFundamental to modern thinking on central banking is the idea that monetary policy is more effective when the public better understands and anticipates how the central bank will respond to evolving economic conditions. Specifically, it is important for the central bank to make clear how it will adjust its policy stance in response to unforeseen economic developments in a manner that reduces or blunts potentially harmful consequences. If the public understands and expects policymakers to behave in this systematically stabilizing manner, it will tend to respond less to such developments. Monetary policy will thus have an "automatic stabilizer" effect that operates through private-sector expectations. It is important to note that tying the response of policy to the economy necessarily makes the future course of the federal funds rate uncertain. But by responding to changing circumstances, policy can be most effective atreducinguncertainty about the course of inflation and employment. Recall how this worked during the couple of decades before the crisis--a period sometimes known as the Great Moderation. The FOMC's main policy tool, the federal funds rate, was well above zero, leaving ample scope to respond to the modest shocks that buffeted the economy during that period. Many studies confirmed that the appropriate response of policy to those shocks could be described with a fair degree of accuracy by a simple rule linking the federal funds rate to the shortfall or excess of employment and inflation relative to their desired values.17The famous Taylor rule provides one such formula.18 The idea that monetary policy should react in a systematic manner in order to blunt the effects of shocks has remained central in the FOMC's policymaking during this recovery. However, the application of this idea has been more challenging. With the federal funds rate pinned near zero, the FOMC has been forced to rely on two less familiar policy tools--the first one being forward guidance regarding the future setting of the federal funds rate and the second being large-scale asset purchases. There are no time-tested guidelines for how these tools should be adjusted in response to changes in the outlook. As the episodes recounted earlier illustrate, the FOMC has continued to try to adjust its policy tools in a systematic manner in response to new information about the economy. But because both the tools and the economic conditions have been unfamiliar, it has also been critical that the FOMC communicate how it expects to deploy its tools in response to material changes in the outlook. Let me review some important elements in the evolution of the FOMC's communication framework. When the FOMC initially began using its unconventional tools, policy communication was relatively simple. In December 2008, for example, the FOMC said it expected that conditions would warrant keeping the federal funds rate near zero for "some time." This period before the "liftoff" in the federal funds rate was described in increasingly specific, and (as it turned out) longer, periods over time--"some time" became "an extended period," which was later changed to "mid-2013," then "late 2014," then "mid-2015."19This fixed, calendar-based guidance had the virtue of simplicity, but it lacked the automatic stabilizer property of communication that would signal how and why the stance of policy and forward guidance might change as developments unfolded, and as we learned about the extent of the need for accommodation. More recently, the Federal Reserve, and I might add, other central banks around the world, have sought to incorporate this automatic stabilizer feature in their communications.20In December 2012, the Committee reformulated its forward guidance, stating that it anticipated that the federal funds rate would remain near zero at least as long as the unemployment rate remained above 6-1/2 percent, inflation over the period between one and two years ahead was projected to be no more than half a percentage point above the Committee's objective, and longer-term inflation expectations continued to be well anchored. This guidance emphasized to the public that it could count on a near-zero federal funds rate at least until substantial progress in the recovery had been achieved, however long that might take. When these thresholds were announced, the unemployment rate was reported to be 7.7 percent, and the Committee projected that the 6-1/2 percent threshold would not be reached for another 2-1/2 years--in mid-2015. The Committee emphasized that these numerical criteria were not triggers for raising the federal funds rate, and Chairman Bernanke stated that, ultimately, any decision to begin removing accommodation would be based on a wide range of indicators.21 Our communications about asset purchases have undergone a similar transformation. The initial asset purchase programs had fixed time and quantity limits, although those limits came with a proviso that they might be adjusted. In the fall of 2012, the FOMC launched its current purchase program, this time explicitly tying the course of the program to evolving economic conditions. When the program began, the rate of purchases was $85 billion per month, and the Committee indicated that purchases would continue, providing that inflation remained well behaved, until there was a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.22 Based on the cumulative progress toward maximum employment since the initiation of the program and the improvement in the outlook for the labor market, the FOMC began reducing the pace of asset purchases last December, stating that "[i]f incoming information broadly supports the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-term objective, the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in further measured steps at future meetings."23Purchases are currently proceeding at a pace of $55 billion per month. Consistent with my theme today, however, the FOMC statement underscores that purchases are not on a preset course--the FOMC stands ready to adjust the pace of purchases as warranted should the outlook change materially. Recent Changes to the Forward GuidanceAt our most recent meeting in March, the FOMC reformulated its forward guidance for the federal funds rate. While one of the main motivations for this change was that the unemployment rate might soon cross the 6-1/2 percent threshold, the new formulation is also well suited to help the FOMC explain policy adjustments that may arise in response to changes in the outlook. I should note that the change in the forward guidance did not indicate a change in the Committee's policy intentions, but instead was made to clarify the Committee's thinking about policy as the economy continues to recover. The new guidance provides a general description of the framework that the FOMC will apply in making decisions about the timing of liftoff. Specifically, in determining how long to maintain the current target range of 0 to 25 basis points for the federal funds rate, "the Committee will assess progress, both realized and expected, toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation."24In other words, the larger the shortfall of employment or inflation from their respective objectives, and the slower the projected progress toward those objectives, the longer the current target range for the federal funds rate is likely to be maintained. This approach underscores the continuing commitment of the FOMC to maintain the appropriate degree of accommodation to support the recovery. The new guidance also reaffirms the FOMC's view that decisions about liftoff should not be based on any one indicator, but that it will take into account a wide range of information on the labor market, inflation, and financial developments. Along with this general framework, the FOMC provided an assessment of what that framework implies for the likely path of policy under the baseline outlook. At present, the Committee anticipates that economic and financial conditions will likely warrant maintaining the current range "for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored."25 Finally, the Committee began explaining more fully how policy may operate in the period after liftoff, indicating its expectation that economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping short-term interest rates below levels the Committee views as likely to prove normal in the longer run. FOMC participants have cited different reasons for this view, but many of the reasons involve persistent effects of the financial crisis and the possibility that the productive capacity of the economy will grow more slowly, at least for a time, than it did, on average, before the crisis. The expectation that the achievement of our economic objectives will likely require low real interest rates for some time is again not confined to the United States but is shared broadly across many advanced economies.26Of course, this guidance is a forecast and will evolve as we gain further evidence about how the economy is operating in the wake of the crisis and ensuing recession. ConclusionIn summary, the policy framework I have described reflects the FOMC's commitment to systematically respond to unforeseen economic developments in order to promote a return to maximum employment in a context of price stability. It is very welcome news that a return to these conditions has finally appeared in the medium-term outlook of many forecasters. But it will be much better news when this objective is reached. My colleagues on the FOMC and I will stay focused on doing the Federal Reserve's part to promote this goal. 1.These inflation rates are based on 12-month changes.Return to text 2.These figures are based on the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) submitted in conjunction with the March 2014 FOMC meeting. The SEP is an addendum to the FOMC minutes and is available at Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 18-19, 2014," press release, April 9.Return to text 3.See theFOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF), as amended effective January 28, 2014, which is available on the Board's website at .Return to text 4.See the SEP in Board of Governors, "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 18-19, 2014," in note 2.Return to text 5.The share in CPS employment of persons working part time for economic reasons rose from 3 percent prior to the recession to 6.5 percent in November 2009, and it has since then declined only to 5 percent. The share in the labor force of those unemployed for more than 26 weeks rose from less than 1 percent prior to the recession to 4.5 percent, and it has since declined to just below 2.5 percent; the previous peak for this series was 2.5 percent in 1983. The records for long-term unemployed begin in 1948.Return to text 6.See Janet L. Yellen (2014), "What the Federal Reserve Is Doing to Promote a Stronger Job Market," speech delivered at the 2014 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference, Chicago, March 31.Return to text 7.For the view that most of the recent decline in labor force participation reflects retirement, see Shigeru Fujita (2014), "On the Causes of Declines in the Labor Force Participation Rate," (PDF) Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, special report,Research Rap,February 6. The view that a larger share of the recent decline reflects cyclical factors is expressed by Christopher J. Erceg and Andrew T. Levin (2013), "Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession," paper presented at "Fulfilling the Full Employment Mandate--Monetary Policy and the Labor Market," 57th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, April 12.Return to text 8.See Ben S. Bernanke (2002), "Deflation: Making Sure It' Doesn't Happen Here," speech delivered at the National Economists Club, Washington, November 21.Return to text 9.If firms' and households' spending decisions depended only on longer-term interest rates, temporarily higher short-term real interest rates due to low inflation at a time that nominal interest rates are constrained by the zero lower bound would have little economic effects, provided that these higher short-term real interest rates would be expected to be compensated by lower short-term real interest rates later on. However, to the extent that these spending decisions depend in part on shorter-term real interest rates, low inflation can induce meaningful economic costs.Return to text 10.The uncertainty surrounding the empirical relationship between slack and inflation is discussed in James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson (2009), "Phillips Curve Inflation Forecasts," in Jeff Fuhrer, Yolanda K. Kodrzycki, Jane Sneddon Little, and Giovanni P. Olivei, eds.,Understanding Inflation and the Implications for Monetary Policy: A Phillips Curve Retrospective(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press). Moreover, with the share of long-term unemployed in total unemployment unusually elevated in recent years, there is an ongoing discussion about whether short- and long-term unemployment have differential effects on inflation. See Robert J. Gordon (2013), "The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU during the Slow Recovery," NBER Working Paper Series 19390 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August); and Mark W. Watson (forthcoming), "Inflation Persistence, the NAIRU, and the Great Recession,"American Economic Review.Return to text 11.See Aspen Publishers (2010),Blue Chip Economic Indicators,vol. 35, no. 4 (April 10). These forecasts were similar to the central tendency of FOMC participants' projections for the unemployment rate at the end of 2011 submitted in conjunction with the April 2010 FOMC meeting, which ranged from 8.1 to 8.5 percent. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, April 27-28, 2010," press release, May 19.Return to text 12.See Aspen Publishers (2010),Blue Chip Financial Forecasts,vol. 29, no. 4 (April 1).Return to text 13.See, respectively, Aspen Publishers (2010),Blue Chip Financial Forecasts,vol. 29, no. 7 (July 1); and Aspen Publishers (2010), vol. 29, no. 10 (October 1). In the statement following its August 10, 2010, meeting, the FOMC noted that "the pace of recovery in output and employment has slowed in recent months." See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 10. See also the discussion in the minutes of that meeting: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, August 10, 2010," press release, August 31.Return to text 14.See, respectively, Aspen Publishers (2011),Blue Chip Economic Indicators,vol. 36, no. 4 (April 10); and Aspen Publishers (2011),Blue Chip Financial Forecasts,vol. 30, no. 4 (April 1).Return to text 15.For the FOMC's calendar-based forward guidance as communicated in its August 2011 statement, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9. For the description of the FOMC's maturity extension program that appeared in its September 2011 statement, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 21.Return to text 16.There are a range of estimates on the effectiveness of these policies. A review is provided in Ben S. Bernanke (2012), "Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1.Return to text 17.See the discussion in John B. Taylor and John C. Williams (2011), "Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy," chap. 15 in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B (San Diego: North-Holland), pp. 829-59. (An April 2010 working paper version of this chapter is available on theFederal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's website (PDF))Return to text 18.See John B. Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214.Return to text 19.The references to "some time," "an extended period," "mid-2013," "late 2014," and "mid-2015" appeared in the FOMC statements of, respectively, December 2008, March 2009, August 2011, January 2012, and September 2012. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "FOMC Statement and Board Approval of Discount Rate Requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and San Francisco," press release, December 16; Board of Governors (2009), "FOMC Statement," press release, March 18, Board of Governors (2011), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9; Board of Governors (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 25; and Board of Governors (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 13.Return to text 20.The Bank of England introduced threshold-based forward guidance in August 2013 and adopted more-qualitative forward guidance in February 2014; see Bank of England, "Forward Guidance," webpage. The European Central Bank recently linked its forward guidance more explicitly to its assessment of economic slack, as discussed in President Mario Draghi's press conference on March 6, 2014; see Mario Draghi (2014), "Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A)," European Central Bank, Frankfurt, March 6.Return to text 21.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Transcript of Chairman Bernanke's Press Conference, December 12, 2012 (PDF),".Return to text 22.See Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," September 13, 2012, in note 19.Return to text 23.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 18.Return to text 24.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014),"Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, March 19.Return to text 25.See Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," March 19, 2014, in note 24.Return to text 26.See the discussion in International Monetary Fund (2014), "Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates (PDF)," chap. 3 inWorld Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven(Washington: IMF, April).Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's 2014 Financial Markets Conference, Atlanta, Georgia (via prerecorded video) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good morning. I'm delighted to have this opportunity to speak to you today, even though I am unable to be with you in person. I'd like to share a few thoughts about the important issues that the Financial Markets Conference (FMC) is addressing this year. Many of these issues, of course, are ones the FMC has grappled with every year since the crisis, an event which elevated the importance of this gathering and of the vital contributions made by the research and the policy discussion the FMC fosters. One of those issues is liquidity. Maturity transformation is a central part of the economic function of banks and many other types of financial intermediaries. But as we saw in the crisis, maturity transformation also exposes intermediaries to liquidity risk, particularly when intermediaries are heavily reliant on short-term wholesale funding. In 2007 and 2008, short-term creditors ran from firms such as Northern Rock, Bear Stearns, and Lehman Brothers, and from money market mutual funds and asset-backed commercial paper programs. Together, these runs were the primary engine of a financial crisis from which the United States and the global economy have yet to fully recover. In response to the crisis, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's first task was to strengthen bank capital requirements through the adoption of the Basel III capital accord and, last summer, our domestic rule implementing the Basel III capital requirements in the United States. Strong bank capital rules remain the foundation of bank regulation. But capital requirements as currently constructed are generally based on credit and market risks from the asset side of the balance sheet and from off-balance-sheet transactions. They do not directly address liquidity risk. Thus, the Basel Committee's second task was to develop new liquidity standards for global banking firms: the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). The LCR is designed to improve a bank's ability to withstand severe short-term liquidity stress events by requiring banking firms to hold a buffer of highly liquid assets to cover net cash outflows in a 30-day stress scenario. The NSFR is meant to promote resilience over a one-year horizon by requiring banks that hold less liquid assets to fund their activities with more stable sources of funding. As others have observed, the new Basel liquidity standards address financial stability risks associated with excessive maturity transformation through at least two channels. First, the new standards insulate banks from liquidity shocks. In the case of the LCR, requiring firms to hold a buffer of highly liquid assets will help to ensure that they have a means of generating liquidity in the event of creditor runs. In the case of the NSFR, requiring firms to use higher levels of stable funding for less liquid assets reduces the vulnerabilities of a firm to structural maturity mismatches. Banking firms that self-insure against liquidity risk in these ways are less likely to need government liquidity support in times of stress. Second, the new standards provide an incentive for firms to move to more stable funding structures. Under the LCR and NSFR, firms that engage in unstable forms of maturity transformation will be required to maintain buffers of highly liquid assets and use stable funding, both of which will impose costs for the firms. Reducing the amount of maturity transformation they engage in will help firms minimize these costs. While the LCR and NSFR are important steps forward, they do not fully address the financial stability concerns associated with short-term wholesale funding. These standards tend to focus on the liquidity positions of firms taken in isolation, rather than on the financial system as a whole. They only apply to internationally active banks, and not directly to shadow banks, despite the fact that liquidity shocks within the shadow banking system played a major role in the crisis. Furthermore, the current versions of the LCR and NSFR do not address financial stability risks associated with so-called matched books of securities financing transactions. Federal Reserve staff are actively considering additional measures that could address these and other residual risks in the short-term wholesale funding markets. Some of these measures--such as requiring firms to hold larger amounts of capital, stable funding, or highly liquid assets based on use of short-term wholesale funding--would likely apply only to the largest, most complex banking organizations. Other measures--such as minimum margin requirements for repurchase agreements and other securities financing transactions--could, at least in principle, apply on a marketwide basis. In designing such measures, we are carefully thinking through questions about the tradeoffs associated with tighter liquidity regulation that will be discussed at this conference. While these cost-benefit questions are difficult to answer with either certainty or precision, let me highlight one data point that suggests that there may be net social gains from introducing further reforms to address short-term wholesale funding risks. In 2010, the Basel Committee assessed the long-term economic impact of stronger capital and liquidity requirements for global banks. Factoring in the Basel III capital requirements and the NSFR, the Basel study suggested that tightening risk-based capital and liquidity requirements would, on net, provide economic benefits, and that benefits would continue to accrue at even higher levels of risk-based capital than are part of Basel III. While it would be a mistake to give undue weight to any one study, this study provides some support for the view that there might be room for stronger capital and liquidity standards for large banks than have been adopted so far. As the Board continues to weigh such steps to further strengthen the financial system, I expect that conferences like the FMC will continue to be a vital part of the process, providing the ideas, analysis, and debate that will help us make the best possible judgments. Thank you for listening and for this opportunity to be a part of this important conference.