Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency on Wednesday adopted a final rule modifying the definition of the denominator of the supplementary leverage ratio in a manner consistent with recent changes agreed to by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The revisions to the supplementary leverage ratio apply to all banking organizations subject to the advanced approaches risk-based capital rule. The changes strengthen the ratio by more appropriately capturing a banking organization's on- and off-balance sheet exposures, and based on estimates, would increase the aggregate measure of exposure across firms. The final rule modifies the methodology for including off-balance sheet items, including credit derivatives, repo-style transactions, and lines of credit, in the denominator of the supplementary leverage ratio. The final rule also requires institutions to calculate total leverage exposure using daily averages for on-balance sheet items and the average of three month-end calculations for off-balance sheet items. Certain public disclosures required by the final rule must be made starting in the first quarter of 2015 and the minimum supplementary leverage ratio requirement using the final rule's denominator calculations is effective January 1, 2018. This rule finalizes the joint notice of proposed rulemaking released on April 8, 2014, with certain revisions and clarifications based on comments received on the proposed rule. Board Votes Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Federal Reserve Board of GovernorsConsumer Financial Protection Bureau The Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) today announced increases in the dollar thresholds in Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) for exempt consumer credit and lease transactions. These increases are consistent with the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) amendments to the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to adjust these thresholds annually by the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers. Transactions at or below the thresholds are subject to the protections of the regulations. The adjustments to the thresholds reflect the annual percentage increase in the consumer price index as of June 1, 2014 and will take effect on January 1, 2015. Based on the adjustments announced today, the protections of the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act generally will apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases of $54,600 or less in 2015--an increase of $1,100 from 2014. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property (such as mortgages) are subject to the Truth in Lending Act regardless of the amount of the loan. Although the Dodd-Frank Act generally transferred rulemaking authority under the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to the CFPB, the Federal Reserve Board retains authority to issue rules for certain motor vehicle dealers. Therefore, the agencies are issuing these adjustments jointly. The attached notices will be published shortly in the Federal Register. Federal RegisternoticesConsumer Leasing (Regulation M):HTML|PDFTruth in Lending (Regulation Z):HTML|PDF Board Votes
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today requested comment on proposed revisions to the "Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment." The Questions and Answers provide additional guidance to financial institutions and the public on the agencies' regulations that implement the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). The proposed new and revised guidance addresses questions raised by bankers, community organizations, and others regarding the agencies' CRA regulations. The proposed new and revised questions and answers: TheFederal Registernotice is attached. Comments will be due 60 days after publication. For more information on the CRA, the agencies' CRA regulations, and the agencies' Questions and Answers, please visit the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council website atwww.ffiec.gov. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Comments on this proposal:Submit|View
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Housing Finance AgencyOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Five federal agencies are seeking comment on a proposed rule to establish margin requirements for swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers, and major security-based swap participants as required by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). The rule is proposed by the Federal Reserve Board, the Farm Credit Administration, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The proposed rule would establish minimum requirements for the exchange of initial and variation margin between covered swap entities and their counterparties to non-cleared swaps and non-cleared security-based swaps. The margin requirements mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act are intended to address a number of weaknesses in the regulation and structure of the swap markets that were revealed during the recent financial crisis. The requirements are intended to reduce risk, increase transparency, and promote market integrity. This proposal builds on one originally released by the agencies in April 2011 and includes some modifications that were made in light of comments, such as an expansion of the types of collateral eligible to be posted as initial margin. This proposal also seeks to promote global consistency by generally following the final framework for margin requirements on non-cleared derivatives that the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the International Organization of Securities Commissions adopted in September 2013. The proposed margin requirements would apply to non-cleared swaps and non-cleared security-based swaps entered into after the proposed rule's applicable compliance dates. The amount of margin that would be required under the proposed rule would vary based on the relative risk of the counterparty and of the non-cleared swap or non-cleared security-based swap. In particular, the proposed rule does not require a covered swap entity to collect specific or minimum amounts of initial margin or variation margin from nonfinancial end users, but rather leaves that decision to the covered swap entity, consistent with its overall credit risk management. The agencies believe this rule maintains the status quo for nonfinancial end users and is consistent with the requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act. Staff of the five agencies consulted with staff of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission in developing the proposed rule as required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The agencies request comments on the proposed rule no later than 60 days after the date of its publication in theFederal Register. Statement by Chair Janet L. Yellen Federal RegisterNotice: Margin and Capital Requirements for Covered Swap EntitiesHTML|PDF Submit comment|View comments Board Votes Meeting Memoranda Open Board Meeting on September 3, 2014
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency finalized a rule on Wednesday to strengthen the liquidity positions of large financial institutions. The rule will for the first time create a standardized minimum liquidity requirement for large and internationally active banking organizations. Each institution will be required to hold high quality, liquid assets (HQLA) such as central bank reserves and government and corporate debt that can be converted easily and quickly into cash in an amount equal to or greater than its projected cash outflows minus its projected cash inflows during a 30-day stress period. The ratio of the firm's liquid assets to its projected net cash outflow is its "liquidity coverage ratio," or LCR. The LCR will apply to all banking organizations with $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets or $10 billion or more in on-balance sheet foreign exposure and to these banking organizations' subsidiary depository institutions that have assets of $10 billion or more. The rule also will apply a less stringent, modified LCR to bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies that do not meet these thresholds, but have $50 billion or more in total assets. Bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies with substantial insurance or commercial operations are not covered by the final rule. The final rule is largely identical to the proposed rule, with a few key adjustments in response to comments from the public. Those adjustments include changes to the range of corporate debt and equity securities included in HQLA, a phasing-in of daily calculation requirements, a revised approach to address maturity mismatch during a 30-day period, and changes in the stress period, calculation frequency, and implementation timeline for the bank holding companies and savings and loan companies subject to the modified LCR. The final rule does not apply to non-bank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for enhanced supervision. Instead, the Federal Reserve Board plans to apply enhanced prudential liquidity standards to these institutions through a subsequently issued order or rule following an evaluation of the business model, capital structure, and risk profile of each designated nonbank financial company. The final rule approved by the federal agencies is based on a liquidity standard agreed to by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The LCR will establish an enhanced prudential liquidity standard consistent with section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The rule is generally consistent with the Basel Committee's LCR standard, but is more stringent in certain areas, including a shorter transition period for implementation. The accelerated transition period reflects a desire to maintain the improved liquidity positions that U.S. institutions have established since the financial crisis, in part as a result of supervisory oversight by U.S. bank regulators. U.S. firms will be required to be fully compliant with the rule by January 1, 2017. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Meeting Memoranda Open Board Meeting on September 3, 2014 Board Votes
As part of the continuing program of operational testing of its policy tools, the Federal Reserve plans to conduct a series of eight consecutive seven-day term deposit operations through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF) beginning in October. Term deposits in this series will incorporate an early withdrawal feature that will allow depository institutions to obtain a return of funds prior to the maturity date subject to an early withdrawal penalty. Technical details regarding the early withdrawal feature are available atwww.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html. The Federal Reserve currently anticipates that over the first four operations, the maximum award amount will be increased gradually to an amount not to exceed $20 billion; the interest rate paid on these initial four operations will be maintained at 26 basis points. Over the subsequent four operations, the Federal Reserve expects to increase the interest rate paid in small steps to a level not to exceed 30 basis points. These operations are designed to ensure the operational readiness of the TDF and to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit procedures. Details for each of the weekly operations, including the maximum award amount, rate offered, early withdrawal penalty, and other terms, will be announced nearer to the time of each operation on the Board’s website. The development of the TDF and the ongoing TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents for the September 16-17 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the September 16-17 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application filed by Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, to establish a branch at the intersection of West Lake Houston Parkway and Magnolia Cove in Kingwood, Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the applications under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by ANB Bank, Denver, Colorado, to merge with Capital West Bank, Laramie, Wyoming, and to establish branches at the locations of Capital West Bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it will begin a quantitative impact study (QIS) to evaluate the potential effects of its revised regulatory capital framework on savings and loan holding companies and nonbank financial companies supervised by the Board that are substantially engaged in insurance underwriting activity (insurance holding companies). In July 2013, the Board finalized its revised regulatory capital framework to implement the Basel III capital rules for bank holding companies, certain savings and loan holding companies, and state member banks. Savings and loan holding companies substantially engaged in insurance underwriting activity were excluded from the framework to provide the Board more time to appropriately tailor the capital rules for those firms. The Board has sought to determine the appropriate regulatory capital framework, consistent with safety and soundness principles, as well as section 171 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, commonly known as the Collins Amendment. The Collins Amendment, in part, requires the establishment of minimum risk-based and leverage requirements for firms regulated by the Board that are not less than the generally applicable risk-based capital and leverage requirements that apply to insured depository institutions. The QIS is being conducted to allow the Board to better understand how to design a capital framework for insurance holding companies it supervises that is compliant with the Collins Amendment. Information collected through the QIS would allow for further exploration of areas of concern raised by commenters during the proposal stage of the revised regulatory capital framework rulemaking. The Federal Reserve has contacted the insurance holding companies it supervises requesting their participation in the QIS and asking for the information submission by December 31, 2014. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Guaranty Development Company, Livingston, Montana, and American Bank, Bozeman, MontanaWritten Agreement issued August 3, 2010Terminated September 2, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: West Pointe Bancshares, Inc., Oshkosh, WisconsinWritten Agreement issued July 15, 2011Terminated September 23, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Ridgestone Financial Services, Inc., Brookfield, WisconsinWritten Agreement issued November 29, 2010Terminated August 27, 2014 Robertson Holding Company, L.P., Unified Shares, LLC, Commercial Bancgroup, Inc., Commercial Bank, all of Harrogate, TennesseeWritten Agreement issued June 8, 2012Terminated August 26, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesdayannounced its approval of the notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Chemical Financial Corporation ("Chemical"), Midland, Michigan, to acquire Northwestern Bancorp, Inc., and its wholly owned subsidiary, Northwestern Bank, a state savings bank that has elected to be treated as a savings association for purposes of section 10(l) of the Home Owners' Loan Act, both of Traverse City, Michigan. The Board also approved the applications under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Chemical's subsidiary bank, Chemical Bank, also of Midland, to merge with Northwestern Bank and to establish and operate 25 branches at the locations of Northwestern Bank's main office and branches. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Fulton Financial Corporation, Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and Lafayette Ambassador Bank (PDF), Bethlehem, PennsylvaniaCease and Desist Order dated September 4, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Santander Holdings USA, Inc. (PDF), Boston, MassachusettsWritten Agreement dated September 15, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Portage Community Bank (PDF), Ravenna, OhioOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated September 9, 2014 Settlers Bank (PDF), Marietta, OhioOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated September 9, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday published a report containing summary information on the volume and value, interchange fee revenue, certain issuer costs, and fraud losses related to debit card transactions in 2013. The report is the third in a series to be published every two years pursuant to section 920 of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA). The Board's Regulation II (Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing), which implements this provision of the EFTA, provides that a debit card issuer subject to the interchange fee standard (a covered issuer) may not receive an interchange fee that exceeds 21 cents plus 5 basis points multiplied by the value of the transaction, plus a 1-cent fraud-prevention adjustment, if eligible. The interchange fee standard does not apply to debit card issuers with consolidated assets of less than $10 billion, certain government-administered debit cards, and certain prepaid cards. The interchange fee standard became effective on October 1, 2011. As in prior years, covered issuers' costs of authorizing, clearing, and settling (ACS) debit card transactions, excluding issuer fraud losses, varied greatly across respondents in 2013, with the median issuer having an average ACS cost of 14.9 cents and the issuer at the 75th percentile having an average ACS cost of 42.2 cents. Issuers with the highest debit card transaction volume generally had the lowest ACS costs per transaction as reflected in an overall average of 4.4 cents per transaction, down from 5 cents per transaction in 2011. Conversely, issuers with the smallest debit card programs generally had the highest ACS costs per transaction. The Board estimated debit-card fraud losses to all parties (merchants, cardholders, and issuers) to be $1.57 billion in 2013, with an average loss of approximately 8 basis points as a share of transaction value, up slightly from 2011. The median covered issuer's average fraud loss as a share of transaction value was 5 basis points, up slightly from 4.7 basis points in 2011. The median covered issuer had average fraud prevention and data security costs of slightly more than 1.4 cents per transaction. The Board does not plan to propose revisions to the Regulation II interchange fee standard or the fraud-prevention adjustment based on these survey data. Sixty-four percent of covered issuers had average ACS costs, including issuer fraud losses, below 21 cents plus 5 basis points of the value of a transaction (the base component of the interchange fee standard) in 2013. This proportion is slightly lower than the 66 percent of covered issuers with average ACS costs below the maximum interchange fee in 2011. Covered issuers with average ACS costs below the maximum interchange fee in 2013 processed over 99 percent of all reported covered transactions, the same proportion as in 2011. The median issuer fraud loss, which serves as the basis for the ad valorem portion of the interchange fee standard, is essentially unchanged from 2011 (5 basis points). Further, when rounded to the nearest cent, the median fraud-prevention and data security costs remained at 1 cent per transaction (the current fraud-prevention adjustment). Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
Policy Normalization Principles and Plans During its recent meetings, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) discussed ways to normalize the stance of monetary policy and the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. The discussions were part of prudent planning and do not imply that normalization will necessarily begin soon. The Committee continues to judge that many of the normalization principles that it adopted in June 2011 remain applicable. However, in light of the changes in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio since 2011 and enhancements in the tools the Committee will have available to implement policy during normalization, the Committee has concluded that some aspects of the eventual normalization process will likely differ from those specified earlier. The Committee also has agreed that it is appropriate at this time to provide additional information regarding its normalization plans. All FOMC participants but one agreed on the following key elements of the approach they intend to implement when it becomes appropriate to begin normalizing the stance of monetary policy:
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in July suggests that economic activity is expanding at a moderate pace. On balance, labor market conditions improved somewhat further; however, the unemployment rate is little changed and a range of labor market indicators suggests that there remains significant underutilization of labor resources. Household spending appears to be rising moderately and business fixed investment is advancing, while the recovery in the housing sector remains slow. Fiscal policy is restraining economic growth, although the extent of restraint is diminishing. Inflation has been running below the Committee's longer-run objective. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators and inflation moving toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced and judges that the likelihood of inflation running persistently below 2 percent has diminished somewhat since early this year. The Committee currently judges that there is sufficient underlying strength in the broader economy to support ongoing improvement in labor market conditions. In light of the cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions since the inception of the current asset purchase program, the Committee decided to make a further measured reduction in the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in October, the Committee will add to its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $5 billion per month rather than $10 billion per month, and will add to its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $10 billion per month rather than $15 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee's sizable and still-increasing holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger economic recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with the Committee's dual mandate. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, the Committee will end its current program of asset purchases at its next meeting. However, asset purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee's decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the Committee's outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The Committee continues to anticipate, based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Stanley Fischer; Narayana Kocherlakota; Loretta J. Mester; Jerome H. Powell; and Daniel K. Tarullo. Voting against the action were Richard W. Fisher and Charles I. Plosser. President Fisher believed that the continued strengthening of the real economy, improved outlook for labor utilization and for general price stability, and continued signs of financial market excess, will likely warrant an earlier reduction in monetary accommodation than is suggested by the Committee's stated forward guidance. President Plosser objected to the guidance indicating that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for "a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends," because such language is time dependent and does not reflect the considerable economic progress that has been made toward the Committee's goals. Statement Regarding Purchases of Treasury Securities and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities
Maryann Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. IntroductionChairman Johnson, Ranking Member Crapo, and other members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's approach to regulating and supervising small community banks and their holding companies. Having started my career as a community bank examiner at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and eventually becoming the officer in charge of bank supervision at the Reserve Bank, I have experienced firsthand how important community banks are to their communities and how critical it is that the Federal Reserve supervises these institutions effectively and efficiently. In my testimony, I will discuss some of the ways the Federal Reserve ensures that regulations, policies, and supervisory activities are tailored to address the risks and activities of community banks without imposing undue burden. The Federal Reserve recognizes the important role that community banks play in providing financial services to their local economies and seeks to supervise these banks in a way that fosters their safe and sound operation without constraining their capacity to support the financial needs of their communities. Current State of Community Banking OrganizationsThe Federal Reserve supervises approximately 800 state-chartered community banks, the large majority of which are small community banks with total assets of $1 billion or less, that are members of the Federal Reserve System (referred to as state member banks).1In addition, the Federal Reserve supervises over 4,000 bank holding companies and more than 300 savings and loan holding companies, most of which operate small community banks and thrifts. During the recent financial crisis, most community banks remained in sound condition. But a large number faced challenges as economic conditions weakened, particularly those that had developed large commercial real estate loan concentrations and funded their activities with nontraditional funding sources. In recent years, many of these banks have recovered, and by the second quarter of 2014 the number of banks on the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's "Problem List" had fallen to 354, far fewer than the peak of 888 reported at the end of the first quarter of 2011.2Despite this decline, the current number of problem banks is still roughly seven times the number of problem banks at the end of 2006, before the crisis began in 2007-08.3 However, capital levels and asset quality at small community banks have improved since the financial crisis.4At year-end 2013, the aggregate tier 1 risk-based capital ratio for community banks was 15.3 percent, up from a low of 12.7 percent at year-end 2008, and the aggregate leverage ratio was 10.4 percent, up from a low of 9.4 percent at year-end 2009. Noncurrent loans and net charge-offs have decreased over the past four years. After several years of declining loan balances at small community banks, we are starting to see a slow increase in loan origination. In addition, earnings have improved in the past couple of years, largely from reductions in provision expenses for loan losses. Yet, despite these promising financial indicators, small community banks continue to experience considerable pressure from low net interest margins, and many report concerns about their prospects for continued growth and profitability. Supervision of Community Banking OrganizationsThe Federal Reserve strives to scale its supervisory expectations based on the size, risk profile, condition, and complexity of a banking organization and its activities and recognizes that a one-size-fits-all approach to community banks is often not appropriate. For example, the Federal Reserve has employed a risk-focused approach to supervision of community banks since the mid-1990s.5In the intervening years, we have adjusted this approach to better calibrate the work conducted relative to the complexity and risk of each bank. If a bank is engaging in nontraditional or higher-risk activities, our supervision program typically requires greater scrutiny and a higher level of review of specific transactions. Conversely, if a bank's activities are lower risk, we adjust our expectations for examiners to a lower level of review. In this way, we alleviate examination burden on community banks with histories of sound performance and modest risk profiles. Last year, we began a process to enhance the ongoing updating of our examination procedures to reflect key lessons of the crisis. Overall, these adjustments should enhance our supervisory efficiency by targeting more intensive examination work at bank activities that proved to be higher risk and reducing some examination testing at community banks that performed well throughout the crisis. The Federal Reserve adopted a new consumer compliance examination framework for community banks in January 2014.6While we have traditionally applied a risk-focused approach to consumer compliance examinations, the new program more explicitly bases examination intensity on the individual community bank's risk profile, weighed against the effectiveness of the bank's compliance controls. As a result, we expect that examiners will spend less time on low-risk compliance issues at community banks, increasing the efficiency of our supervision and reducing regulatory burden on many community banks. In addition, we revised our consumer compliance examination frequency policy to lengthen the time frame between on-site consumer compliance and Community Reinvestment Act examinations for many community banks with less than $1 billion in total consolidated assets. In addition to our efforts to refine our risk-focused approach to supervision, we have been increasing the level of off-site supervisory activities, which can tangibly reduce burden on community banking organizations. For example, last year we conducted a pilot program under which we conducted some aspects of the loan review process off-site, relying on the bank's electronic records to evaluate loan quality and underwriting practices. Overall, community bankers that were part of the pilot were very supportive of this approach, which reduced the amount of time examiners needed to spend on-site at bank offices. As a result, we plan to continue using this approach in future examinations at banks that maintain electronic loan records. While off-site loan review has benefits for both bankers and examiners, some bankers have expressed concerns that increasing off-site supervisory activities could potentially reduce the ability of banks to have face-to-face discussions with examiners regarding asset quality or risk-management issues. In that regard, we will continue to work with community banks that may prefer their loan reviews to be conducted on-site. In short, the Federal Reserve is trying to strike an appropriate balance of off-site and on-site supervisory activities to ensure that resources are used more efficiently while maintaining high-quality supervision of community banking organizations. The Federal Reserve has invested significant resources in developing various technological tools for examiners to improve the efficiency of both off-site and on-site supervisory activities. The expanded use of technological tools has assisted in completing community bank examination work off-site while ensuring the quality of supervision is not compromised. For instance, the Federal Reserve has automated various parts of the community bank examination process, including a set of tools used among all Reserve Banks to assist in the pre-examination planning and scoping. This automation can save examiners and bank management time, as a bank can submit requested pre-examination information electronically rather than mailing paper copies to the Federal Reserve Bank. These tools also assist Federal Reserve Bank examiners in the continuous, off-site monitoring of community banking organizations, enabling examiners to determine whether a particular community banking organization's financial condition has deteriorated and warrants supervisory attention between on-site examinations. Tailoring Regulations for Community Banking OrganizationsAs Governor Tarullo testified before this committee last week, we recognize that the burden community banks encounter when attempting to understand and implement a new regulation may be disproportionate to the level of risk to which these institutions are exposed.7To address this, we work within the constraints of the relevant statutory mandate to draft rules so as not to subject community banks to requirements that would be unnecessary or unduly burdensome to implement. When a proposed rule is issued to the public for comment, we gather critical information regarding the benefits and costs of the proposal from those we expect to be affected by the rule as well as from the general public. These feedback channels have been instrumental to our efforts to appropriately scale rules and policies to the activities and risks at community banks. For example, in developing the final capital guidelines that were issued in July 2013, the federal banking agencies included in their final rules several changes from the proposed rules to respond to comments and reduce the regulatory burden on community banks.8As a result, many of the requirements will not apply to community banks. In addition, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies developed a streamlined supplementalCommunity Bank Guideto assist noncomplex community banks and holding companies in understanding the possible impact of the new rules on their operations.9 Many recently established rules have been applied only to the largest, most complex banking organizations. For example, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have not applied large-bank stress testing requirements to community banks. The Federal Reserve has continued, through public statements and examiner training, to explain clearly the requirements, expectations, and activities relating to Dodd-Frank Act stress testing (DFAST) and the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) exercise and to reinforce that DFAST and CCAR requirements, expectations, and activitiesdo notapply--either explicitly or implicitly--to community banking organizations.10 Clarifying Expectations for Community BanksThe Federal Reserve has made a concerted effort to explain to both community bankers and Federal Reserve examiners which entities are subject to new rules and policies. In addition to tailoring regulations, as discussed previously, one significant way we clarify the applicability of guidance to community banks is to provide a statement at the top of each Supervision and Regulation letter and Consumer Affairs letter. These letters are the primary means by which the Federal Reserve issues supervisory and consumer compliance guidance to bankers and examiners. This additional clarity allows community bankers to focus efforts on the supervisory policies that are applicable to their banks. Moreover, it is important to note that we work closely with our colleagues at the state banking agencies and the other federal regulatory agencies to ensure that our supervisory approaches and methodologies are consistently applied to all community banks. While it is important that our written guidance and regulations clearly convey supervisory expectations and identify the applicable audience, we know that some of the most important communications are not necessarily those that come out of Washington, D.C., but rather the formal and informal conversations that take place between examiners and bankers during on-site examinations. These conversations are fundamental in ensuring that the Federal Reserve's policies are communicated to and correctly interpreted by community bankers. These discussions provide for clear communication of issues identified during the examination process, and community bankers also tell us that they appreciate learning from examiners about where they stand relative to comparable banks. There is a risk that these conversations, however, may inadvertently suggest that practices at larger banks should be adopted by community banks, when that is not actually the Federal Reserve's intent. To ensure that supervisory expectations are communicated appropriately, therefore, the Federal Reserve is making its longstanding program for training examiners more robust. For example, we are currently modernizing our longstanding examiner commissioning program for community bank examiners, and a key part of this effort is reviewing the curriculum to ensure that supervisory expectations for larger banks do not make their way into the curriculum. In addition, when new supervisory policies are issued, we typically arrange a teleconference to explain the new policy to examiners, including whether and to what extent the policy is applicable to community banks. By effectively training our examination staff, and providing channels for keeping them informed of newly issued policies in a timely manner, examiners are better equipped to understand the supervisory goals of regulations and guidance for community banks and to provide guidance to community banks. To help ensure that examiners implement supervisory policies consistently across community banks, Federal Reserve Board staff analysts monitor bank supervision activities and sample recently completed examination reports to assess whether policies are implemented appropriately and whether examiner conclusions are adequately supported. These analysts also conduct periodic reviews of specific examination activities carried out by Reserve Bank examiners to assess their implementation of supervisory policies and standards at community banks. Periodically, we become aware of particular concerns being raised by the industry with regard to community banks being held to inappropriate standards. We take these concerns seriously and focus our reviews of examination activities to confirm that examiners are appropriately implementing supervisory policies and reaffirming policy objectives when necessary. In addition to the examination process, the Federal Reserve Board has established additional mechanisms to ensure that supervisory policies for community banks are appropriately tailored and to provide other avenues of discussion for community bankers to share their perspectives with the Board and senior Reserve Bank officials. For example, the Federal Reserve established a Community Depository Institution Advisory Council (CDIAC) at each of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks and at the Board.11Members are selected from representatives of banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions in each Federal Reserve District, with a representative from each of these 12 local CDIACs serving on a national council that meets with the Federal Reserve Board twice each year. These meetings provide the Federal Reserve Board with valuable insight regarding the concerns of community depository institutions, which often include issues relating to regulatory burden and examination practices. The Board of Governors also has a community and regional bank subcommittee of its Committee on Bank Supervision.12This subcommittee reviews policy proposals to ensure they are appropriately tailored for community banks. The subcommittee also meets with Federal Reserve staff to hear about key supervisory initiatives at community banks and ongoing research in the community banking arena. On this latter point, one of the great strengths of the Federal Reserve as the central bank of the United States is its role in conducting and fostering economic research. With this in mind, the Board's community bank subcommittee has been encouraging more research about community banking issues to better understand the role of community banks in the U.S. economy and the effects that regulatory initiatives may have on these banks. That initiative to encourage more high-quality research on community banking issues ultimately led to an inaugural community banking research and policy conference, "Community Banking in the 21st Century," jointly hosted by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) in 2013 at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.13Later this month, the Federal Reserve and the CSBS will host a second community banking research conference, again at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.14Among other topics, the conference will cover community bank formation, behavior, and performance; the effect of government policy on bank lending and risk taking; the effect of government policy on community bank viability; and the future of community banking. We have also developed several platforms to improve our communication with community bankers and to enhance our industry training efforts. For example, we have developed two programs--Ask the Fed and Outlook Live--that have become quite popular with community bankers who are interested in learning more about topics of importance to both banks and supervisors. Ask the Fed is a program for officials of state member banks, bank and savings and loan holding companies, and state bank regulators that provides an excellent opportunity for bankers and others to ask Board and Reserve Bank staff policy questions outside of an examination context, primarily on safety-and-soundness and related issues. Outlook Live, which is a companion program to the Federal Reserve's quarterlyConsumer Compliance Outlookpublication, is a webinar series on consumer compliance issues that is led by Federal Reserve staff.15 We are also now using periodic newsletters and other communication tools to highlight information in which community bankers may be interested and to provide information about how examiners will assess compliance with Federal Reserve policies. In addition toConsumer Compliance Outlook, in 2012 the Federal Reserve System established the Community Banking Connections website and quarterly newsletter to focus on supervisory issues that are of practical interest to community bankers and bank board members.16The Federal Reserve also launched a series of special-purpose publications called FedLinks.17These publications highlight key elements of specific supervisory topics and discuss how examiners will typically review a particular bank activity and the related risk-management practices. The common goal for all of these outreach efforts is to build and sustain an ongoing dialogue with community bankers through which supervisory expectations are helpfully conveyed and clarified. Reducing Regulatory Burden for Community BanksThe Federal Reserve continues to explore ways to reduce regulatory burden for community banks. In analyzing regulatory burden on community banks and other institutions, the Federal Reserve tries to strike the appropriate balance between, on the one hand, achieving its longstanding responsibilities of fostering a safe and sound financial system and compliance with relevant consumer regulations and, on the other hand, ensuring that our supervision and regulation are calibrated appropriately for smaller institutions. Whenever the Federal Reserve contemplates possible regulatory changes, we conduct a thorough analysis of the effects of such changes on the ability of institutions to manage their operations in a safe and sound manner as well as the ability of Federal Reserve examiners to identify risks that may pose a threat to individual institutions or to the financial system more broadly. An example of the how the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies consider a variety of factors when reviewing regulations for burden is the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA) review. The agencies have recently started their second EGRPRA review by requesting public comment to identify potentially outdated, unnecessary, and burdensome regulations imposed on insured depository institutions. The comment period for the EGRPRA review for the first set of regulations ended early in September. The Federal Reserve and the other agencies plan to engage in discussions with bankers and interested parties regarding the EGRPRA review and will post relevant information from these meetings on the EGRPRA website once finalized.18 ConclusionAlthough the financial condition of community banks has been improving, we recognize that many community banks continue to face challenges. The Federal Reserve has a long history of tailoring supervisory practices for community banks, and we will continue to modify and refine our supervisory programs to not impose undue burden while still ensuring that community banks operate in a safe and sound manner. We will continue to solicit the views of smaller institutions in Federal Reserve and interagency rulemaking processes and welcome their feedback on community banking issues more generally. Thank you for inviting me to share the Federal Reserve's views on these matters affecting community banking organizations. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have. 1.For supervisory purposes, the Federal Reserve uses the term "community banking organization" to describe a state member bank and/or holding company with $10 billion or less in total consolidated assets.Return to text 2.See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Quarterly Banking Profile, Second Quarter 2014, available atwww2.fdic.gov/qbp/2014jun/qbp.pdf.Return to text 3.See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Quarterly Banking Profile, Fourth Quarter 2006, available atwww2.fdic.gov/qbp/2006dec/qbp.pdf.Return to text 4.Figures are based on quarterly Call Report data filed by commercial banks and savings associations. Seewww.ffiec.gov/ffiec_report_forms.htm.Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (1997), "Risk-Focused Framework for the Supervision of Community Banks," Supervision and Regulations Letter SR 97-25 (October 1). In addition, the Board of Governors first approved a risk-focused consumer compliance supervision program on September 18, 1997.Return to text 6.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs (2013), "Community Bank Risk-Focused Consumer Compliance Supervision Program," Consumer Affairs Letter CA 13-19 (November 18); and "Consumer Compliance and Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Examination Frequency Policy," Consumer Affairs Letter CA 13-20 (November 18).Return to text 7.Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Dodd-Frank Implementation," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, September 9.Return to text 8.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Federal Reserve Board Approves Final Rule to Help Ensure Banks Maintain Strong Capital Positions," press release, July 2.Return to text 9.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) (2013),New Capital Rule: Community Bank Guide (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, FDIC, and OCC, July).Return to text 10.For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, and OCC (2012), "Statement to Clarify Supervisory Expectations for Stress Testing by Community Banks (PDF)," May 14.Return to text 11.For more information on the CDIAC, seewww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htm.Return to text 12.For more information on the Board's committees, including membership, seehttp://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm.Return to text 13.Abstracts of research papers discussed at the 2013 conference are available atwww.stlouisfed.org/banking/community-banking-conference/abstracts.cfm.Return to text 14.For more information on the 2014 conference, seewww.stlouisfed.org/banking/community-banking-conference-2014/.Return to text 15.Consumer Compliance Outlookis available atwww.philadelphiafed.org/bank-resources/publications/consumer-compliance-outlook/, and Outlook Live is available atwww.philadelphiafed.org/bank-resources/publications/consumer-compliance-outlook/outlook-live/.Return to text 16.Community Banking Connections is available atwww.communitybankingconnections.org/.Return to text 17.FedLinksis available athttp://www.cbcfrs.org/fedlinks.cfm.Return to text 18.For more information on EGRPRA and the regulatory review process, seehttp://egrpra.ffiec.gov/index.html.Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Federal Reserve/Conference of State Bank Supervisors Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, Missouri It is a pleasure for me to join Jim Bullard and John Ryan in welcoming all of you to the second annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors. I had the privilege of addressing the inaugural community banking conference held here last year, and as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board's Subcommittee on Smaller Regional and Community Banking, I am delighted to return to this venue to participate in this year's event.1 As all of you surely know, community banks play a vital role in America's financial system, providing essential services to households, small businesses, and small farms in communities throughout the country. Community banks differ from their larger cousins, not just in size, but in the fundamental focus of their business. Community bankers' primary objective is to serve the members of their local communities, who are not only their customers but also their neighbors and friends. They have strong links to the people and businesses that reside in their communities, as well as direct knowledge of local economic conditions. These close ties give community bankers a clear advantage in understanding local needs and tailoring their products and services to meet those needs. I will confess that I have never worked at a community bank; however, I have been a community bank customer, and in that role I have had personal experience interacting with bankers whose mission is to provide high quality of service to every customer who walks in the door. Despite the advantages that I just mentioned, life is not always easy for community bankers. The number of community banks in the United States has declined sharply over the past three decades, due to a combination of failures and acquisitions.2And many remaining community banks have struggled to survive, especially during the last five or six years. Although improving overall economic conditions have begun to provide some relief to these struggling banks, they continue to face significant challenges. The burden of regulatory compliance can be particularly daunting for small banks. And competition, from large banks and credit unions as well as other nonbank financial service providers, is always a concern. My colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board and I are committed to making sure that we understand the challenges faced by community banks. One way that we further our understanding is by talking to the bankers themselves. The entire Board of Governors meets twice a year with the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, which includes representatives of community banks, thrifts, and credit unions in each of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts.3Individual governors also take advantage of opportunities to meet with community bankers from time to time. During last year's conference I met with a group of St. Louis area community bankers to hear what was on their minds. I will conduct a nationwide webinar with community bankers next month. In fact, I speak regularly to a number of bank executives, including those who run smaller institutions. I find these types of conversations--with people who live and work in the world outside the Capital Beltway and far from Wall Street--to be particularly enlightening. And, of course, this conference, which was conceived as the result of a successful collaboration between the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, provides an annual opportunity for community bankers, bank regulators, and academic researchers to come together to share ideas and insights surrounding the issues that matter most to community bankers. This year's program includes presentations by the authors of a number of excellent academic research papers, the unveiling of the results of a new survey of community banks conducted on behalf of the conference organizers, reactions by community bankers to the research and survey findings, and several compelling speeches. The primary focus of today's agenda is research. The response to the conference's call for papers was quite impressive, and the conference research committee faced the challenging task of selecting the most relevant, interesting, and high-quality papers to be included in the program. The authors of these papers include academics and policymakers, with backgrounds in law, economics, and finance. The topics covered clearly demonstrate a desire, on the part of the researchers, to promote a deeper understanding of what makes community banks tick and of how a wide range of government policies affects the activities, profitability, and viability of community banks. The first session considers factors underlying community bank formation, behavior, and performance. The first paper looks at characteristics of newly chartered banks--where they form, and how they fare over time. The second paper also focuses on newly chartered banks, considering possible explanations for the near absence of new bank charters over the past few years. Those of us at the Fed pay a great deal of attention to this type of bank formation, because it is the primary source of new competition in the markets in which community banks compete. The third paper in this session looks at how rivalry among banks affects their decisions to adopt new technology, and the fourth seeks to explain the persistence of low net-interest income among community banks in recent years. The second session addresses the effects, both intended and unintended, of specific government policies on community bank behavior. One paper looks at how the 2006 commercial real estate guidance for banks affected loan growth.4Another paper examines the effect of the creation of the Small Business Lending Fund on community bank lending to small businesses. The third paper in this session focuses on what happens when banks perceive that examiners have given them inappropriately negative evaluations. The underlying theme of the third research session is how broad government policies affect community bank profitability and viability. The first paper provides an overview of the effects of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act on community banks. The second paper considers whether a provision of the JOBS Act that modified the threshold for Exchange Act reporting for unlisted banks and bank holding companies helped or hurt small banks. The third paper contrasts the thousands of small community banks operating in the United States with the handful of very large financial institutions and proposes a new approach to regulation that recognizes the very different business models of these two types of institutions. The fourth and final paper takes a high-level look at the effects of regulatory policy on the structure of the U.S. banking system and the viability of community banks. On day two of the conference, you will learn about the results of a recently conducted survey that was completed by more than 1,000 community bankers from across the country, as well as the feedback obtained from more than 1,300 bankers participating in town hall meetings hosted by state bank commissioners in 30 states. The presentation of these findings will be followed by a panel discussion by a select group of community banking experts. I hope I have succeeded in whetting your appetite for the sessions that lie ahead, and I encourage you to make the most of this unique opportunity to interact with bankers, regulators, and researchers who share a common interest in the future of community banking. 1.For more information on the Board's committees, including membership, seehttp://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm.Return to text 2.Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2012), "FDIC Community Banking Study (PDF)," December.Return to text 3.For more information on the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, seewww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htm.Return to text 4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2006), "Federal Banking Agencies Issue Final Guidance on Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate Lending," press release, December 6.Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York Thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak this evening. I would like to discuss ongoing efforts to reform the current structure and uses of the London Interbank Offered Rate, commonly referred to as LIBOR. These reforms affect not only the financial industry, but also a large number of U.S. households and corporations. LIBOR is a reference rate. When two parties enter a financial contract in which interest payments are to be exchanged, they frequently choose to base those payments on LIBOR. LIBOR is currently referenced in roughly $300 trillion worth of contracts globally, which means that it is part of the global financial system's critical infrastructure.1But LIBOR's credibility was badly undermined by the scandal that erupted when some of the banks that help produce the rate attempted to manipulate it by contributing inaccurate estimates of their borrowing costs. These illegal actions helped damage the public's trust not just in LIBOR, but also in financial markets and institutions more broadly. In response, a number of global efforts to reform reference rates have been undertaken. LIBOR is produced and administered in London. As a result of the steps taken by the government of the United Kingdom, LIBOR is now regulated and supervised by the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). The International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) developed a broad set of 19 principles that reference rates and other financial benchmarks are now expected to meet.2Building on this work, in July, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) released a report outlining a number of further reform proposals.3Continuing the work of my former Fed colleague Jeremy Stein, I recently took over as co-chair--along with Martin Wheatley, chief executive officer of the FCA--of the international group that drafted the report and is now charged with implementing its recommendations.4Today I will discuss the reasons why further reforms are necessary and how those reforms should proceed, and I will focus on U.S. dollar LIBOR.5As is made clear in the FSB report, while the goals and principles of the official sector participants are uniform, specific plans for reference rate reform will vary by currency, depending on differences in markets and institutions. I will share my conclusion at the outset. While there have been significant reforms, much remains to be done.6First, U.S. dollar LIBOR needs to be updated to reflect current practices in unsecured funding markets and to be better anchored in actual transactions. Second, and equally important, regulators need to work with market participants to encourage them to develop and adopt alternative reference rates that better reflect the current structure of U.S. financial markets, in which borrowing and derivatives transactions are much more likely to be secured with collateral. Going forward, these alternative rates could replace LIBOR as the reference rate for new interest rate derivatives and some other contracts denominated in U.S. dollars. These dual transitions will need to be managed very carefully to avoid disrupting the financing markets on which borrowers and lenders depend. But I believe that they are crucial to strengthening the stability of our financial system and to helping restore the public's faith in its integrity. This problem is not just Wall Street's concern; every household with a LIBOR-linked mortgage and every corporation with a LIBOR-linked loan has an interest in more robust U.S. dollar reference rates. The BasicsI will take a few moments to explain the basic mechanics of LIBOR for those who have not spent time on an interest rate swap desk. For almost three decades, LIBOR was run by the British Bankers' Association. Just a few months ago, a private corporation called ICE Benchmark Administration (IBA) took over the daily production and administration of the rate subject to the regulation and supervision of the FCA. Today, 18 banks participate in the panel that contributes to the production of U.S. dollar LIBOR. Each morning at 11 a.m. London time, those banks estimate the rate at which they could borrow at several different maturities ranging from overnight up to a year, and they send those estimates to IBA. It is often the case that banks have recent transactions at some but not all of these maturities. Where there are no transactions, they submit estimates of their borrowing costs based on their judgment. In addition to U.S. dollar LIBOR, the rate is produced in four other currencies--the euro, the yen, the British pound, and the Swiss franc--although not all banks contribute rates in all currencies. The administrator provides specific instructions to the panel banks regarding their submissions; currently, these instructions direct banks to reflect the perceived rate at which they could borrow from another bank.7The administrator collects these submissions and, after dropping the highest and lowest quartiles at each maturity, publishes an average of the remaining submissions as the U.S. dollar LIBOR rate for that day. Pervasive and ProblematicWhen the British Bankers' Association standardized LIBOR in the 1980s for use in interest rate products, I doubt that anyone could have imagined how pervasive it would eventually become. As I mentioned, there are an estimated $300 trillion in LIBOR contracts, roughly half which reference dollar LIBOR. In the United States, dollar LIBOR is the reference rate used in most interest rate swaps and futures contracts, in most floating-rate mortgages, in many commercial loans, and in structured products such as mortgage- and asset-backed securities. The list could go on and on, but the key point is that LIBOR touches a large number of U.S. households and businesses. Although LIBOR is currently used for all of these purposes, it is actually not ideally suited for some of them. LIBOR is designed to measure the costs of bank borrowing for a panel of large banks. The rate can be decomposed into a component that reflects the general level of risk-free rates and a component that reflects a risk premium related to the credit risk of the borrowing bank. During the global financial crisis, the credit risk component of LIBOR fluctuated dramatically, which meant that LIBOR behaved quite differently from rates with no credit risk embedded in them, such as risk-free rates. LIBOR is a less-than-ideal rate for most derivatives contracts and secured borrowing because movements in the credit risk component do not reflect well the underlying risks of those contracts. However, LIBOR's pervasiveness has become self-reinforcing. Firms use LIBOR in contracts, even when it is less than ideal, because they know they can hedge the resulting risk using highly liquid, LIBOR-based interest rate swaps or other derivatives contracts. And those derivatives markets are so liquid because most market participants use LIBOR as the reference rate in their financial contracts. Because of the progression of this dynamic over time, and not because of some careful design, LIBOR has spread well beyond its intended uses and become an important pillar of the global financial system--perhaps too important. In recent years, two separate developments have called into question the wisdom of that arrangement. I have already mentioned the first one--the emergence of a pervasive pattern of attempted manipulation of LIBOR dating back many years. This misconduct was designed either to increase the potential profit of the submitting firms or to convey a misleading picture of the relative health of such firms. Since 2012, seven financial institutions have settled related charges with the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice, and the cumulative penalties and fines paid in the United States now stand at more than $3 billion.8Global penalties paid related to benchmark misconduct exceed $6 billion as investigations into reference rate manipulation continue. Although these penalties and fines are themselves substantial, to my mind the longer-term damage to the public's trust represents the greater cost of this misconduct. A second problem is that unsecured interbank borrowing has been in a secular decline that predates the global financial crisis. Changes in bank behavior following the crisis exacerbated the decline and further weakened the foundation of LIBOR. The result is a scarcity, or outright absence in longer tenors, of actual transactions that banks can use to estimate their daily submission to LIBOR. Ongoing regulatory reforms and the shift away from unsecured funding raise the possibility that unsecured interbank borrowing transactions may become even more infrequent in the future. While it is also possible that activity in these markets could rebound, the threat that this form of borrowing may decline further, particularly in periods of stress, seems likely to remain. So let me pose a question: Is it wise to rely on a critical benchmark that is built on a market in decline? Clearly not. The risks to market functioning are simply too great. For example, market activity could decline to the point where publication of a rate becomes untenable. And many of the panel banks have expressed concerns about the ongoing legal risks of remaining on the panel. If the publication of LIBOR were to become untenable or if we were to simply "end LIBOR," as some have urged, untangling the $150 trillion in outstanding U.S. dollar LIBOR contracts would entail a protracted, expensive, and uncertain process of negotiating amendments to an enormous number of complex documents--a horrible mess and a feast for the legal profession, to be sure. It does not help matters that the hundreds of trillions of dollars' worth of derivatives contracts referencing LIBOR do not, in general, have robust backups in the event that publication of a rate ceases. The FSB report identifies ways to improve U.S. dollar LIBOR, and to create alternatives to it, while minimizing transition costs, particularly for end users who bear no blame for the misconduct. The proposed reforms come down to two simple ideas. First, U.S. dollar LIBOR needs to be redefined to include a broader range of transaction types. Doing so will make it more robust and will allow it to reflect actual bank funding costs, which is what the rate was intended to do in the first place. Second, we need to promote robust alternatives to U.S. dollar LIBOR that better reflect the secured nature of many of today's financial market transactions. Updating U.S. Dollar LIBORLet me first address the efforts the Federal Reserve is considering, in cooperation with the LIBOR administrator and U.K. authorities, to update the mechanics of U.S. dollar LIBOR. Our aim is to make LIBOR more robust and more representative of current bank funding costs. In this regard, we have considered two important attributes of LIBOR--its definition and the data used to produce it. While the current definition of LIBOR is limited to unsecured borrowing between banks, LIBOR is actually intended to represent the overall cost of banks' unsecured borrowing. At the time LIBOR was created, a substantial amount of that unsecured borrowing was in the interbank market, but that is no longer the case. Broadening the definition to include the unsecured borrowing from nonbanks would make the rate more representative of current funding practices. Changing the definition of LIBOR, as has been done in the past, would acknowledge the fact that a reference rate must adapt to continue to represent what it is meant to measure.9 Updating the definition of U.S. dollar LIBOR could also allow other sources of transactions data to be incorporated into it. Potentially, we could even move away from the current panel-based method of calculating U.S. dollar LIBOR to a rate that is fully transactions based. In April, the Federal Reserve began collecting data from banks on a variety of unsecured transactions. These data, along with other available data, will help us understand whether there is enough borrowing activity to support a fully transactions-based rate.10It will take some time to assess these data and, in particular, to analyze the depth of the markets under different conditions and during different times of the year. But preliminary analysis, which is reinforced by research done by the Market Participants Group (MPG) that was assembled by the FSB, suggests that there may be enough borrowing activity to create a transactions-based U.S. dollar LIBOR rate. Basing U.S. dollar LIBOR more on transactions could modestly increase the volatility of the rate. However, I see nothing wrong with a reference rate that more accurately reflects the volatility of the market it represents. We are working closely with the LIBOR administrator, IBA, and with its regulator, FCA, to explore these issues. In this regard, cooperation with IBA is crucial if LIBOR is to be strengthened--U.S. dollar LIBOR is produced in the United Kingdom and is not regulated here in the United States. The IOSCO review found that IBA has made progress in implementing most of the 19 IOSCO principles; the changes I have discussed are designed to continue this progress, and I believe that IBA is well motivated to continue its efforts.11 Alternatives NeededImproving U.S. dollar LIBOR alone cannot eliminate all of the weaknesses in the current system. In the FSB's opinion and that of the MPG, a large portion of the derivatives that currently reference U.S. dollar LIBOR would be better served by referencing a risk-free (or nearly risk-free) rate based on a robust and liquid underlying market. These transactions are more appropriately linked to a narrower measure of interest rates that does not include a bank credit risk component. Encouraging alternatives that better reflect today's funding markets would also allow for greater choice, increase the resilience of the system, and would potentially make hedging of some risks less costly. In addition, the incentive to manipulate LIBOR would be substantially reduced if a smaller share of the multi-hundred-trillion-dollar derivatives market was referencing it. Some possible alternatives include rates based on the U.S. Treasury market or rates based on the secured funding markets that have replaced much of the borrowing banks used to do in the unsecured interbank market. The Federal Reserve is not seeking to dictate the particular rate that financial markets adopt. Instead, we will encourage key market participants to further the work done by the FSB's MPG by narrowing down the list of alternatives and developing them into robust reference rates that meet agreed-upon international standards and best practices.12There are enough suggestions on the MPG's list to inspire confidence that we should be able to find common ground. Any alternative would, of course, need to be in accord with the IOSCO principles mentioned earlier, and some potential alternatives would take time to fully develop. But the establishment of alternative reference rates for certain products is in our shared interests and would substantially strengthen the financial system. We are strongly committed that at least one such rate be developed and actively used as soon as practicable. And we look forward to working with financial institutions and other market participants to achieve this end. In the near term, the Federal Reserve, along with other government agencies, intends to meet with a wide range of market participants, including end users, to hear their views as to how change can be effected and to begin the work of developing alternatives to LIBOR. Later this year, we will convene a group of the largest global dealers to discuss these issues, following a model that was successfully used to promote derivatives reform. Searching for potential alternative rates and encouraging their use will be a key point of that discussion. Of course, end users will be affected by these changes as well, and we will also consult closely with key participants outside of the dealer community to make sure that reform meets their needs and is not disruptive to them. In particular, end users who want to continue to use LIBOR will certainly be able to do so, and we will work toward the goal of ensuring that any changes to LIBOR will not require borrowers or lenders to amend their existing contracts. And the markets that reference dollar LIBOR are so enormous that there will surely be more than enough liquidity to support both a new risk free rate as well as LIBOR itself. One of the lessons that I take from our study of LIBOR is that these existing legacy contracts are quite important. As I mentioned earlier, many financial contracts, including derivatives contracts, do not have robust backups in the event that the reference rates they use cease to exist. Some derivatives, such as interest rate swaps, can be quite long lasting, and, over a long enough period of time, there is always a risk that any given reference rate will cease being published. It is important that financial contracts address the need for a backup plan if a reference rate does cease to function. This issue is something that we intend to bring up with market participants and end users as we meet with them. ConclusionMy hope is that governments, market participants, and end users can work together to build a stronger foundation for the reference interest rates that are so critical to our financial system. Implementation of these measures is clearly in the interest of U.S. financial stability. I also hope and expect that individual financial institutions will understand that it is also in their private interests. Reference rates are one of the foundations of the financial system, and it is in the interest of everyone, from the residential mortgage holder to the financial institutions that heavily use these rates, that those foundations have integrity and be well constructed and resistant to manipulation. As I said at the beginning, the problems with LIBOR have undermined the public's trust in the financial system. In light of the need to regain that trust, I am certain that our reform efforts will meet with the active cooperation of financial institutions in carrying forward these reforms. 1.For more information on the role of LIBOR in the global financial system, see Wheatley Review (2012),The Wheatley Review of LIBOR: Final Report(PDF)(London: HM Treasury, September).Return to text 2.Details on the principles may be found in Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2013),Principles for Financial Benchmarks: Final Report(PDF)(Madrid: Board of IOSCO, July).Return to text 3.For the FSB's reform proposals, see Financial Stability Board (2014),Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, July).Return to text 4.Former Federal Reserve Governor Jeremy C. Stein was the previous co-chair.Return to text 5.The views expressed here are my own and should not be taken to represent those of the FSB's Official Sector Steering Group or those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 6.LIBOR reform and the work still to be accomplished are discussed in Wheatley Review,The Wheatley Review of LIBOR,in note 1.Return to text 7.The actual question asks banks only about transactions of "reasonable market size." This size is not defined and is left to banks' judgment.Return to text 8.The seven firms that have settled consist of five banks (Barclays, Lloyds Bank, Rabobank, RBS, and UBS) and two brokers (ICAP and RP Martin).Return to text 9.For a reference to a past change in LIBOR, see the British Bankers' Association's website "BBA LIBOR" at www.bbalibor.com/disclaimer/explained/historical-perspective. The design of BBA LIBOR has seen one significant change since its inception. Up until 1998, banks submitted quotes to the BBA LIBOR process in line with the question "At what rate do you think interbank term deposits will be offered by one prime bank to another prime bank for a reasonable market size today at 11 am?" During 1998, this question changed and has, up until today, been as follows: "At what rate could you borrow funds, were you to do so by asking for and then accepting inter-bank offers in a reasonable market size just prior to 11am?" This decision was made after consultation with the markets and was implemented due to a view that a universal definition of a prime bank could no longer be given. It also links the figures submitted by banks to their own market activity rather than a hypothetical entity. For a reference to the usefulness of the adaptability of reference rates, see Board of IOSCO,Principles for Financial Benchmarks,p. 12, in note 2.Return to text 10.For the report form used to collect these data, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,FR2420, Report of Selected Money Market Rates (PDF).Return to text 11.The results of the IOSCO review are reported in Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2014),Review of the Implementation of IOSCO's Principles for Financial Benchmarks by Administrators of Euribor, Libor and Tibor(Madrid: Board of IOSCO, July).Return to text 12.For details on the MPG's work, see Financial Stability Board (2014),Market Participants Group on Reforming Interest Rate Benchmarks: Final Report(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, March).Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Panel Discussion on "Debt Management in an Era of Quantitative Easing: What Should the Treasury and the Fed Do?", Washington, D.C. Watch live at:http://www.brookings.edu/events/2014/09/30-debt-management-quantitative-easing-treasury-fed Thank you for the opportunity to be here today. Given my role at the Federal Reserve, I am not in a position to comment on debt management policy.1 I would like to begin by complimenting the authors of this highly interesting paper for their systematic approach to thinking about a wide-ranging and difficult set of issues. After a period during which the Treasury's debt management needs dominated Federal Reserve policies, the Fed began to regain its independence with the Treasury-Fed Accord of 1951. Since the 1970s, there has been little or no coordination between the two institutions over debt management. This paper argues that the extraordinary response to the global financial crisis brought about a conflict between debt management and monetary policy that should have been avoided through collaboration. The paper proposes a regime in which the Treasury and the Fed would cooperate around debt management at all times and would fully collaborate in the case in which the monetary policy rate is pinned at the zero lower bound. As a policymaker, I bring a degree of skepticism to a proposal to make major changes to institutional arrangements that seem to me to have served the public well. I will mention three areas where I have significant concerns. First, the literature on financial stability and monetary policy is still in its infancy. There is no consensus that monetary policy (or debt management policy) should assume the kinds of roles assigned by the authors. In particular, policymakers are addressing the problem of private money creation through an array of regulatory initiatives. Second, in describing the costs of the existing arrangements, the paper estimates that the Treasury's post-2008 extension of the weighted average maturity (or duration) of the Federal debt offset--in a purely mechanical sense--about 35 percent of the effect of the Federal Reserve's large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs on the level of 10‑year Treasury yields.2I would challenge this ex post framing of the issue. Maturity extension merely continued a policy begun by the Treasury well before the crisis and was also broadly consistent with the Treasury's past behavior at times of substantial increases in borrowing. My starting point would be that the Federal Open Market Committee did what it thought was appropriate ex ante to return the economy to full employment and stable prices, taking Treasury decisions concerning debt management as exogenous. As the authors acknowledge, there are good reasons to think that any term premium effect of the maturity extension must have been much smaller than the "35 percent" figure implies. The paper's estimate is based solely on what is sometimes referred to as the "duration removal" channel. There are other channels that would not be offset by maturity extension--in particular, a channel by which the Federal Reserve signals the strength of its commitment to achieving the dual mandate. My view is that it is quite difficult to explain the observed effects of LSAPs on asset prices without reference to these other channels. In addition, according to the authors' estimates, the "announcement effects" of the Treasury's maturity extension policy seem to be only half the size of the effects of comparable Fed announcements. The LSAPs tripled the Federal Reserve's share of outstanding 10-year duration, from 12 percent to 36 percent, and had quite significant effects on the prices of financial assets. By most estimates, the 10-year Treasury term premium was deeply negative from mid-2011 through mid-2013; it remains near zero today, far below normal pre-crisis levels. Given the very low level of rates over this period, it is not clear to me that a slightly more negative term premium would have produced materially different real economy results. Third, the authors' proposals seem to me to be fraught with risk for the Federal Reserve. I believe that the existing institutional arrangements have served the public well. The independence of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy is highly valuable to society. There is considerable evidence that monetary policy independence leads to better macroeconomic outcomes. Any active collaboration between debt management and monetary policy, even in a crisis, would risk calling into question that independence. That is a risk I would be very reluctant to take. The period after the Second World War during which debt management imposed requirements upon monetary policy was marked by strains between the Treasury and the Fed and less than full independence for monetary policy. While current institutional arrangements may be imperfect, history suggests a need for caution before allowing these two policies to become entangled once again. Thanks again, and I look forward to our conversation. 1.The views offered are mine alone and not necessarily those of my colleagues at the Federal Reserve.Return to text 2.The term "LSAPs" is used here to include QE1 (that is, the first round of quantitative easing by the Fed), QE2 (the second round), the maturity extension program, and QE3 (the third round).Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Crapo, and other members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's activities in mitigating systemic risk and implementing the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). In testifying before this committee in February, I noted my hope and expectation that this year would be the beginning of the end of our implementation of the major provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act. Seven months later, we are on track to fulfill that expectation. The Federal Reserve and other banking supervisors have continued to make progress in implementing the congressional mandates in the Dodd-Frank Act, promoting a stable financial system, and strengthening the resilience of banking organizations. In today's testimony, I will provide an update on the Federal Reserve's implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act and describe key upcoming regulatory and supervisory priorities to address the problems of "too big to fail" and systemic risk. The Federal Reserve is committed to continuing to work with our fellow banking agencies and with the market regulators to help ensure that the organizations we supervise operate in a safe and sound manner and are able to support activity in other sectors of the economy. As we complete our revisions to the financial regulatory architecture, we are cognizant that regulatory compliance can impose a disproportionate burden on smaller financial institutions. In addition to overseeing large banking firms, the Federal Reserve supervises approximately 800 state-chartered community banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System, as well as several thousand small bank holding companies. In my testimony, I also will describe how the Federal Reserve is seeking to ensure that its regulations and supervisory framework are not unnecessarily burdensome for community banking organizations so they can continue their important function of safe and sound lending to local communities. Recent Dodd-Frank Act Implementation MilestonesSince the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act more than four years ago, the Federal Reserve and the other agencies represented at this hearing have completed wide-ranging financial regulatory reforms that have remade the regulatory landscape for financial firms and markets. Internationally, at the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), we have helped develop new standards for global banks on risk-based capital, leverage, liquidity, single-counterparty credit limits, and margin requirements for over-the-counter derivatives. We have also worked with the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to reach global agreements on resolution regimes for systemic financial firms and on a set of shadow banking regulatory reforms. Domestically, we have completed many important measures. We approved final rules implementing the Basel III capital framework, which help ensure that U.S. banking organizations maintain strong capital positions and are able to continue lending to creditworthy households and businesses even during economic downturns. We implemented the Dodd-Frank Act's stress testing requirements, which are complemented by the Federal Reserve's annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. Together, these supervisory exercises provide a forward-looking assessment of the capital adequacy of the largest U.S. banking firms. Pursuant to section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, we established a set of enhanced standards for large U.S. banking organizations to help increase the resiliency of their operations and thus promote financial stability. In addition, the Federal Reserve implemented a rule requiring foreign banking organizations with a significant U.S. presence to establish U.S. intermediate holding companies over their U.S. subsidiaries and subjecting such companies to substantially the same prudential standards applicable to U.S. bank holding companies. We finalized the Volcker rule to implement section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Act and prohibit banking organizations from engaging in short-term proprietary trading of certain securities and derivatives. These and other measures have already created a financial regulatory architecture that is much stronger and much more focused on financial stability than the framework in existence at the advent of the financial crisis. More recently, the Federal Reserve, often in tandem with some or all of the other agencies represented at this hearing, has made progress on a number of other important regulatory reforms. I will discuss those steps in more detail. Liquidity rules for large banking firmsLast week, the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies approved a final rule, consistent with the enhanced prudential standards requirements in section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which implements the first broadly applicable quantitative liquidity requirement for U.S. banking firms. Liquidity standards for large U.S. banking firms are a key contributor to financial stability, as they work in concert with capital standards, stress testing, and other enhanced prudential standards to help ensure that large banking firms manage liquidity in a manner that mitigates the risk of creditor and counterparty runs. The rule's liquidity coverage ratio, or LCR, requires covered banking firms to hold minimum amounts of high-quality liquid assets--such as central bank reserves and high-quality government and corporate debt--that can be converted quickly and easily into cash sufficient to meet expected net cash outflows over a short-term stress period. The LCR applies to bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies with $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets or $10 billion or more in on-balance-sheet foreign exposures. The rule also applies a less stringent, modified LCR to bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies that are below these thresholds but with more than $50 billion in total assets. The rule does not apply to bank holding companies or savings and loan holding companies with less than $50 billion in total assets, nor to nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). The Federal Reserve will apply enhanced liquidity standards to designated nonbank financial companies through a subsequently issued order or rule following an evaluation of each of their business models, capital structures, and risk profiles. The rule's LCR is based on a liquidity standard agreed to by the BCBS but is more stringent than the BCBS standard in several areas, including the range of assets that qualify as high-quality liquid assets and the assumed rate of outflows for certain kinds of funding. In addition, the rule's transition period is shorter than that in the BCBS standard. The accelerated phase-in of the U.S. LCR reflects our objective that large U.S. banking firms maintain the improved liquidity positions they have already built following the financial crisis, in part because of our supervisory oversight. We believe the LCR will help ensure that these improved liquidity positions will not weaken as memories of the financial crisis fade. The final rule is largely identical to the proposed rule, with a few key adjustments made in response to comments from the public. Those adjustments include changing the scope of corporate debt securities and publicly traded equities qualifying as high-quality liquid assets, phasing in reporting requirements, and modifying the stress period and reporting frequency for firms subject to the modified LCR. Swap margin reproposalSections 731 and 764 of the Dodd-Frank Act require the establishment of initial and variation margin requirements for swap dealers and major swap participants (swap entities) on swaps that are not centrally cleared. These requirements are intended to ensure that the counterparty risks inherent in swaps are prudently limited and not allowed to build to unsustainable levels that could pose risks to the financial system. In addition, requiring all uncleared swaps to be subject to robust margin requirements will remove economic incentives for market participants to shift activity away from contracts that are centrally cleared. The Federal Reserve and four other U.S. agencies originally issued a proposed rule to implement these provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act in April 2011. Following the release of the original proposal, the BCBS and the International Organization of Securities Commissions began working to establish a consistent global framework for imposing margin requirements on uncleared swaps. This global framework was finalized last September. After considering the comments that were received on the April 2011 U.S. proposal and the recently established global standards, the agencies issued a reproposal last week. Under the reproposal, swap entities would be required to collect and post initial and variation margin on uncleared swaps with another swap entity and other financial end user counterparties. The requirements are intended to result in higher initial margin requirements than would be required for cleared swaps, which is meant to reflect the more complex and less liquid nature of uncleared swaps. In accordance with the statutory requirement to establish margin requirements regardless of counterparty type, the reproposal would require swap entities to collect and post margin in connection with any uncleared swaps they have with nonfinancial end users. These requirements, however, are quantitatively and qualitatively different from the margin requirements for swaps with financial end users. Specifically, swaps with nonfinancial end users would not be subject to specific, numerical margin requirements but would only be subject to initial and variation margin requirements at such times, in such forms, and in such amounts, if any, that the swap entity determines is necessary to address the credit risk posed by the counterparty and the transaction. There are currently cases where a swap entity does not collect initial or variation margin from nonfinancial end users because it has determined that margin is not needed to address the credit risk posed by the counterparty or the transaction. In such cases, the reproposal would not require a change in current practice. The agencies believe that these requirements are consistent with the Dodd-Frank Act and appropriately reflect the low level of risk presented by most nonfinancial end users. The agencies in the reproposal have taken several steps to help mitigate any impact to the liquidity of the financial system that could result from the swap margin requirements. These steps include incorporating an initial margin requirement threshold below which exchanges of initial margin are not required, allowing for a wider range of assets to serve as eligible collateral, and providing smaller swap entities with an extended timeline to come into compliance. We look forward to receiving comments on the reproposal. Modifications to the supplementary leverage ratio and adoption of the enhanced supplementary leverage ratioAlso last week, the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies approved a final rule that modifies the denominator calculation of the supplementary leverage ratio in a manner consistent with the changes agreed to earlier this year by the BCBS. The revised supplementary leverage ratio will apply to all banking organizations subject to the advanced approaches risk-based capital rule starting in 2018. These modifications to the supplementary leverage ratio will result in a more appropriately measured set of leverage capital requirements and, in the aggregate, are expected to modestly increase the stringency of these requirements across the covered banking organizations. This rule complements the agencies' adoption in April of a rule that strengthens the internationally agreed-upon Basel III leverage ratio as applied to U.S.-based global systemically important banks (GSIBs). This enhanced supplementary leverage ratio, which will be effective in January 2018, requires U.S. GSIBs to maintain a tier 1 capital buffer of at least 2 percent above the minimum Basel III supplementary leverage ratio of 3 percent, for a total of 5 percent, to avoid restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments. In light of the significantly higher risk-based capital rules for GSIBs under Basel III, imposing a stricter leverage requirement on these firms is appropriate to help ensure that the leverage ratio remains a relevant backstop for these firms. Key Regulatory PrioritiesAs we near the completion of the implementation of the major provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, some key regulatory reforms remain unfinished. To that end, the Federal Reserve contemplates near- to medium-term measures to enhance the resiliency and resolvability of U.S. GSIBs and address the risks posed to financial stability from reliance by financial firms on short-term wholesale funding. The financial crisis made clear that policymakers must devote significant attention to the potential threat to financial stability posed by our most systemic financial firms. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve has been working to develop regulations that are designed to reduce the probability of failure of a GSIB to levels that are meaningfully below those for less systemically important firms and to materially reduce the potential adverse impact on the broader financial system and economy in the event of a failure of a GSIB. GSIB risk-based capital surchargesAn important remaining Federal Reserve initiative to improve GSIB resiliency is our forthcoming proposal to impose graduated common equity risk-based capital surcharges on U.S. GSIBs. The proposal will be consistent with the standard in section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act that capital requirements be progressively more stringent as the systemic importance of a firm increases. It will build on the GSIB capital surcharge framework developed by the BCBS, under which the size of the surcharge for an individual GSIB is a function of the firm's systemic importance. By further increasing the amount of the most loss-absorbing form of capital that is required to be held by firms that potentially pose the greatest risk to financial stability, we intend to improve the resiliency of these firms. This measure might also create incentives for them to reduce their systemic footprint and risk profile. While our proposal will use the GSIB risk-based capital surcharge framework developed by the BCBS as a starting point, it will strengthen the BCBS framework in two important respects. First, the surcharge levels for U.S. GSIBs will be higher than the levels required by the BCBS, noticeably so for some firms. Second, the surcharge formula will directly take into account each U.S. GSIB's reliance on short-term wholesale funding. We believe the case for including short-term wholesale funding in the surcharge calculation is compelling, given that reliance on this type of funding can leave firms vulnerable to runs that threaten the firm's solvency and impose externalities on the broader financial system. Resolvability of GSIBsOur enhanced regulation of GSIBs also includes efforts to improve their resolvability. Most recently, in August, the Federal Reserve and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) completed reviews of the second round of resolution plans submitted to the agencies in October 2013 by 11 U.S. bank holding companies and foreign banks. Section 165(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires banking organizations with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial companies designated by the FSOC to submit resolution plans to the Federal Reserve and the FDIC. Each plan must describe the organization's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure. In completing the second round reviews of these banking organizations' resolution plans, the FDIC and the Federal Reserve noted certain shortcomings in the resolution plans that the firms must address to improve their resolvability in bankruptcy. Both agencies also indicated the expectation that the firms make significant progress in addressing these issues in their 2015 resolution plans. In addition, the Federal Reserve has been working with the FDIC to develop a proposal that would require the U.S. GSIBs to maintain a minimum amount of long-term unsecured debt at the parent holding company level. While minimum capital requirements are designed to cover losses up to a certain statistical probability, in the even less likely event that the equity of a financial firm is wiped out, successful resolution without taxpayer assistance would be most effectively accomplished if a firm has sufficient long-term unsecured debt to absorb additional losses and to recapitalize the business transferred to a bridge operating company. The presence of a substantial tranche of long-term unsecured debt that is subject to bail-in during a resolution and is structurally subordinated to the firm's other creditors should reduce run risk by clarifying the position of those other creditors in an orderly liquidation process. A requirement for long-term debt also should have the benefit of improving market discipline, since the holders of that debt would know they faced the prospect of loss should the firm enter resolution. The Federal Reserve is working with global regulators, under the auspices of the FSB, to develop a proposal that would require the largest, most complex global banking firms to maintain a minimum amount of loss absorbency capacity beyond the levels mandated in the Basel III capital requirements. Another element of our efforts to promote resolvability of large banking organizations involves the early termination rights of derivative counterparties to GSIBs. Some of the material operating subsidiaries of GSIBs are counterparties to large volumes of over-the-counter derivatives and other qualifying financial contracts that provide for an event of default based solely on the insolvency or receivership of the parent holding company. Although the Dodd-Frank Act created an orderly liquidation authority (OLA) to better enable the government to resolve a failed systemically important financial firm--and the OLA's stay and transfer provisions can prevent exercise of such contractual rights by counterparties to contracts under U.S. law--the OLA provisions may not apply to contracts under foreign law. Accordingly, counterparties of the foreign subsidiaries and branches of GSIBs may have contractual rights and substantial economic incentives to accelerate or terminate those contracts as soon as the U.S. parent GSIB enters OLA. This could render a resolution unworkable by resulting in the disorderly unwind of an otherwise viable foreign subsidiary and the disruption of critical intra-affiliate activities that rely on the failing subsidiary. The challenge would be compounded in a bankruptcy resolution because derivatives and other qualifying financial contracts are exempt from the automatic stay under bankruptcy law, regardless of whether the contracts are governed by U.S. or foreign law. The international regulatory community is working to mitigate this risk as well. The Federal Reserve is working with the FDIC and global regulators, financial firms, and other financial market actors to develop a protocol to the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) Master Agreement to address the impediments to resolvability generated by these early termination rights. The FSB will be reporting progress on this effort in the fall. Short-term wholesale fundingAs I have noted in prior testimony before this committee, short-term wholesale funding plays a critical role in the financial system. During normal times, it helps to satisfy investor demand for safe and liquid investments, lowers funding costs for borrowers, and supports the functioning of important markets, including those in which monetary policy is executed. During periods of stress, however, runs by providers of short-term wholesale funding and associated asset liquidations can result in large fire sale externalities and otherwise undermine financial stability. A dynamic of this type engulfed the financial system in 2008. Since the crisis, the Federal Reserve has taken several steps to address short-term wholesale funding risks. The Basel III capital framework and the Federal Reserve's stress testing regime have significantly increased the quantity and quality of required capital in the banking system, particularly for those banking organizations that are the most active participants in short-term wholesale funding markets. Similarly, the implementation of liquidity regulations such as the LCR, together with related efforts by bank supervisors, will help to limit the amount of liquidity risk in the banking system. We have also taken steps to reduce risks posed by the use of short-term wholesale funding by actors outside the banking system. These include leading an effort to reduce reliance by borrowers in the tri-party repo market on intraday credit from clearing banks and increasing the regulatory charges on key forms of credit and liquidity support that banks provide to shadow banks. In part because of these actions and in part because of market adjustments, there is less risk embedded in short-term wholesale funding markets today than in the period immediately preceding the financial crisis. The short-term wholesale funding markets are generally smaller, the average maturity of short-term funding arrangements is moderately greater, and collateral haircuts are more conservative. In addition, the banking organizations that are the major intermediaries in short-term wholesale funding markets are much more resilient based on the measures I discussed earlier. Nevertheless, we believe that more needs to be done to guard against short-term wholesale funding risks. While the total amount of short-term wholesale funding is lower today than immediately before the crisis, volumes are still large relative to the size of the financial system. Furthermore, some of the factors that account for the reduction in short-term wholesale funding volumes, such as the unusually flat yield curve environment and lingering risk aversion from the crisis, are likely to prove transitory. Federal Reserve staff is currently working on three sets of initiatives to address residual short-term wholesale funding risks. As discussed above, the first is a proposal to incorporate the use of short-term wholesale funding into the risk-based capital surcharge applicable to U.S. GSIBs. The second involves proposed modifications to the BCBS's net stable funding ratio (NSFR) standard to strengthen liquidity requirements that apply when a bank acts as a provider of short-term funding to other market participants. The third is numerical floors for collateral haircuts in securities financing transactions (SFTs)--including repos and reverse repos, securities lending and borrowing, and securities margin lending. Modifications to the NSFR could be designed to help address the types of concerns described in my previous testimony regarding SFT matched book activity. In the classic fact pattern, a matched book dealer uses SFTs to borrow on a short-term basis from a cash investor, such as a money market mutual fund, to finance a short-term SFT loan to a client, such as a leveraged investment fund. The regulatory requirements on SFT matched books are generally low despite the fact that matched books can pose significant microprudential and macroprudential risks. Neither the BCBS LCR nor the NSFR originally finalized by the Basel Committee would have imposed a material charge on matched book activity. In January, the BCBS proposed a revised NSFR that would require banks to hold a material amount of stable funding against short-term SFT loans, as well as other short-term credit extensions, to nonbank financial entities. By requiring banks that make short-term loans to hold stable funding, such a charge would help limit the liquidity risk that a dealer would face if it experiences a run on its SFT liabilities but is unable to liquidate corresponding SFT assets. In addition, by making it more expensive for the dealer to provide short-term credit, the charge could help lean against excessive short-term borrowing by the dealer's clients. Turning to numerical floors for SFT haircuts, the appeal of this policy measure is that it would help address the risk that post-crisis reforms targeted at banking organizations will drive systemically risky activity toward places in the financial system where prudential standards do not apply. In its universal form, a system of numerical haircut floors for SFTs would require any entity that wants to borrow against a security to post a minimum amount of excess margin to its lender that would vary depending on the asset class of the collateral. Like minimum margin requirements for derivatives, numerical floors for SFT haircuts would serve as a mechanism for limiting the build-up of leverage at the transaction level and could mitigate the risk of procyclical margin calls. Last August, the FSB issued a consultative document that represented an initial step toward the development of a framework of numerical floors. However, the FSB's proposal contained some significant limitations, including that its scope was limited to transactions in which a bank or broker-dealer extends credit to an unregulated entity and that the calibration of the numerical floor levels was relatively low. Since then, the FSB has been actively considering whether to strengthen the proposal along both of these dimensions. Financial sector concentration limitsIn May, the Federal Reserve proposed a rule to implement section 622 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which prohibits a financial company from combining with another company if the resulting financial company's liabilities exceed 10 percent of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of all financial companies. Under the proposal, financial companies subject to the concentration limit would include insured depository institutions, bank holding companies, savings and loan holding companies, foreign banking organizations, companies that control insured depository institutions, and nonbank financial companies designated by the FSOC for Federal Reserve supervision. Consistent with section 622, the proposal generally defines liabilities of a financial company as the difference between its risk-weighted assets, as adjusted to reflect exposures deducted from regulatory capital, and its total regulatory capital. Firms not subject to consolidated risk-based capital rules would measure liabilities using generally accepted accounting standards. We anticipate finalizing this rule in the near term. Credit risk retentionSection 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act requires firms generally to retain credit risk in securitization transactions they sponsor. Retaining credit risk creates incentives for securitizers to monitor closely the quality of the assets underlying a securitization transaction and discourages unsafe and unsound underwriting practices by originators. In August 2013, the Federal Reserve, along with several other agencies, revised a proposal from 2011 to implement section 941. The Federal Reserve is working with the other agencies charged by the Dodd-Frank Act with implementing this rule to complete it in the coming months. Rationalizing the Regulatory Framework for Community BanksBefore closing, I would like to discuss the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts to minimize regulatory burden consistent with the effective implementation of our statutory responsibilities for community banks, given the important role they play within our communities. Over the past few decades, community banks have substantially reduced their presence in lines of businesses such as consumer lending in the face of competition from larger banks benefiting from economies of scale. Today, as a group, their most important forms of lending are to small- and medium-sized businesses. Smaller community banks--those with less than $1 billion in assets--account for nearly one-fourth of commercial and industrial lending, and nearly 40 percent of commercial real estate lending, to small- and medium-sized businesses, despite their having less than 10 percent of total commercial banking assets. These figures reveal the importance of community banks to local economies and the damage that could result if these banks were unable to continue operating within their communities. Banking regulators have taken many steps to try to avoid unnecessary regulatory costs for community banks, such as fashioning more basic supervisory expectations for smaller, less complex banks and identifying which provisions of new regulations are relevant to smaller banks. In this regard, the Federal Reserve has worked to communicate clearly the extent to which new rules and policies apply to smaller banks and to tailor them as appropriate. We also work closely with our colleagues at the federal and state banking regulatory agencies to ensure that supervisory approaches and methodologies are consistently applied to community banks. But several new statutory provisions apply explicitly to some smaller banks or, by failing to exclude any bank from coverage, apply to all banks. The Federal Reserve is supportive of considering areas where the exclusion of community banks from statutory provisions that are less relevant to community bank practice may be appropriate. For example, we believe it would be worthwhile to consider whether community banks should be excluded from the scope of the Volcker rule and from the incentive compensation requirements of section 956 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The concerns addressed by statutory provisions like these are substantially greater at larger institutions and, even where a practice at a smaller bank might raise concerns, the supervisory process remains available to address what would likely be unusual circumstances. Another area in which the Federal Reserve has made efforts to right-size our supervisory approach with regard to community banks is to improve our off-site monitoring processes so that we can better target higher risk institutions and activities. Research conducted for a 2013 conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors addressed the resilience of the community bank model and showed how some banks performed better than others during the recent crisis. Building on this research, we are updating our off-site monitoring screens to reflect experience gained during the crisis and recalibrating our examination scoping process for community banks to focus our testing on higher-risk banks and activities, and whenever possible reduce procedures for banks of lower risk. Recognizing the burden that the on-site presence of many examiners can place on the day-to-day business of a community bank, we are also working to increase our level of off-site supervisory activities. Responding to on-site examinations and inspections is of course a cost for community banks, but this cost must be weighed against the supervisory benefit of face-to-face interactions with bank examiners to explore and resolve institution-specific concerns. The Federal Reserve aims to strike the appropriate balance of off-site and on-site supervisory activities to ensure that the quality of community bank supervision is maintained without creating an overly burdensome process. To that end, last year we completed a pilot on conducting parts of the labor-intensive loan review off-site using electronic records from banks. Based on good results with the pilot, we are planning to continue using this approach in future reviews at banks where bank management is supportive of the process and where electronic records are available. We are also exploring whether other examination procedures can be conducted off-site without compromising the ability of examiners to accurately assess the safety and soundness of supervised banks. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve has made significant progress in implementing the Dodd-Frank Act and other measures designed to improve the resiliency of banking organizations and reduce systemic risk. We are committed to working with the other U.S. financial regulatory agencies to promote a stable financial system in a manner that does not impose a disproportionate burden on smaller institutions. To help us achieve these goals, we will continue to seek the views of the institutions we supervise and the public as we further develop regulatory and supervisory programs to preserve financial stability at the least cost to credit availability and economic growth. Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have.
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the 2014 Assets Learning Conference of the Corporation for Enterprise Development, Washington, D.C. (via prerecorded video) Thank you for this opportunity to show my support for the work all of you do on asset-building, and to say a few words on this vitally important topic. The financial crisis and the Great Recession demonstrated, in a dramatic and unmistakable manner, how extraordinarily vulnerable are the large share of American families with very few assets to fall back on. We have come far from the worst moments of the crisis, and the economy continues to improve. But the effects of the recession are still being felt by many families, particularly those that had very little in savings and other assets beforehand. To help make this point, I'd like to cite a few numbers from the Federal Reserve's 2013 Survey of Consumer Finances, published earlier this month. The Survey is conducted every three years and this new edition provides one of the first good looks at how families in different economic circumstances have fared in the recovery. For lower-income families, what we find is sobering. The median net worth reported by the bottom fifth of households by income was only $6,400 in 2013. Among this group, representing about 25 million American households, many families had no wealth or had negative net worth. The next fifth of households by income had median net worth of just $27,900. These numbers represent declines from 2010. One reason is that income has continued to fall for these families. Another likely reason for this decline in net worth is the lingering effects of the housing crisis. Home equity accounts for the lion's share of wealth for most families and many of these families have not yet recovered the wealth they lost in the housing crisis. The housing market is improving and housing will remain an important channel for asset building for lower and middle income families. But one of the lessons of the crisis, which will not be news to many of you, is the importance of diversification and especially of possessing savings and other liquid financial assets to fall back in times of economic distress. Yet for lower and middle income families, financial assets, including 401 (k) plans and pensions, are still a very small share of their assets. According to the 2013 survey, the bottom half of families by income held only 8 percent of all financial assets held by households. A larger lesson from the financial crisis, of course, is how important it is to promote asset-building, including saving for a rainy day, as protection from the ups and downs of the economy. I surely hope that our nation will not face another crisis anytime soon as severe as the one we recently experienced. But for many lower-income families without assets, the definition of a financial crisis is a month or two without a paycheck, or the advent of a sudden illness or some other unexpected expense. Families with assets to draw on are able to deal with these developments as bumps in the road. Families without these assets can end up, very suddenly, off the road. According to the Board's recent Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, an unexpected expense of just $400 would prompt the majority of households to borrow money, sell something, or simply not pay at all. The Federal Reserve's mission is to promote a healthy economy and strong financial system, and that is why we have promoted and will continue to promote asset-building. One way we do this is through the Community Development programs at each of our 12 Reserve Banks, and through the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs in Washington. As a research institution, and a convener of stakeholders involved in community development, I believe the Fed can help you in carrying out your mission, to encourage families to take the small steps that over time can lead to the accumulation of considerable assets. Thank you for the chance to be a small part of this conference, and for your commitment to a cause that I strongly support.