Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) on Wednesday announced the finalization of a technical correction to the definition of "eligible guarantee" in the agencies' risk-based capital rules. In April, the agencies proposed a rule to correct the definition of eligible guarantee by clarifying the types of guarantees that can be recognized for purposes of calculating a banking organization's regulatory capital. Banking organizations utilize eligible guarantees to reduce their credit risk to certain exposures. The correction impacts banking organizations that determine their regulatory capital ratios under the advanced approaches framework, which applies to large internationally active banking organizations--generally those with at least $250 billion in total consolidated assets or at least $10 billion in total on-balance sheet foreign exposures. The final rule is substantially similar to the proposed rule and adopts the definition of eligible guarantee without change. To ensure consistent public disclosure of capital ratios, the agencies will allow advanced approaches banking organizations to adopt the final rule before the effective date. The final rule is effective October 1, 2014. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
Office of the Comptroller of the CurrencyBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationConference of State Bank Supervisors Four federal financial institutions regulatory agencies and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) today issued guidance to financial institutions regarding home equity lines of credit (HELOCs) nearing their "end-of-draw" periods, which occurs when the principal amount of the HELOC must begin to be repaid. The guidance encourages financial institutions to effectively communicate with borrowers about the pending reset and provides broad principles for managing risk as HELOCs reach their end-of-draw periods. The agencies and CSBS recognize that financial institutions and borrowers may face challenges as HELOCs near their end-of-draw periods. Many borrowers will continue to meet their contractual obligation when their loan resets to an amortizing payment or reaches a balloon maturity. However, some may find it difficult to make higher payments or to refinance their existing loans due to changes in their financial circumstances or declines in property values. When borrowers experience financial difficulties, financial institutions and borrowers generally find it beneficial to work together to avoid unnecessary defaults. The guidance describes how financial institutions can effectively manage their potential exposures under these circumstances. The guidance promotes an understanding of potential exposures and describes consistent, effective responses to HELOC borrowers unable to meet their contractual obligations. The appropriate accounting and reporting procedures for HELOCs nearing their end-of-draw periods are also discussed.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that they will use to determine compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. These ratios update data released on July 1, 2013. In general, section 109 prohibits a bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 also prohibits branches of banks controlled by out-of-state bank holding companies from operating primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 provides a process to test compliance with the statutory requirements. The first step in the process involves a loan-to-deposit ratio screen that compares a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio to the host state loan-to-deposit ratio for banks in a particular state. A second step is conducted if a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio is less than one-half of the published ratio for that state or if data are not available at the bank to conduct the first step. The second step requires the appropriate agency to determine whether the bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the bank's interstate branches. A bank that fails both steps is in violation of section 109 and is subject to sanctions by the appropriate agency. The updated host state loan-to-deposit ratios are attached.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) on Wednesday released the public portions of annual resolution plans for 17 financial firms. Each plan must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires that bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) as systemically important periodically submit resolution plans to the FDIC and the Federal Reserve. Thirteen of the firms whose plans were released Wednesday previously have submitted at least one resolution plan. They are: Bank of America Corporation, Bank of New York Mellon Corporation, Barclays PLC, Citigroup Inc., Credit Suisse Group AG, Deutsche Bank AG, Goldman Sachs Group, HSBC Holdings plc, JPMorgan Chase & Co., Morgan Stanley, State Street Corporation, UBS AG, and Wells Fargo & Company. Initial public resolution plans for American International Group, Prudential Financial, Inc., and General Electric Capital Corporation were also released. The firms are nonbank financial companies that have been designated by the FSOC for enhanced supervision. The initial resolution plan for Bankia SA was also released. The Federal Reserve Board and FDIC granted requests for extensions from BNP Paribas SA and Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc for their second resolution plan submissions. Those plans are now due to the agencies on or before October 1, 2014. By regulation, resolution plans must be divided into a public section and a confidential section. The public sections of the plans are available on theFDICandBoardwebsites.
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Green, and other members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify about the Federal Reserve's supervisory activities pertaining to banking organizations and their account relationships with law-abiding businesses. In my testimony, I will describe the legal framework governing the establishment and maintenance of customer accounts and the regulatory expectations the Federal Reserve has established for the banking organizations we supervise. I will also highlight related aspects of our examination and enforcement process in this area. Let me begin by saying that the Federal Reserve believes it is important that banking organizations provide services to consumers and businesses whose activities comply with applicable laws. It is equally important that the banks we supervise do not facilitate or participate in illegal activity. Indeed, during the past several years the Federal Reserve has provided information to the banking organizations we supervise to clarify the requirements for providing account services to law-abiding businesses. Legal Framework and the Federal Reserve's Regulatory ExpectationsCongress, through the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), requires banking organizations to establish and maintain anti-money-laundering (AML) programs designed to detect when services provided by the organization are being used for illegal purposes. By law, each Federal Reserve-regulated institution, like other depository institutions, must have a BSA program that contains four critical elements, including a system of internal controls to ensure ongoing compliance with the BSA, independent testing of the bank's compliance with the BSA, training of appropriate bank personnel, and the designation of an individual responsible for coordinating and monitoring day-to-day compliance with the BSA.1Under the general rubric of "know your customer" laws and regulations, each banking organization is also required to maintain a customer identification program as part of the BSA compliance program and perform due diligence on its customers.2In addition, a banking organization must identify and report known or suspected criminal violations of the BSA or certain other federal laws and suspicious transactions related to money-laundering activity.3Criminal prosecutors at the Department of Justice and other law enforcement officials have direct access to the database that holds these Suspicious Activity Reports and rely on this information to initiate criminal investigations. The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have published an examination manual intended to provide practical and flexible guidance to examiners and banking organizations regarding acceptable customer due-diligence and risk-mitigation practices as part of an effective BSA program.4The Federal Reserve expects a banking organization to maintain adequate policies and procedures to address risks associated with customer relationships. The scope of these policies and procedures will depend on the banking organization's ongoing assessment of the risks posed by the particular customer relationship. A banking organization takes many factors into account when conducting a customer risk assessment including, in particular, the standards the customer has in place to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations, and the relationship the customer seeks with the banking organization. It is essential that banking organizations make a judgment as to customers with respect to the level of risk they pose. The purpose of these policies is to ensure banking organizations provide services to law-abiding customers. The decision to establish, limit, or terminate a particular customer relationship is a decision for the banking organization. This decision may be based on various factors, including a banking organization's assessment of the risks associated with offering banking services to a particular customer, and its capacity and systems to effectively manage those risks. It is not the Board's policy to discourage banking organizations from offering services to any class of law-abiding financial services consumers or businesses. Payment Services Offered by NonbanksMany of the questions that have arisen with respect to the customer due-diligence expectations of the federal banking agencies relate to the involvement of nonbanks as intermediaries or providers of financial services, including money services businesses (MSBs) and third-party payment processors (TPPPs). MSBs provide financial services, such as check cashing, money remittance, and other services, to customers that do not have traditional bank accounts. Some MSBs include large, globally active companies while others are small businesses such as gas stations and convenience stores offering financial products and services. By comparison, TPPPs are bank customers that provide payment-processing services to merchants and other entities such as telemarketers and online businesses. Both MSBs and TPPPs engage in transactions with individuals and companies who are not direct customers of the bank. The Federal Reserve follows guidance issued in 2005 by the federal banking agencies and the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) governing account relationships with MSBs.5That guidance confirms that banking organizations may provide banking services to MSBs that operate lawfully. The guidance is intended to assist banks in the decision to open and maintain accounts for legitimate businesses by identifying the programs and procedures they should have in place to perform customer due diligence and monitoring of these customers for suspicious activity. The Federal Reserve also follows the interagency examination manual and related guidance issued by FinCEN when evaluating the procedures banking organizations use to manage account relationships with TPPPs.6These entities often use their commercial bank accounts to conduct payment processing for their merchant clients. The guidance is designed to assist banking organizations in designing and implementing policies and systems for monitoring and managing the risks associated with the payment and lending products they offer. The objective of the guidance and the Federal Reserve's supervisory activities is to direct banking organizations to take appropriate steps to offer their services to legitimate and law-abiding customers, and to minimize the risk of facilitating money laundering, terrorist financing, or other illicit activity. Examination and Enforcement ProcessIn 1986, Congress included in the Money Laundering Control Act the requirement that the Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies examine the AML program and procedures banking organizations use to assure compliance with the BSA and report problems with a bank's procedures to management. Under the Money Laundering Control Act, the federal banking agencies are required to take formal, public action against a financial institution that fails to establish and maintain the required program or correct problems with the program that were previously reported to the institution by the supervisors. Consistent with this mandate, the Federal Reserve generally conducts regular on-site examinations of each bank it is charged with supervising on an alternating basis with state banking supervisors. As part of these examinations, examiners review the institution's AML procedures and its compliance with the BSA. For large, complex banking organizations, the safety and soundness examination process is continuous, and anti-money-laundering and BSA compliance is incorporated into the examination process. When we find that a bank has not adopted a program and procedures that properly meet the bank's BSA obligations, the matter is discussed with bank management and noted in the institution's report of examination. The Federal Reserve's enforcement actions under the BSA typically are aimed at correcting deficiencies in an organization's policies and procedures for monitoring account activities and identifying unlawful or suspicious transactions. Recent Justice Department InitiativeFinally, regarding the focus of this hearing, Operation Choke Point is an initiative of the Department of Justice and not an initiative of the Federal Reserve. The Department of Justice has the sole authority to indict or seek criminal fines or other sanctions and to criminally prosecute individuals and businesses for their actions. As we have testified previously, the Federal Reserve cooperates with other agencies in various enforcement actions, including by providing information in response to subpoenas issued by the Justice Department or other federal law enforcement authorities.7 Thank you very much for inviting me to present the Federal Reserve's views on these important issues. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have. 1.See 31 U.S.C. § 5318(h) and Board of Governors Regulation H (12 C.F.R. § 208.63) (BSA program requirements for state member banks).Return to text 2.See 31 C.F.R. § 103.121 and Board of Governors Regulations H and K at 12 C.F.R. §§ 208.63(b)(2), 211.5(m)(2), and 211.24(j)(2) (customer identification requirements).Return to text 3.See 12 C.F.R. § 208.62 and Regulations K and Y at 12 C.F.R. §§ 211.5(k), 211.24(f), and 225.4(f) (suspicious activity reporting requirements).Return to text 4.See Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (2010), "Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering Examination Manual" (April 29).Return to text 5.See Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision (2005), "Interagency Interpretive Guidance on Providing Banking Services to Money Services Businesses Operating in the United States" (April 26).Return to text 6.Seeinfranote 4 at pp. 239-242. See also Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (2012) "Risk Associated with Third-Party Payment Processors" (October 22).Return to text 7."Patterns of Abuse: Assessing Bank Secrecy Act Compliance and Enforcement": Hearing before the S. Comm. on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, 113th Congress (2013) (statement of Jerome H. Powell, Governor, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System).Return to text
The Federal Reserve on Friday announced that it has not objected to a re-submitted capital plan from Zions Bancorporation. Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve objected to the 2014 capital plan from Zions because the firm did not meet the minimum, post-stress tier 1 common ratio of 5 percent during the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. Zions was required to submit a new capital plan under the Federal Reserve's regulation. In the new submission, the firm's minimum, post-stress tier 1 common ratio was 5.1 percent. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On July 7, 2014, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.30000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on July 10, 2014, and will mature on July 17, 2014. The interest rate of 0.30000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On June 30, 2014, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.29000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on July 3, 2014, and will mature on July 10, 2014. The interest rate of 0.29000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application filed by MB Financial, Inc., Chicago, to acquire Taylor Capital Group, Inc., Rosemont, and thereby indirectly acquire Cole Taylor Bank, Chicago, all of Illinois. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application filed by Old National Bancorp, Evansville, Indiana, to merge with United Bancorp, Inc. and thereby indirectly acquire United Bank & Trust, both of Ann Arbor, Michigan. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday issued a consent order to cease and desist and a civil money penalty assessment of $3,510,000 against Cole Taylor Bank of Chicago, Illinois. The order addresses the participation by the bank and its agent, Higher One, Inc. of New Haven, Connecticut (Higher One), in deceptive practices in violation of section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act. Higher One is a nonbank entity that provides institutions of higher education with financial aid refund disbursement services for students. Higher One typically offers students three methods of receiving their financial aid refund: (1) paper check; (2) ACH transfer to an existing bank account; or (3) direct deposit to the Higher One deposit account and debit card product known as the "OneAccount." Because Higher One is not a bank, it must partner with banks to offer the OneAccount. From May 4, 2012 to August 14, 2013, Cole Taylor served as one of the banks providing deposit accounts in connection with the OneAccount. The actions addressed in this order involve the following deceptive practices by Higher One, under Cole Taylor's oversight, that, at various points in the financial aid refund selection process, misled students about the OneAccount. Higher One is taking material corrective action to address these practices in its current disclosures to students. However, appropriate remedial actions against Higher One, including the payment of restitution for its past practices, are currently being pursued. In addition to the civil money penalty, the order against Cole Taylor Bank also requires it to assume backup liability for any restitution to students that Higher One is required to pay in a Federal Reserve enforcement action in the event that Higher One cannot pay the restitution amounts. Actions are also being pursued against another state member bank that has a similar arrangement with Higher One relating to the OneAccounts. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation Press Release
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Lincoln County Bancorp and Peoples Bank and Trust Company, both of Troy, MissouriWritten Agreement issued June 14, 2010Terminated July 23, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Premier Bank (PDF), Denver, ColoradoPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated July 29, 2014 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Metropolitan Bank Group, Inc., Chicago, IllinoisCease and Desist Order issued April 12, 2013Terminated July 25, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: State Bank (PDF), New Hampton, IowaOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated July 17, 2014 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: NASB Financial, Inc., Grandview, MissouriWritten Agreement issued November 29, 2012Terminated July 16, 2014 NexTier Incorporated, Butler, PennsylvaniaWritten Agreement issued October 4, 2010Terminated July 17, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Turkiye Cumhuriyeti Ziraat Bankasi A.S., Ankara, Turkey and Turkiye Cumhuriyeti Ziraat Bankasi A.S. New York Branch (PDF), New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated June 25, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday published a report regarding the Independent Foreclosure Review (IFR) and the Payment Agreement that replaced the IFR. The Payment Agreement required large mortgage servicers to provide approximately $10 billion in cash payments to eligible borrowers and other foreclosure prevention assistance. After the Payment Agreement has been fully implemented, the Federal Reserve expects to publish data on the final status of the cash payments and the foreclosure prevention assistance. Between April 2011 and April 2012, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Reserve issued enforcement actions against 16 mortgage loan servicers for deficient practices in mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. In addition to correcting their servicing practices, the actions required the servicers to hire independent consultants to conduct file reviews to determine if borrowers suffered financial injury and were eligible for financial remediation. To settle their obligations under the IFR, 15 mortgage servicers entered into the Payment Agreement with the OCC and the Federal Reserve to provide $3.9 billion in direct cash payments to borrowers and approximately $6.1 billion in foreclosure prevention assistance. The Payment Agreement provides the greatest benefit to consumers in a timelier manner than would have occurred under the IFR and ensures that servicers cannot ask or require borrowers to waive any legal claims against their servicer as a condition of payment. The report released today provides information on the process for the review of the foreclosure files during the IFR and file review results, including servicer error rates during the IFR, up to the time the IFR was replaced. The report also contains updated information on direct borrower payments and other assistance from the Payment Agreement and discusses the Federal Reserve's ongoing supervision of corrective actions the mortgage servicers are required to implement. The report focuses primarily on servicers regulated by the Federal Reserve. Also on Monday, the Board released action plans for Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley to correct deficiencies in the firms' third-party vendor management procedures. The action plans were required by the enforcement actions issued in 2011 and 2012 by the Federal Reserve for deficiencies in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. Independent Foreclosure Review report, July 2014|PDF Goldman Sachs Residential Mortgage Servicing Vendor Management Policy Addendum (PDF) Morgan Stanley Policy for the Management of Third Party Residential Mortgage Servicing Providers (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released the order related to the previously announced monetary sanctions against SunTrust Banks, Inc., and certain of its subsidiaries (SunTrust) for unsafe and unsound practices in residential mortgage loan servicing and processing. The Board reached an agreement in principle with SunTrust for monetary sanctions totaling $160 million on October 10, 2013. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June indicates that growth in economic activity rebounded in the second quarter. Labor market conditions improved, with the unemployment rate declining further. However, a range of labor market indicators suggests that there remains significant underutilization of labor resources. Household spending appears to be rising moderately and business fixed investment is advancing, while the recovery in the housing sector remains slow. Fiscal policy is restraining economic growth, although the extent of restraint is diminishing. Inflation has moved somewhat closer to the Committee's longer-run objective. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators and inflation moving toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced and judges that the likelihood of inflation running persistently below 2 percent has diminished somewhat. The Committee currently judges that there is sufficient underlying strength in the broader economy to support ongoing improvement in labor market conditions. In light of the cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions since the inception of the current asset purchase program, the Committee decided to make a further measured reduction in the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in August, the Committee will add to its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $10 billion per month rather than $15 billion per month, and will add to its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $15 billion per month rather than $20 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee's sizable and still-increasing holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger economic recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with the Committee's dual mandate. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in further measured steps at future meetings. However, asset purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee's decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the Committee's outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The Committee continues to anticipate, based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Stanley Fischer; Richard W. Fisher; Narayana Kocherlakota; Loretta J. Mester; Jerome H. Powell; and Daniel K. Tarullo. Voting against was Charles I. Plosser who objected to the guidance indicating that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for "a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends," because such language is time dependent and does not reflect the considerable economic progress that has been made toward the Committee's goals. Statement Regarding Purchases of Treasury Securities and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities
On July 7, 2014, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.30000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $10,000,000,000. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's May 9, 2014,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of its policy tools designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the operation is listed below; the operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Operation and Tender Parameters All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full at the interest rate shown above. The minimum tender amount is $10,000; the maximum amount is $10,000,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. All tenders must be submitted between the opening and closing time on the operation date. Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The2013 Federal Reserve Payments Study Detailed Report, released today, provides new information on the payments landscape including updated results on the intensity of card use by consumers and businesses; further discussion of previously released information on third-party payments fraud; new estimates of over-the-counter cash withdrawals and deposits at bank branches and wire transfers made by businesses and consumers; and discussion of emerging and alternative payments likely to replace traditional payments such as cash and checks. The report, available athttp://www.frbservices.org/communications/payment_system_research.html, provides more detailed information about the 2013 summary findings published by the Federal Reserve last December. An updated summary report is also available online. New findings include: "The 2013 Federal Reserve Payments Study collected a broad cross-section of information related to complex consumer and business payments use, and the overview contained in today's report offers a more complete picture of how the information can be used to better understand developments in the payments system," said Jim McKee, senior vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which sponsored the study. He further explained "the industry can use this data to continue serving the public interest to improve the U.S. payments system." The study is the fifth in a series of triennial survey efforts, collecting data for 2012 and including, for the first time, a broader view of trends by incorporating some information from earlier studies. Today's report also provides comprehensive tables containing the various estimates produced from the data collected, detailed descriptions of estimates produced from each survey effort, the methodology used to conduct each survey and, in a few instances, revisions to data published in December. As in previous studies, the estimates reported are based on information gathered in three survey efforts: the2013 Depository and Financial Institutions Payments Survey (DFIPS),the2013 Network, Processors and Issuers Payments Surveys (NPIPS),and the2013 Check Sample Survey (CSS). The Federal Reserve partnered with McKinsey & Company and Lieberman Research Group, as its subcontractor, on the DFIPS, and with Blueflame Consulting and MH Consulting, as its subcontractor, on the NPIPS. McKinsey & Company reviewed a large random sample of images for the CSS. The information collected in each survey is combined with information about payments trends from previous studies and then analyzed and adjusted for seasonality to produce comprehensive estimates not available in other studies. David FettigFSPC Spokesman(612) 204-5274[email protected]
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Martin Feldstein Lecture, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts Although the recession in the United States that started in December 2007 ended in June 2009, the impact of the Great Recession, which began when Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy on September 15, 2008, continues to be felt in the United States, Europe, and around the world.1After the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, policymakers, working through the G-20, quickly reached agreement on the macroeconomic policies needed to minimize the damage done by the crisis. For their part, central bankers and supervisors of financial systems, working through the newly established Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the newly enlarged Basel Committee, rapidly developed a program for reform of the financial sector and its supervision. In this lecture I will ask how much has been achieved so far in implementing the ambitious financial sector reform program that was widely agreed at the early stages of the global financial crisis. From among the range of topics in which financial sector reforms have been instituted since 2008, I focus on three: capital and liquidity for banks and other financial institutions, macroprudential supervision, and the problem of too big to fail (TBTF). What Happened?The 2007-09 crisis was both the worst economic crisis and the worst financial crisis since the 1930s. Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, many thought that we were about to witness a second Great Depression. That did not happen, in large part because policymakers had learned some of the lessons of the Great Depression. Nonetheless, the advanced economies were put through severe economic and political tests. Fortunately, policymakers succeeded in dealing with the situation better than many had feared they would; unfortunately, we are still dealing with the consequences of the collapse and the steps necessary to deal with it. Former Congressman Barney Frank has been heard to say that economists have a wonderful technique, that of the counterfactual, to analyze what has been achieved by preventing disasters, but that real people base their judgments more on the current state of the world than on disasters that have not happened. True as that may be, we should from time-to-time allow ourselves to recognize that as bad as the Great Recession has been, it would have been much worse had policymakers not undertaken the policies they did--many of them unorthodox and previously untried--to deal with the imminent crisis that confronted the United States and global economies after the fall of Lehman Brothers. And for that, we owe them our gratitude and our thanks. The Financial Sector Reform ProgramSeveral financial sector reform programs were prepared within a few months after the Lehman Brothers failure. These programs were supported by national policymakers, including the community of bank supervisors. The programs--national and international--covered some or all of the following nine areas:2(1) to strengthen the stability and robustness of financial firms, "with particular emphasis on standards for governance, risk management, capital and liquidity"3(2) to strengthen the quality and effectiveness of prudential regulation and supervision; (3) to build the capacity for undertaking effective macroprudential regulation and supervision; (4) to develop suitable resolution regimes for financial institutions; (5) to strengthen the infrastructure of financial markets, including markets for derivative transactions; (6) to improve compensation practices in financial institutions; (7) to strengthen international coordination of regulation and supervision, particularly with regard to the regulation and resolution of global systemically important financial institutions, later known as G-SIFIs; (8) to find appropriate ways of dealing with the shadow banking system; and (9) to improve the performance of credit rating agencies, which were deeply involved in the collapse of markets for collateralized and securitized lending instruments, especially those based on mortgage finance. Rather than seek to give a scorecard on progress on all the aspects of the reform programs suggested from 2007 to 2009, I want to focus on three topics of particular salience mentioned earlier: capital and liquidity, macroprudential supervision, and too big to fail. Capital and Liquidity RatiosAt one level, the story on capital and liquidity ratios is very simple: From the viewpoint of the stability of the financial system, more of each is better. This is the principle that lies behind the vigorous campaign waged by Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig to increase bank capital ratios, set out in their book,The Bankers' New Clothes: What's Wrong with Banking and What to Do about It,and in subsequent publications.4 But at what level should capital and liquidity ratios be set? In practice, the base from which countries work is agreement among the regulators and supervisors who belong to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). At one time the membership consisted of the members of the G-10 plus Switzerland. It now includes the membership of the G-20 plus a few other countries.5 Following the global crisis, the BCBS moved to the Basel III agreement, which strengthens capital requirements, as opposed to Basel II, which tried to build primarily on measures of risk capital set by internal models developed by each individual bank. This approach did not work, partly because the agreed regulatory minimum capital ratios were too low, but also because any set of risk weights involves judgments, and human nature would rarely result in choices that made for higher risk weights. In the United States, the new regulations require large bank holding companies (BHCs) to use risk-weighted assets (RWAs) that are the greater of those produced by firms' internal models or the standardized risk weights, some of which have been raised, thus mitigating the problem of the use of internal risk ratings. What has been achieved? Globally In addition, in the United States Many of these rules do not apply to community banks, in light of their different business models. One more point on bank capital: The Swiss and Swedish regulators have already gone far in raising capital requirements, including by requiring bail-in-able secondary holdings of capital in the form of contingent convertible capital obligations (CoCos). The United States may be heading in a similar direction, but not by using CoCos, rather by requiring minimum amounts of "gone-concern" loss absorbency--in the form of long-term debt--that would be available for internal financing recapitalization through a new orderly liquidation mechanism created by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). In addition to enhanced capital ratios and tougher measures of risk-based capital, the Basel III accord includes bank liquidity rules, another key element of global financial regulatory reform. The Basel Committee has agreed on the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), which is designed to reduce the probability of a firm's liquidity insolvency over a 30-day horizon through a self-insurance regime of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) to meet short-term stressed funding needs. The BCBS is also working to finalize the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), which helps to ensure a stable funding profile over a one-year horizon. The bottom line to date: The capital ratios of the 25 largest banks in the United States have risen by as much as 50 percent since the beginning of 2005 to the start of this year, depending on which regulatory ratio you look at. For example, the tier 1 common equity ratio has gone up from 7 percent to 11 percent for these institutions. The increase in the ratios understates the increase in capital because it does not adjust for tougher risk weights in the denominator. In addition, the buffers of HQLAs held by the largest banking firms have more than doubled since the end of 2007, and their reliance on short-term wholesale funds has fallen considerably. At the same time, the introduction of macroeconomic supervisory stress tests in the United States has added a forward-looking approach to assessing capital adequacy, as firms are required to hold a capital buffer sufficient to withstand a several-year period of severe economic and financial stress. The stress tests are a very important addition to the toolkit of supervisors, one that is likely to add significantly to the quality of financial sector supervision. Macroprudential Policy and SupervisionIn practice, there are two uses of the term "macroprudential supervision."8The first relates to the supervision of the financial system as a whole, with an emphasis on interactions among financial markets and institutions. The second relates to the use of regulatory or other non-interest-rate tools of policy to deal with problems arising from the behavior of asset prices.9For instance, when central bank governors are asked how they propose to deal with the problem of rising housing prices at a time when the central bank for macroeconomic reasons does not want to raise the interest rate, they generally reply that if the need arises, they will use macroprudential policies for that purpose. By that they mean policies that will reduce the supply of credit to the housing sector without changing the central bank interest rate. Sector-specific regulatory and supervisory policies in the financial sector were used extensively and systematically in the United States in the period following World War II until the 1990s and are now being used in other advanced and developing countries. Elliott, Feldberg, and Lehnert review the use of such measures in the United States.10Frequently, these policies were aimed at encouraging or discouraging activity in particular sectors, for example agriculture, exports, manufacturing, or housing; sometimes broad, non-interest-rate measures were used to try to deal with inflation or asset-price increases, for instance, the use of credit controls. The issue of how monetary policy should relate to asset-price inflation had been on the agenda of central bankers for many years before the Lehman Brothers' failure.11The issue became more prominent in the United States in the 1990s and the first few years of this century, and temporarily culminated in the Fed's "mopping-up" approach, namely that monetary policy--meaning interest rate policy--should not react to rising asset prices or suspected bubbles except to the extent that they affect either employment and/or price stability. Operationally, this approach was much more likely to lead to action after the bubble had burst than as it was forming.12The policy was tested in the bursting of the tech bubble in 2001 and appeared to be successful as the economy recovered from 2002 onward.13However, the mopping-up doctrine did not include the second element of the macroprudential approach--the use of regulatory and supervisory measures to deal with undesired asset-price movements when the central bank interest rate was judged not to be available for that purpose. At present, the word macroprudential is used primarily in the second sense--of the use of regulatory and supervisory noncentral bank interest rate tools to affect asset prices. In this sense, the use of the word takes us back to a world that central bankers thought they had left by the 1990s.14 Now, from etymology to economics: I want to review my experience with macroprudential policies--in the second sense of noninterest regulatory and supervisory policies--as Governor of the Bank of Israel to draw a few key lessons about the use of these policies. To set the background: There was no financial crisis in Israel during the Great Recession. As domestic interest rates declined along with global rates, housing prices began to rise.15This is a normal part of the textbook adjustment mechanism and is expected to encourage an increase in the rate of homebuilding. The rate of building increased, but not sufficiently to meet the demand for housing, and prices continued to rise.16 The banks are the largest financial institutions in Israel and dominate housing finance. The supervisor of banks reports to the governor of the central bank. Starting in 2010, the supervisor began to implement a series of measures to reduce the supply of housing finance by the banks. Among the measures used were increasing capital requirements and provisioning against mortgages; limiting the share of any housing financing package indexed to the short-term (central bank) interest rate to one-third of the total loan, with the remainder of the package having to be linked to either the five-year real or five-year nominal interest rate; and, on different occasions, limiting the loan-to-value (LTV) and payment-to-income (PTI) ratios.17Additional precautionary measures were implemented in the supervision of banks.18 The most successful of these measures was the limit of one-third imposed in May 2011 on the share of any housing loan indexed in effect to the Bank of Israel interest rate. Competition among the banks had driven the spread on floating rate mortgages indexed to the Bank of Israel rate down to 60 basis points, which meant that mortgage financing was available at an extremely low interest rate. The term-structure was relatively steep, so that the requirement that the remaining two-thirds of any financing package had to be indexed to a five-year rate--whether real or nominal--made a substantial difference to the cost of housing finance. In addition, increases in both LTV and PTI ratios were moderately effective. However, increasing capital charges had very little impact in practice. There are three key lessons from this experience. First, the Bank of Israel did not have good empirical estimates of the effectiveness of the different macroprudential measures.19This problem is likely to be relevant in many countries in large part because we have relatively little experience of the use of such measures in recent years.20Policymakers may thus be especially cautious in the use of measures of this type. Second, measures aimed at reducing the demand for housing are likely to be politically sensitive.21Their use requires either very cautious and well-aimed measures by the regulatory authorities, and/or the use by the government of subsidies to compensate some of those who end up facing more difficulty in buying housing as a result of the imposition of macroprudential measures. Indeed, it often appears that there is a conflict between cautious risk management by the lenders and the desire of society to house its people decently. Third, there is generally a need for coordination among several regulators and authorities in dealing with macroprudential problems of both types. There are many models of regulatory coordination, but I shall focus on only two: the British and the American. As is well known, the United Kingdom has reformed financial sector regulation and supervision by setting up a Financial Policy Committee (FPC), located in the Bank of England; the major reforms in the United States were introduced through the Dodd-Frank Act, which set up a coordinating committee among the major regulators, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). In discussing these two approaches, I draw on a recent speech by the person best able to speak about the two systems from close-up, Don Kohn.22Kohn sets out the following requirements for successful macroprudential supervision: to be able to identify risks to financial stability, to be willing and able to act on these risks in a timely fashion, to be able to interact productively with the microprudential and monetary policy authorities, and to weigh the costs and benefits of proposed actions appropriately. Kohn's cautiously stated bottom line is that the FPC is well structured to meet these requirements, and that the FSOC is not. In particular, the FPC has the legal power to impose policy changes on regulators, and the FSOC does not, for it is mostly a coordinating body. After reviewing the structure of the FSOC, Kohn presents a series of suggestions to strengthen its powers and its independence. The first is that every regulatory institution represented in the FSOC should have the goal of financial stability added to its mandate. His final suggestion is, "Give the more independent FSOC tools it can use more expeditiously to address systemic risks."23He does not go so far as to suggest the FSOC be empowered to instruct regulators to implement measures somehow decided upon by the FSOC, but he does want to extend its ability to make recommendations on a regular basis, perhaps on an expedited "comply-or-explain" basis. Kohn remarks that he does not hold up the U.K. structure of macroprudential supervision as ideal for all countries at all times and further notes that the U.K. system vests a great deal of authority in a single institution, the Bank of England. This element is not consistent with the U.S. approach of dispersing power among competing institutions. These are important, and difficult, issues. Kohn's proposals clearly warrant serious examination. It may well be that adding a financial stability mandate to the overall mandates of all financial regulatory bodies, and perhaps other changes that would give more authority to a reformed FSOC, would contribute to increasing financial and economic stability. Financial Reform and TBTFDiagnoses of what went wrong with the financial system at the start of the Great Recession in the United States generally placed heavy emphasis on the problem of too big to fail. The TBTF problem derives from the typical response of governments confronted by the potential failure of a large bank, which is to intervene to save the bank and some of its noninsured creditors.24In the words of Governor Tarullo, "...no matter what its general economic policy principles, a government faced with the possibility of a cascading financial crisis that could bring down its national economy tends to err on the side of intervention."25 I will start by discussing some of the main steps in the links between TBTF and the crisis, and between the financial sector reform program and TBTF. We begin with the link between TBTF and government intervention: Once investors believe that governments will intervene to prevent large banks from becoming bankrupt, they become willing to lend to these banks at lower rates than they would lend without the implicit guarantee. This could lead to such banks becoming larger than optimal and to encouraging them to take more risks than they would absent expected government intervention to reduce the likelihood of their becoming bankrupt. A great deal of empirical work has attempted to measure the premium--in terms of a lower cost of financing--that the large banks typically receive. The results vary, but a representative set of estimates--that of the International Monetary Fund in its April 2014 issue of theGlobal Financial Stability Report--reports that in 2013 their estimates of the premium were approximately 15 basis points in the United States, 25-60 basis points in Japan, 20-60 basis points in the United Kingdom, and 60-90 basis points in the euro area.26The estimated premium in the United States was higher at the height of the financial crisis, and has been declining since then in response to the significant steps made in the regulatory reform agenda. Do large banks, with lower costs of financing, take bigger risks? The empirical relationship between bank size and their risk-taking has been examined by Laeven, Ratnovski, and Tong, who find that "large banks tend to have lower capital ratios, less stable funding, more market-based activities, and (to) be more organizationally complex than small banks."27From this they conclude that "[l]arge banks are riskier, and create more systemic risk, when they have lower capital and less-stable funding. [They] create more systemic risk (but are not individually riskier) when they engage more in market-based activities or are more organizationally complex."28 The key to these results is the recognition that banks have several sources of financing, and that the more they rely on market interest rate-sensitive short-term funding, the less stable they are likely to be. Organizational complexity is certainly an issue: Maintaining managerial control, especially risk control, in a multi-activity bank, where individual rewards may be massive, is extremely difficult--think for instance of Baring's in the late 1990s, or Societe Generale, or the so-called London Whale at JPMorgan Chase. Strong risk management is essential but faces the hurdle of the structural incentives for risk-taking implied by limited liability for individuals and by what may be a human proclivity to take risks.29But of course, banks that are heavily consumer deposit financed also fail from time to time, as a result of bad lending decisions. It could be that large banks can finance themselves more cheaply because they are more efficient, that is, that there are economies of scale in banking. For some time, the received wisdom was that there was no evidence of such economies beyond relatively modest-sized banks, with balance sheets of approximately $100 billion. More recently, several papers have found that economies of scale may continue beyond that level. For example, the title of a paper by Joseph Hughes and Loretta Mester, "Who Said Large Banks Don't Experience Scale Economies? Evidence from a Risk-Return Driven Cost Function"30suggests that large institutions may be better able to manage risk more efficiently because of "technological advantages, such as diversification and the spreading of information...and other costs that do not increase proportionately with size." That said, these authors conclude that "[W]e do not know if the benefits of large size outweigh the potential costs in terms of systemic risk that large scale may impose on the financial system." They add that their results suggest that "strict size limits to control such costs will likely not be effective, since they work against market forces..." The TBTF theory of why large banks are a problem has to contend with the history of the Canadian and Australian banking systems. Both these systems have several very large banks, but both systems have been very stable--in the Canadian case, for 150 years.31Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003) examined the impact of bank concentration, bank regulation, and national institutions on the likelihood of a country suffering a financial crisis and concluded that countries are less likely to suffer a financial crisis if they have (1) a more concentrated banking system, (2) fewer entry barriers and activity restrictions on bank activity, and (3) better-developed institutions that encourage competition throughout the economy.32The combination of the first finding with the other two appears paradoxical, but the key barrier to competition that was absent in Canada was the prohibition of nationwide branch banking, a factor emphasized by Calomiris and Haber in their discussion of the Canadian case.33In addition, I put serious weight on another explanation offered in private conversation by a veteran of the international central banking community, "Those Canadian banks aren't very adventurous," which I take to be a compliment.34 Why is the TBTF phenomenon so central to the debate on reform of the financial system? It cannot be because financial institutions never fail. Some do, for example, Lehman Brothers and the Washington Mutual failed in the Great Recession. Other banks were merged out of existence, often at very low prices, with the FDIC managing the resolution process. Banks in the United Kingdom and in Europe failed during the Great Recession. It cannot be because equity-holders never lose in bank crises. It could be because until now, bond holders in large banks rarely have lost significantly in crises--rather, for fear of contagion, they ended up being protected by the government. Almost certainly, TBTF is central to the debate about financial crises because financial crises are so destructive of the real economy. It is also because the amounts of money involved when the central bank or the government intervenes in a financial crisis are extremely large, even though the final costs to the government, including the central bank, are typically much smaller. In some cases, governments and central banks even come out slightly ahead after the crisis is over and the banks have been sold back to the private sector. Another factor may be that the departing heads of some banks that failed or needed massive government assistance to survive nonetheless received very large retirement packages. One can regard the entire regulatory reform program, which aims to strengthen the resilience of banks and the banking system to shocks, as dealing with the TBTF problem by reducing the probability that any bank will get into trouble. There are, however, some aspects of the financial reform program that deal specifically with large banks. The most important such measure is the work on resolution mechanisms for SIFIs, including the very difficult case of G-SIFIs. In the United States, the Dodd-Frank Act has provided the FDIC with the Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA)--a regime to conduct an orderly resolution of a financial firm if the bankruptcy of the firm would threaten financial stability. And the FDIC's single-point-of-entry approach for effecting a resolution under the new regime is a sensible proposed implementation path for the OLA. Closely associated with the work on resolution mechanisms is the living will exercise for SIFIs. In addition, there are the proposed G-SIB capital surcharges and macro stress tests applied to the largest BHCs ($50 billion or more). Countercyclical capital requirements are also likely to be applied primarily to large banks. Similarly the Volcker rule, or the Vickers rules in the United Kingdom or the Liikanen rules in the euro zone, which seek to limit the scope of a bank's activities, are directed at TBTF, and I believe appropriately so. What about simply breaking up the largest financial institutions? Well, there is no "simply" in this area. At the analytical level, there is the question of what the optimal structure of the financial sector should be. Would a financial system that consisted of a large number of medium-sized and small firms be more stable and more efficient than one with a smaller number of very large firms? That depends on whether there are economies of scale in the financial sector and up to what size of firm they apply--that is to say it depends in part on why there is a financing premium for large firms. If it is economies of scale, the market premium for large firms may be sending the right signals with respect to size. If it is the existence of TBTF, that is not an optimal market incentive, but rather a distortion. What would happen if it was possible precisely to calculate the extent of the subsidy or distortion and require the bank to pay the social cost of the expansion of its activity?35This could be done either by varying the deposit insurance rate for the bank or by varying the required capital ratios for SIFIs to fit each bank's risk profile and structure. This, along with measures to strengthen large banks, would reduce the likelihood of SIFI failure--but could not be relied upon to prevent all failures. Would breaking up the largest banks end the need for future bailouts? That is not clear, for Lehman Brothers, although a large financial institution, was not one of the giants--except that it was connected with a very large number of other banks and financial institutions. Similarly, the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s and 1990s was not a TBTF crisis but rather a failure involving many small firms that were behaving unwisely, and in some cases illegally. This case is consistent with the phrase, "too many to fail." Financial panics can be caused by herding and by contagion, as well as by big banks getting into trouble. In short, actively breaking up the largest banks would be a very complex task, with uncertain payoff. The Bottom LinesThe United States is making significant progress in strengthening the financial system and reducing the probability of future financial crises. In particular And if, despite all our efforts, a crisis happens, we need to be willing and prepared to deal with it. 1.I began work on this lecture when I was a resident Distinguished Fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations and completed it after I joined the Federal Reserve Board on May 28, 2014. I am grateful to Dinah Walker of the Council on Foreign Relations for research assistance and to Nellie Liang, Skander Van den Heuvel, Mark Van Der Weide, William Bassett, Beth Kiser, Barbara Hagenbaugh, and Stacey Tevlin at the Federal Reserve Board for discussions, advice, and assistance. Views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Open Market Committee, or the Council on Foreign Relations.Return to text 2.This is a combination of the areas of reform presented in the G-30 report, Group of Thirty (2009),Financial Reform: A Framework for Financial Stability (PDF), (Washington, D.C.: Group of Thirty, January); the FSB report, "Improving Financial Regulation: Report of the Financial Stability Board to G20 Leaders (PDF)," Financial Stability Board, September 2009; and some that I added.Return to text 3.Group of Thirty (2009), p. 21. For an incisive account of measures to deal with the TBTF problem, see the 2009 speech by my Federal Reserve Board colleague, Daniel K. Tarullo (2009), "Confronting Too Big to Fail," speech delivered at the Exchequer Club, Washington, D.C., October 21.Return to text 4.Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig (2013),The Bankers' New Clothes: What's Wrong with Banking and What to Do about It(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).Return to text 5.A full list of jurisdictions and institutions represented on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision can be found atwww.bis.org/bcbs/membership.htm.Return to text 6.As my colleagues Chair Yellen and Governor Tarullo have noted, it may be appropriate to go beyond the risk-based surcharges proposed by the BCBS. The goal would be to reach a point where any remaining TBTF subsidies have been offset and where other social costs of a potential failure by the firm have been internalized.Return to text 7.In addition, the subsidiary banks of the U.S. G-SIBs will need to meet a 6 percent leverage ratio to be considered well capitalized from the viewpoint of prompt corrective action regulations.Return to text 8.The word "macroprudential" appears to have been invented in the late 1970s and was used by Andrew Crockett and others at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in the 1990s and later. It began to come into central banker usage in the first decade of this century. But it was the consequences of the failure of Lehman Brothers that made it a household word. See Piet Clement (2010) "The Term 'Macroprudential': Origins and Evolution (PDF),"BIS Quarterly Review,March, pp. 59-67.Return to text 9.For an authoritative, recent statement by Chair Yellen, see Janet L. Yellen (2014), "Monetary Policy and Financial Stability," speech delivered at the 2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., July 2.Return to text 10.For a comprehensive review of the use of such policies, see Douglas J. Elliott, Greg Feldberg, and Andreas Lehnert (2013), "The History of Cyclical Macroprudential Policy in the United States," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-29 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May).Return to text 11.Among the suggested solutions was the proposal that the consumer price index should include the prices of assets as representing the costs of future consumption. See Armen A. Alchian and Benjamin Klein (1973), "On a Correct Measure of Inflation,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 5 (1), part 1, pp. 173-91.Return to text 12.As is well known, support for the mopping-up approach was not unanimous, with, for example, researchers at the BIS, notably Claudio Borio and Bill White, presenting the view that monetary policy should be used to deal with asset-price inflation. See Claudio Borio and William R. White (2003), "Whither Monetary and Financial Stability? The Implications of Evolving Policy Regimes (PDF)," paper presented at "Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in the Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28-30. See also Raghuram Rajan (2005), "Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier? (PDF)" paper presented at "The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in the Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 25-27.Return to text 13.It could be argued that the low interest rates of the 2003-06 period were the result of the mopping-up approach. I do not see any necessary connection between the mopping-up doctrine and monetary policy in the period following the mopping up of the hi-tech boom.Return to text 14.According to the ProQuest database, of the roughly 1,600 articles referring to the term "macroprudential" after the start of the Great Recession, almost all refer to regulatory and supervisory interventions.Return to text 15.House prices tended to increase more rapidly in countries that did not experience a financial sector crisis during the Great Recession. For a more detailed account, see Stanley Fischer (2014), "Macroprudential Policy in Action: Israel," in George A. Akerlof, Olivier J. Blanchard, David Romer, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds.,What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy after the Crisis(Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press), pp. 87-98.Return to text 16.The supply of land to the market in Israel is fundamentally controlled by the government, which owns more than 90 percent of the land.Return to text 17.For more details, see Fischer (2014).Return to text 18.Mortgages in Israel arenotnonrecourse loans; in the event of nonpayment, the lender can seek to attach other assets of the borrower in addition to the house itself.Return to text 19.Typically the impact was calculated based on an estimate of how much a measure would increase the effective interest rate paid by the borrower, but this calculation generally resulted in an overestimate of the impact of the policy change.Return to text 20.Elliott, Feldberg, and Lehnert (2013) present empirical results on the use of macroprudential (sense 2) measures in the United States, but their results are at too high a level of aggregation to be useful in making decisions on the deployment of specific supervisory or regulatory measures. The literature is growing. For example, Kuttner and Shim examine the effects of actions in 57 countries since the 1980s on house prices and housing credit growth. See Kenneth N. Kuttner and Ilhyock Shim (2013), "Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilise Housing Markets? Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies," Bank for International Settlements working paper no. 433 (Basel: BIS, November).Return to text 21.This is a general problem but is particularly the case in the Israeli context where the bulk of the male population is conscripted into the armed forces for three years at a relatively low salary, and there is a general view that young couples deserve to be able to buy an apartment when they marry.Return to text 22.Donald Kohn (2014), "Institutions for Macroprudential Regulation: the UK and the U.S." speech delivered at the Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., April 17.Return to text 23.The FSOC would become more independent as a result of implementing Kohn's suggestions.Return to text 24.In describing the TBTF diagnosis, I draw on Tarullo (2009). In addition, see Gary H. Stern and Ron J. Feldman (2004),Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts(Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press); Charles W. Calomiris and Stephen H. Haber (2014),Fragile by Design: The Political Origins of Banking Crises and Scarce Credit(Princeton: Princeton University Press); and Financial Stability Board (2010), "Reducing the Moral Hazard Posed by Systemically Important Financial Institutions (PDF)," FSB report (Basel: BIS, October). For a very readable account, see chapter 11 of Alan S. Blinder (2013),After the Music Stopped: The Financial Crisis, the Response, and the Work Ahead(New York: Penguin Books).Return to text 25.Tarullo (2009), p.2.Return to text 26.International Monetary Fund (2014),Global Financial Stability Report(Washington, D.C.: IMF, April), chapter 3.Return to text 27.Luc Laeven, Lev Ratnovski, and Hui Tong (2014), "Bank Size and Systemic Risk (PDF)," International Monetary Fund Staff Discussion Note 1404, May.Return to text 28.Large banks also hold less capital than small banks because they are more diversified--for example, small U.S. banks have larger geographical concentrations and larger single-name concentrations than larger banks.Return to text 29.In this regard one cannot fail to be impressed by the fact that in countries with a death penalty for corruption, some people appear nonetheless to be willing to take the chance of becoming rich illegally.Return to text 30.See Joseph P. Hughes and Loretta J. Mester (2011), "Who Said Large Banks Don't Experience Scale Economies? Evidence from a Risk-Return-Driven Cost Function (PDF)," working paper 11-27 (Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, July).Return to text 31.If this lecture had been delivered in 2005, I would have added the British banking system to the above list. This is evidence that the regulatory structure also matters.Return to text 32.Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2003), "Bank Concentration and Crises (PDF)," National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 9921 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, August).Return to text 33.Calomiris and Haber (2014), pp. 305-11.Return to text 34.This comment pushes one in the direction of supporting the Volcker rule and other restrictions on commercial banks undertaking capital market activities. One criticism of the Volcker rule is that two of the key failed institutions in the recent financial crisis--Bear-Stearns and Lehman Brothers--were not banks. It is hard to see why this fact suggests that permitting commercial banks to combine their activities with those of investment banks would be a stabilizing factor for the banking system.Return to text 35.See footnote 6 above.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for June 2 and June 16, 2014. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on June 17-18, 2014. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJune 17-18, 2014:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the 2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C. Watch live It is an honor to deliver the inaugural Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture. Michel Camdessus served with distinction as governor of the Banque de France and was one of the longest-serving managing directors of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). In these roles, he was well aware of the challenges central banks face in their pursuit of price stability and full employment, and of the interconnections between macroeconomic stability and financial stability. Those interconnections were apparent in the Latin American debt crisis, the Mexican peso crisis, and the East Asian financial crisis, to which the IMF responded under Camdessus's leadership. These episodes took place in emerging market economies, but since then, the global financial crisis and, more recently, the euro crisis have reminded us that no economy is immune from financial instability and the adverse effects on employment, economic activity, and price stability that financial crises cause. The recent crises have appropriately increased the focus on financial stability at central banks around the world. At the Federal Reserve, we have devoted substantially increased resources to monitoring financial stability and have refocused our regulatory and supervisory efforts to limit the buildup of systemic risk. There have also been calls, from some quarters, for a fundamental reconsideration of the goals and strategy of monetary policy. Today I will focus on a key question spurred by this debate: How should monetary and other policymakers balance macroprudential approaches and monetary policy in the pursuit of financial stability? In my remarks, I will argue that monetary policy faces significant limitations as a tool to promote financial stability: Its effects on financial vulnerabilities, such as excessive leverage and maturity transformation, are not well understood and are less direct than a regulatory or supervisory approach; in addition, efforts to promote financial stability through adjustments in interest rates would increase the volatility of inflation and employment. As a result, I believe a macroprudential approach to supervision and regulation needs to play the primary role. Such an approach should focus on "through the cycle" standards that increase the resilience of the financial system to adverse shocks and on efforts to ensure that the regulatory umbrella will cover previously uncovered systemically important institutions and activities. These efforts should be complemented by the use of countercyclical macroprudential tools, a few of which I will describe. But experience with such tools remains limited, and we have much to learn to use these measures effectively. I am also mindful of the potential for low interest rates to heighten the incentives of financial market participants to reach for yield and take on risk, and of the limits of macroprudential measures to address these and other financial stability concerns. Accordingly, there may be times when an adjustment in monetary policy may be appropriate to ameliorate emerging risks to financial stability. Because of this possibility, and because transparency enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy, it is crucial that policymakers communicate their views clearly on the risks to financial stability and how such risks influence the appropriate monetary policy stance. I will conclude by briefly laying out how financial stability concerns affect my current assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy. Balancing Financial Stability with Price Stability: Lessons from the Recent PastWhen considering the connections between financial stability, price stability, and full employment, the discussion often focuses on the potential for conflicts among these objectives. Such situations are important, since it is only when conflicts arise that policymakers need to weigh the tradeoffs among multiple objectives. But it is important to note that, in many ways, the pursuit of financial stability is complementary to the goals of price stability and full employment. A smoothly operating financial system promotes the efficient allocation of saving and investment, facilitating economic growth and employment. A strong labor market contributes to healthy household and business balance sheets, thereby contributing to financial stability. And price stability contributes not only to the efficient allocation of resources in the real economy, but also to reduced uncertainty and efficient pricing in financial markets, which in turn supports financial stability. Despite these complementarities, monetary policy has powerful effects on risk taking. Indeed, the accommodative policy stance of recent years has supported the recovery, in part, by providing increased incentives for households and businesses to take on the risk of potentially productive investments. But such risk-taking can go too far, thereby contributing to fragility in the financial system.1This possibility does not obviate the need for monetary policy to focus primarily on price stability and full employment--the costs to society in terms of deviations from price stability and full employment that would arise would likely be significant. I will highlight these potential costs and the clear need for a macroprudential policy approach by looking back at the vulnerabilities in the U.S. economy before the crisis. I will also discuss how these vulnerabilities might have been affected had the Federal Reserve tightened monetary policy in the mid-2000s to promote financial stability. Looking Back at the Mid-2000sAlthough it was not recognized at the time, risks to financial stability within the United States escalated to a dangerous level in the mid-2000s. During that period, policymakers--myself included--were aware that homes seemed overvalued by a number of sensible metrics and that home prices might decline, although there was disagreement about how likely such a decline was and how large it might be. What was not appreciated was how serious the fallout from such a decline would be for the financial sector and the macroeconomy. Policymakers failed to anticipate that the reversal of the house price bubble would trigger the most significant financial crisis in the United States since the Great Depression because that reversal interacted with critical vulnerabilities in the financial system and in government regulation. In the private sector, key vulnerabilities included high levels of leverage, excessive dependence on unstable short-term funding, weak underwriting of loans, deficiencies in risk measurement and risk management, and the use of exotic financial instruments that redistributed risk in nontransparent ways. In the public sector, vulnerabilities included gaps in the regulatory structure that allowed some systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) and markets to escape comprehensive supervision, failures of supervisors to effectively use their existing powers, and insufficient attention to threats to the stability of the system as a whole. It is not uncommon to hear it suggested that the crisis could have been prevented or significantly mitigated by substantially tighter monetary policy in the mid-2000s. At the very least, however, such an approach would have been insufficient to address the full range of critical vulnerabilities I have just described. A tighter monetary policy would not have closed the gaps in the regulatory structure that allowed some SIFIs and markets to escape comprehensive supervision; a tighter monetary policy would not have shifted supervisory attention to a macroprudential perspective; and a tighter monetary policy would not have increased the transparency of exotic financial instruments or ameliorated deficiencies in risk measurement and risk management within the private sector. Some advocates of the view that a substantially tighter monetary policy may have helped prevent the crisis might acknowledge these points, but they might also argue that a tighter monetary policy could have limited the rise in house prices, the use of leverage within the private sector, and the excessive reliance on short-term funding, and that each of these channels would have contained--or perhaps even prevented--the worst effects of the crisis. A review of the empirical evidence suggests that the level of interest rates does influence house prices, leverage, and maturity transformation, but it is also clear that a tighter monetary policy would have been a very blunt tool: Substantially mitigating the emerging financial vulnerabilities through higher interest rates would have had sizable adverse effects in terms of higher unemployment. In particular, a range of studies conclude that tighter monetary policy during the mid-2000s might have contributed to a slower rate of house price appreciation. But the magnitude of this effect would likely have been modest relative to the substantial momentum in these prices over the period; hence, a very significant tightening, with large increases in unemployment, would have been necessary to halt the housing bubble.2Such a slowing in the housing market might have constrained the rise in household leverage, as mortgage debt growth would have been slower. But the job losses and higher interest payments associated with higher interest rates would have directly weakened households' ability to repay previous debts, suggesting that a sizable tightening may have mitigated vulnerabilities in household balance sheets only modestly.3 Similar mixed results would have been likely with regard to the effects of tighter monetary policy on leverage and reliance on short-term financing within the financial sector. In particular, the evidence that low interest rates contribute to increased leverage and reliance on short-term funding points toward some ability of higher interest rates to lessen these vulnerabilities, but that evidence is typically consistent with a sizable range of quantitative effects or alternative views regarding the causal channels at work.4Furthermore, vulnerabilities from excessive leverage and reliance on short-term funding in the financial sector grew rapidly through the middle of 2007, well after monetary policy had already tightened significantly relative to the accommodative policy stance of 2003 and early 2004. In my assessment, macroprudential policies, such as regulatory limits on leverage and short-term funding, as well as stronger underwriting standards, represent far more direct and likely more effective methods to address these vulnerabilities.5 Recent International ExperienceTurning to recent experience outside the United States, a number of foreign economies have seen rapidly rising real estate prices, which has raised financial stability concerns despite, in some cases, high unemployment and shortfalls in inflation relative to the central bank's inflation target.6These developments have prompted debate on how to best balance the use of monetary policy and macroprudential tools in promoting financial stability. For example, Canada, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom have expressed a willingness to use monetary policy to address financial stability concerns in unusual circumstances, but they have similarly concluded that macroprudential policies should serve as the primary tool to pursue financial stability. In Canada, with inflation below target and output growth quite subdued, the Bank of Canada has kept the policy rate at or below 1 percent, but limits on mortgage lending were tightened in each of the years from 2009 through 2012, including changes in loan-to-value and debt-to-income caps, among other measures.7In contrast, in Norway and Sweden, monetary policy decisions have been influenced somewhat by financial stability concerns, but the steps taken have been limited. In Norway, policymakers increased the policy interest rate in mid-2010 when they were facing escalating household debt despite inflation below target and output below capacity, in part as a way of "guarding against the risk of future imbalances."8Similarly, Sweden's Riksbank held its policy rate "slightly higher than we would have done otherwise" because of financial stability concerns.9In both cases, macroprudential actions were also either taken or under consideration. In reviewing these experiences, it seems clear that monetary policymakers have perceived significant hurdles to using sizable adjustments in monetary policy to contain financial stability risks. Some proponents of a larger monetary policy response to financial stability concerns might argue that these perceived hurdles have been overblown and that financial stability concerns should be elevated significantly in monetary policy discussions. A more balanced assessment, in my view, would be that increased focus on financial stability risks is appropriate in monetary policy discussions, but the potential cost, in terms of diminished macroeconomic performance, is likely to be too great to give financial stability risks a central role in monetary policy decisions, at least most of the time. If monetary policy is not to play a central role in addressing financial stability issues, this task must rely on macroprudential policies. In this regard, I would note that here, too, policymakers abroad have made important strides, and not just those in the advanced economies. Emerging market economies have in many ways been leaders in applying macroprudential policy tools, employing in recent years a variety of restrictions on real estate lending or other activities that were perceived to create vulnerabilities.10Although it is probably too soon to draw clear conclusions, these experiences will help inform our understanding of these policies and their efficacy. Promoting Financial Stability through a Macroprudential ApproachIf macroprudential tools are to play the primary role in the pursuit of financial stability, questions remain on which macroprudential tools are likely to be most effective, what the limits of such tools may be, and when, because of such limits, it may be appropriate to adjust monetary policy to "get in the cracks" that persist in the macroprudential framework.11 In weighing these questions, I find it helpful to distinguish between tools that primarily build through-the-cycle resilience against adverse financial developments and those primarily intended to lean against financial excesses.12 Building ResilienceTools that build resilience aim to make the financial system better able to withstand unexpected adverse developments. For example, requirements to hold sufficient loss-absorbing capital make financial institutions more resilient in the face of unexpected losses. Such requirements take on a macroprudential dimension when they are most stringent for the largest, most systemically important firms, thereby minimizing the risk that losses at such firms will reverberate through the financial system. Resilience against runs can be enhanced both by stronger capital positions and requirements for sufficient liquidity buffers among the most interconnected firms. An effective resolution regime for SIFIs can also enhance resilience by better protecting the financial system from contagion in the event of a SIFI collapse. Further, the stability of the financial system can be enhanced through measures that address interconnectedness between financial firms, such as margin and central clearing requirements for derivatives transactions. Finally, a regulatory umbrella wide enough to cover previous gaps in the regulation and supervision of systemically important firms and markets can help prevent risks from migrating to areas where they are difficult to detect or address. In the United States, considerable progress has been made on each of these fronts. Changes in bank capital regulations, which will include a surcharge for systemically important institutions, have significantly increased requirements for loss-absorbing capital at the largest banking firms. The Federal Reserve's stress tests and Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review process require that large financial institutions maintain sufficient capital to weather severe shocks, and that they demonstrate that their internal capital planning processes are effective, while providing perspective on the loss-absorbing capacity across a large swath of the financial system. The Basel III framework also includes liquidity requirements designed to mitigate excessive reliance by global banks on short-term wholesale funding. Oversight of the U.S. shadow banking system also has been strengthened. The new Financial Stability Oversight Council has designated some nonbank financial firms as systemically important institutions that are subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve. In addition, measures are being undertaken to address some of the potential sources of instability in short-term wholesale funding markets, including reforms to the triparty repo market and money market mutual funds--although progress in these areas has, at times, been frustratingly slow. Additional measures should be taken to address residual risks in the short-term wholesale funding markets. Some of these measures--such as requiring firms to hold larger amounts of capital, stable funding, or highly liquid assets based on use of short-term wholesale funding--would likely apply only to the largest, most complex organizations. Other measures--such as minimum margin requirements for repurchase agreements and other securities financing transactions--could, at least in principle, apply on a marketwide basis. To the extent that minimum margin requirements lead to more conservative margin levels during normal and exuberant times, they could help avoid potentially destabilizing procyclical margin increases in short-term wholesale funding markets during times of stress. Leaning Against the WindAt this point, it should be clear that I think efforts to build resilience in the financial system are critical to minimizing the chance of financial instability and the potential damage from it. This focus on resilience differs from much of the public discussion, which often concerns whether some particular asset class is experiencing a "bubble" and whether policymakers should attempt to pop the bubble. Because a resilient financial system can withstand unexpected developments, identification of bubbles is less critical. Nonetheless, some macroprudential tools can be adjusted in a manner that may further enhance resilience as risks emerge. In addition, macroprudential tools can, in some cases, be targeted at areas of concern. For example, the new Basel III regulatory capital framework includes a countercyclical capital buffer, which may help build additional loss-absorbing capacity within the financial sector during periods of rapid credit creation while also leaning against emerging excesses. The stress tests include a scenario design process in which the macroeconomic stresses in the scenario become more severe during buoyant economic expansions and incorporate the possibility of highlighting salient risk scenarios, both of which may contribute to increasing resilience during periods in which risks are rising.13Similarly, minimum margin requirements for securities financing transactions could potentially vary on a countercyclical basis so that they are higher in normal times than in times of stress. Implications for Monetary Policy, Now and in the FutureIn light of the considerable efforts under way to implement a macroprudential approach to enhance financial stability and the increased focus of policymakers on monitoring emerging financial stability risks, I see three key principles that should guide the interaction of monetary policy and macroprudential policy in the United States. First, it is critical for regulators to complete their efforts at implementing a macroprudential approach to enhance resilience within the financial system, which will minimize the likelihood that monetary policy will need to focus on financial stability issues rather than on price stability and full employment. Key steps along this path include completion of the transition to full implementation of Basel III, including new liquidity requirements; enhanced prudential standards for systemically important firms, including risk-based capital requirements, a leverage ratio, and tighter prudential buffers for firms heavily reliant on short-term wholesale funding; expansion of the regulatory umbrella to incorporate all systemically important firms; the institution of an effective, cross-border resolution regime for systemically important financial institutions; and consideration of regulations, such as minimum margin requirements for securities financing transactions, to limit leverage in sectors beyond the banking sector and SIFIs. Second, policymakers must carefully monitor evolving risks to the financial system and be realistic about the ability of macroprudential tools to influence these developments. The limitations of macroprudential policies reflect the potential for risks to emerge outside sectors subject to regulation, the potential for supervision and regulation to miss emerging risks, the uncertain efficacy of new macroprudential tools such as a countercyclical capital buffer, and the potential for such policy steps to be delayed or to lack public support.14Given such limitations, adjustments in monetary policy may, at times, be needed to curb risks to financial stability.15 These first two principles will be more effective in helping to address financial stability risks when the public understands how monetary policymakers are weighing such risks in the setting of monetary policy. Because these issues are both new and complex, there is no simple rule that can prescribe, even in a general sense, how monetary policy should adjust in response to shifts in the outlook for financial stability. As a result, policymakers should clearly and consistently communicate their views on the stability of the financial system and how those views are influencing the stance of monetary policy. To that end, I will briefly lay out my current assessment of financial stability risks and their relevance, at this time, to the stance of monetary policy in the United States. In recent years, accommodative monetary policy has contributed to low interest rates, a flat yield curve, improved financial conditions more broadly, and a stronger labor market. These effects have contributed to balance sheet repair among households, improved financial conditions among businesses, and hence a strengthening in the health of the financial sector. Moreover, the improvements in household and business balance sheets have been accompanied by the increased safety of the financial sector associated with the macroprudential efforts I have outlined. Overall, nonfinancial credit growth remains moderate, while leverage in the financial system, on balance, is much reduced. Reliance on short-term wholesale funding is also significantly lower than immediately before the crisis, although important structural vulnerabilities remain in short-term funding markets. Taking all of these factors into consideration, I do not presently see a need for monetary policy to deviate from a primary focus on attaining price stability and maximum employment, in order to address financial stability concerns. That said, I do see pockets of increased risk-taking across the financial system, and an acceleration or broadening of these concerns could necessitate a more robust macroprudential approach. For example, corporate bond spreads, as well as indicators of expected volatility in some asset markets, have fallen to low levels, suggesting that some investors may underappreciate the potential for losses and volatility going forward. In addition, terms and conditions in the leveraged-loan market, which provides credit to lower-rated companies, have eased significantly, reportedly as a result of a "reach for yield" in the face of persistently low interest rates. The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation issued guidance regarding leveraged lending practices in early 2013 and followed up on this guidance late last year. To date, we do not see a systemic threat from leveraged lending, since broad measures of credit outstanding do not suggest that nonfinancial borrowers, in the aggregate, are taking on excessive debt and the improved capital and liquidity positions at lending institutions should ensure resilience against potential losses due to their exposures. But we are mindful of the possibility that credit provision could accelerate, borrower losses could rise unexpectedly sharply, and that leverage and liquidity in the financial system could deteriorate. It is therefore important that we monitor the degree to which the macroprudential steps we have taken have built sufficient resilience, and that we consider the deployment of other tools, including adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, as conditions change in potentially unexpected ways. ConclusionIn closing, the policy approach to promoting financial stability has changed dramatically in the wake of the global financial crisis. We have made considerable progress in implementing a macroprudential approach in the United States, and these changes have also had a significant effect on our monetary policy discussions. An important contributor to the progress made in the United States has been the lessons we learned from the experience gained by central banks and regulatory authorities all around the world. The IMF plays an important role in this evolving process as a forum for representatives from the world's economies and as an institution charged with promoting financial and economic stability globally. I expect to both contribute to and learn from ongoing discussions on these issues. 1.The possibility that periods of relative economic stability may contribute to risk-taking and the buildup of imbalances that may unwind in a painful manner is often linked to the ideas of Hyman Minsky (see Hyman P. Minsky (1992), "The Financial Instability Hypothesis (PDF)," Working Paper 74 (Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Jerome Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, May)). For a recent example of an economic model that tries to explore these ideas, see, for example, Markus K. Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov (2014), "A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector,"American Economic Review,vol. 104 (February), pp. 379-421.Return to text 2.For a discussion of this issue encompassing experience across a broad range of advanced economies in the 2000s, including the United States, see Jane Dokko, Brian M. Doyle, Michael T. Kiley, Jinill Kim, Shane Sherlund, Jae Sim, and Skander Van Den Heuvel (2011), "Monetary Policy and the Global Housing Bubble,"Economic Policy, vol. 26 (April), pp. 233-83. Igan and Loungani (2012) highlight how interest rates are an important, but far from the most important, determinant of housing cycles across countries (see Deniz Igan and Prakash Loungani (2012), "Global Housing Cycles," IMF Working Paper Series WP/12/217 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, August)). Bean and others (2010), examining the tradeoffs between unemployment, inflation, and stabilization of the housing market in the United Kingdom, imply that reliance on monetary policy to contain a housing boom may be too costly in terms of other monetary policy goals (see Charles Bean, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver, and Tim Taylor (2010), "Monetary Policy after the Fall (PDF)," paper presented at "Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26-28). Saiz (2014) suggests that about 50 percent of the variation in house prices during the 2000s boom can be explained by low interest rates, and finds that it was the remaining, "non-fundamental" component that subsequently collapsed--that is, the interest rate component was not a primary factor in what Saiz terms "the bust" (see Albert Saiz (2014), "Interest Rates and Fundamental Fluctuations in Home Values (PDF)," paper presented at the Public Policy and Economics Spring 2014 Workshops, hosted by the Harris School of Public Policy, University of Chicago, April 8).Return to text 3.The notion that tighter monetary policy may have ambiguous effects on leverage or repayment capacity is illustrated in, for example, Anton Korinek and Alp Simsek (2014), "Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19970 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).Return to text 4.See, for example, Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin (2010), "Liquidity and Leverage,"Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 19 (July), pp. 418-37; and Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin (2011), "Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics," in Benjamin Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3A (San Diego, Ca.: Elsevier), pp. 601-50. For a study emphasizing how changes in the response of monetary policy to financial vulnerabilities would likely change the relationship between monetary policy and financial vulnerabilities, see Oliver de Groot (2014), "The Risk Channel of Monetary Policy (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (June), pp. 115-60.Return to text 5.This evidence and experience suggest that a reliance on monetary policy as a primary tool to address the broad range of vulnerabilities that emerged in the mid-2000s would have had uncertain and limited effects on risks to financial stability. Such uncertainty does not imply that a modestly tighter monetary policy may not have been marginally helpful. For example, some research suggests that financial imbalances that became apparent in the mid-2000s may have signaled a tighter labor market and more inflationary pressure than would have been perceived solely from labor market conditions and overall economic activity. Hence, such financial imbalances may have called for a modestly tighter monetary policy through the traditional policy lens focused on inflationary pressure and economic slack. See, for example, David M. Arseneau and Michael Kiley (2014), "The Role of Financial Imbalances in Assessing the State of the Economy," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 18).Return to text 6.For a summary of house price developments across a range of countries through 2013, see International Monetary Fund (2014), "Global Housing Watch."Return to text 7.For a discussion of macroprudential steps taken in Canada, see Ivo Krznar and James Morsink (2014), "With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility: Macroprudential Tools at Work in Canada," IMF Working Paper Series 14/83 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, May).Return to text 8.See Norges Bank (2010), "The Executive Board's Monetary Policy Decision--Background and General Assessment," press release, May 5, paragraph 28.Return to text 9.See Per Jansson (2013), "How Do We Stop the Trend in Household Debt? Work on Several Fronts," speech delivered at the SvD Bank Summit, Berns Salonger, Stockholm, December 3, p. 2.Return to text 10.For a discussion, see Min Zhu (2014), "Era of Benign Neglect of House Price Booms Is Over," IMF Direct (blog), June 11.Return to text 11.These questions have been explored in, for example, International Monetary Fund (2013),The Interaction of Monetary and Macroprudential Policies (PDF)(Washington: IMF, January 29).Return to text 12.The IMF recently discussed tools to build resilience and lean against excesses (and provided a broad overview of macroprudential tools and their interaction with other policies, including monetary policy); see International Monetary Fund (2013),Key Aspects of Macroprudential Policy (PDF)(Washington: IMF, June 10).Return to text 13.See thePolicy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing at Regulation YY--Enhanced Prudential Standards and Early Remediation Requirements for Covered Companies (PDF), 12 C.F.R. pt. 252 (2013), Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing.Return to text 14.For a related discussion, see Elliott, Feldberg, and Lehnert, "The History of Cyclical Macroprudential Policy in the United States."Return to text 15.Adam and Woodford (2013) present a model in which macroprudential policies are not present and housing prices experience swings for reasons not driven by "fundamentals." In this context, adjustments in monetary policy in response to house price booms--even if such adjustments lead to undesirable inflation or employment outcomes--are a component of optimal monetary policy. See Klaus Adam and Michael Woodford (2013), "Housing Prices and Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)," working paper, June 29.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chair Yellen submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on July 16, 2014. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Crapo, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress. In my remarks today, I will discuss the current economic situation and outlook before turning to monetary policy. I will conclude with a few words about financial stability. Current Economic Situation and OutlookThe economy is continuing to make progress toward the Federal Reserve's objectives of maximum employment and price stability. In the labor market, gains in total nonfarm payroll employment averaged about 230,000 per month over the first half of this year, a somewhat stronger pace than in 2013 and enough to bring the total increase in jobs during the economic recovery thus far to more than 9 million. The unemployment rate has fallen nearly 1-1/2 percentage points over the past year and stood at 6.1 percent in June, down about 4 percentage points from its peak. Broader measures of labor utilization have also registered notable improvements over the past year. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have declined sharply in the first quarter. The decline appears to have resulted mostly from transitory factors, and a number of recent indicators of production and spending suggest that growth rebounded in the second quarter, but this bears close watching. The housing sector, however, has shown little recent progress. While this sector has recovered notably from its earlier trough, housing activity leveled off in the wake of last year's increase in mortgage rates, and readings this year have, overall, continued to be disappointing. Although the economy continues to improve, the recovery is not yet complete. Even with the recent declines, the unemployment rate remains above Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' estimates of its longer-run normal level. Labor force participation appears weaker than one would expect based on the aging of the population and the level of unemployment. These and other indications that significant slack remains in labor markets are corroborated by the continued slow pace of growth in most measures of hourly compensation. Inflation has moved up in recent months but remains below the FOMC's 2 percent objective for inflation over the longer run. The personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index increased 1.8 percent over the 12 months through May. Pressures on food and energy prices account for some of the increase in PCE price inflation. Core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, rose 1.5 percent. Most Committee participants project that both total and core inflation will be between 1-1/2 and 1-3/4 percent for this year as a whole. Although the decline in GDP in the first quarter led to some downgrading of our growth projections for this year, I and other FOMC participants continue to anticipate that economic activity will expand at a moderate pace over the next several years, supported by accommodative monetary policy, a waning drag from fiscal policy, the lagged effects of higher home prices and equity values, and strengthening foreign growth. The Committee sees the projected pace of economic growth as sufficient to support ongoing improvement in the labor market with further job gains, and the unemployment rate is anticipated to continue to decline toward its longer-run sustainable level. Consistent with the anticipated further recovery in the labor market, and given that longer-term inflation expectations appear to be well anchored, we expect inflation to move back toward our 2 percent objective over coming years. As always, considerable uncertainty surrounds our projections for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation. FOMC participants currently judge these risks to be nearly balanced but to warrant monitoring in the months ahead. Monetary PolicyI will now turn to monetary policy. The FOMC is committed to policies that promote maximum employment and price stability, consistent with our dual mandate from the Congress. Given the economic situation that I just described, we judge that a high degree of monetary policy accommodation remains appropriate. Consistent with that assessment, we have maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and have continued to rely on large-scale asset purchases and forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate to provide the appropriate level of support for the economy. In light of the cumulative progress toward maximum employment that has occurred since the inception of the Federal Reserve's asset purchase program in September 2012 and the FOMC's assessment that labor market conditions would continue to improve, the Committee has made measured reductions in the monthly pace of our asset purchases at each of our regular meetings this year. If incoming data continue to support our expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward 2 percent, the Committee likely will make further measured reductions in the pace of asset purchases at upcoming meetings, with purchases concluding after the October meeting. Even after the Committee ends these purchases, the Federal Reserve's sizable holdings of longer-term securities will help maintain accommodative financial conditions, thus supporting further progress in returning employment and inflation to mandate-consistent levels. The Committee is also fostering accommodative financial conditions through forward guidance that provides greater clarity about our policy outlook and expectations for the future path of the federal funds rate. Since March, our postmeeting statements have included a description of the framework that is guiding our monetary policy decisions. Specifically, our decisions are and will be based on an assessment of the progress--both realized and expected--toward our objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Our evaluation will not hinge on one or two factors, but rather will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation and long-term inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. Based on its assessment of these factors, in June the Committee reiterated its expectation that the current target range for the federal funds rate likely will be appropriate for a considerable period after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal and provided that inflation expectations remain well anchored. In addition, we currently anticipate that even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the federal funds rate below levels that the Committee views as normal in the longer run. Of course, the outlook for the economy and financial markets is never certain, and now is no exception. Therefore, the Committee's decisions about the path of the federal funds rate remain dependent on our assessment of incoming information and the implications for the economic outlook. If the labor market continues to improve more quickly than anticipated by the Committee, resulting in faster convergence toward our dual objectives, then increases in the federal funds rate target likely would occur sooner and be more rapid than currently envisioned. Conversely, if economic performance is disappointing, then the future path of interest rates likely would be more accommodative than currently anticipated. The Committee remains confident that it has the tools it needs to raise short-term interest rates when the time is right and to achieve the desired level of short-term interest rates thereafter, even with the Federal Reserve's elevated balance sheet. At our meetings this spring, we have been constructively working through the many issues associated with the eventual normalization of the stance and conduct of monetary policy. These ongoing discussions are a matter of prudent planning and do not imply any imminent change in the stance of monetary policy. The Committee will continue its discussions in upcoming meetings, and we expect to provide additional information later this year. Financial StabilityThe Committee recognizes that low interest rates may provide incentives for some investors to "reach for yield," and those actions could increase vulnerabilities in the financial system to adverse events. While prices of real estate, equities, and corporate bonds have risen appreciably and valuation metrics have increased, they remain generally in line with historical norms. In some sectors, such as lower-rated corporate debt, valuations appear stretched and issuance has been brisk. Accordingly, we are closely monitoring developments in the leveraged loan market and are working to enhance the effectiveness of our supervisory guidance. More broadly, the financial sector has continued to become more resilient, as banks have continued to boost their capital and liquidity positions, and growth in wholesale short-term funding in financial markets has been modest. SummaryIn sum, since the FebruaryMonetary Policy Report,further important progress has been made in restoring the economy to health and in strengthening the financial system. Yet too many Americans remain unemployed, inflation remains below our longer-run objective, and not all of the necessary financial reform initiatives have been completed. The Federal Reserve remains committed to employing all of its resources and tools to achieve its macroeconomic objectives and to foster a stronger and more resilient financial system. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.