Governor Jerome H. Powell At the 2014 Spring Membership Meeting, Institute for International Finance, London, United Kingdom Thank you for inviting me here today. I should say at the outset that the views that I offer are my own and not necessarily those of any other member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). You have asked about the effectiveness of forward guidance. My view is that forward guidance has generally been effective in providing support for the economy at a time when the federal funds rate has been pinned at its effective lower bound. The FOMC has provided various forms of forward guidance since 2009, both for rate policy and for asset purchases. I will focus today mainly on rate policy. There is more than can be said in five minutes, however, so I will leave the rest to our discussion afterward. In my view, forward rate guidance has helped reduce medium and longer-term interest rates, and by doing so has provided meaningful support for the economy. First, by increasing public understanding and market confidence in the path of rates, guidance has helped reduce term premiums. Second, by communicating that rates would remain lower for longer than market participants might otherwise have expected, guidance has lowered medium- and longer-term rates through the expectations channel. Finally, even when guidance has initially been well aligned with market expectations, it has reduced the likelihood that rate expectations will subsequently shift upward in ways that the Committee does not intend. Event studies as well as market-implied quotes and surveys corroborate the view that guidance has reduced medium- and longer-term interest rates and has held down volatility as well. To be sure, there have also been times when forward guidance and market expectations have diverged, with resulting spikes in volatility. Such situations may be difficult to avoid, given the use of new, unconventional policy tools, although we always try to communicate policy as clearly as possible. Our forward guidance has evolved over time--from qualitative, to date-based, to quantitative guidance, and from largely unconditional to state-contingent guidance explaining how the Committee will react to future economic outcomes. In March 2009, the Committee offered the qualitative guidance that it expected to hold the federal funds rate near zero "for an extended period."1In August 2011, the Committee moved to date-based guidance, saying that it expected to hold the rate near zero at least until mid-2013.2In December 2012, the Committee adopted quantitative thresholds that were explicitly tied to future economic conditions. In particular, it stated its intention to hold the policy rate near zero "at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored."3 More recently, at the March 2014 FOMC meeting, as the 6-1/2 percent unemployment threshold approached, the Committee offered new guidance that contained qualitative and time-based elements but retained the state-contingent nature of the threshold guidance. First, the Committee said that, in determining how long to hold the federal funds rate near zero, it "will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation"; it also indicated that, in making this assessment, it would take into account a wide range of information, "including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments."4 Second, the Committee indicated, "based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends"--a time-based reference, since the Committee has indicated that it expects to wind down its asset purchases by the end of this year if the economy continues to evolve as expected.5Of course, the actual timing of liftoff will depend on the performance of the economy. Third, the Committee stated that it "anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run."6Committee members have differing thoughts on why that may be the case. In my view, the reasons would include the lingering effects of the financial crisis, including lower potential growth for a time. Turning briefly to asset purchases, since last December's FOMC meeting, the Committee has reduced asset purchases in a series of measured steps from a pace of $85 billion a month to its current pace of $45 billion per month. If incoming information continues to broadly support the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, these measured steps would continue and asset purchases would come to an end in the fourth quarter of this year. Market expectations seem to be well aligned with this guidance. Thank you. I look forward to our discussion. 1.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "FOMC Statement," press release, March 18, paragraph 3.Return to text 2.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011),"FOMC Statement," press release, August 9.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 12, paragraph 5.Return to text 4.The thresholds provided a useful guide to policy, but with the unemployment rate approaching its 6‑1/2 percent threshold, the Committee judged that it would need to look at a broader range of information in order to determine the appropriate stance of policy. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, March 19, paragraph 5.Return to text 5.See Board of Governors, "FOMC Statement," March 19, 2014, paragraph 5, in note 4.Return to text 6.See Board of Governors, "FOMC Statement," March 19, 2014, paragraph 6, in note 4.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencyFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced the availability of the 2014 list of distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies, where revitalization or stabilization activities will receive Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) consideration as "community development." "Distressed nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies" and "underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies" are designated by the agencies in accordance with their CRA regulations. The criteria for designating these areas are available on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)website. The designations continue to reflect local economic conditions, including triggers such as unemployment, poverty, and population changes. As with past releases, the agencies incorporate a one-year lag period for geographies that are no longer designated as distressed or underserved in the current release. Geographies subject to this one-year lag period are eligible to receive consideration for community development activities for 12 months after publication of the current list. The current and previous years' lists can be found on the FFIEC website, along with information about the data sources used to generate those lists.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Association of American Law Schools 2014 Midyear Meeting, Washington, D.C. It is a pleasure to be back among law professors here at the Association of American Law Schools (AALS) Midyear Meeting. Let me begin by applauding the organizers for encouraging collaboration between corporate and financial law scholars. Indeed, it is striking how much of the insightful legal scholarship that followed the financial crisis has come from corporate law scholars. On reflection, this outcome is not really surprising. After all, much corporate law scholarship revolves around incentive structures, agency costs, and asymmetric information flows--all matters of great relevance to financial regulation. Furthermore, legislatures and courts have a long history of debating, and sometimes adopting, special corporate law and governance rules for financial institutions. In my remarks this afternoon I will try to further the collaboration between corporate and financial law scholarship by suggesting how the nature of finance and financial regulation affects corporate governance and why, in turn, special corporate governance measures are needed as part of an effective prudential regulatory system. In making the latter argument, I will review some of the measures, both longstanding and more recent, that illustrate the point and then suggest some additional steps that might complement existing prudential regulations. Finally, I will offer some more tentative thoughts on the possible implication of this analysis for corporate law fiduciary duties. A theme running through these remarks will be the centrality of risk--its assessment, assumption, and allocation--in understanding the relationship between corporate governance and financial regulation. Financial Firms and Corporate GovernanceThere are at least three significant ways in which the nature of financial activities and regulation affect the operation of key mechanisms of corporate governance.1 First, it has long been recognized that the unique features of deposit-taking financial institutions raise the question whether generally applicable corporate law and governance principles are adequate. Because banks are financial intermediaries that use deposits to provide much, if not most, of the funding for their lending, an insolvent bank may well be unable to satisfy all its deposit liabilities. The fear of this possibility lies at the heart of banking runs and panics. In the days before federal deposit insurance, the impracticality of contractual solutions to reduce the vulnerability of depositors led to a variant of normally applicable limited liability rules. Many states enacted so-called double liability rules, whereby shareholders could be liable for the losses of a failed bank in an amount equal, and in addition, to their investment in the bank. Presumably, these rules were intended to change the calculus of shareholders as to the risks they wished their banks to assume and, perhaps, the degree to which they monitored management. Following the creation of federal deposit insurance, a series of constraints on normal corporate prerogatives has been applied to insured institutions, justified in large part by the need to counteract the resulting moral hazard and to protect the federal deposit insurance fund (DIF). Bank charters have always differed from general corporate charters insofar as they grant special privileges and forbid certain activities by the chartered institutions. In addition, special prudential requirements have always applied to chartered banks. Perhaps the most important of these today is the imposition of minimum capital requirements on all insured depository institutions and bank holding companies. Second, there is a variety of ways in which the attributes of financial markets and financial regulation affect the capital market discipline assumed in much corporate governance theory and corporate law. The prior point about the moral hazard associated with insured deposits implies that--at least in traditional, deposit-reliant banks--the kind of market discipline associated with the price of funding and creditor monitoring will be attenuated. More generally, to the degree uninsured depositors or other bank creditors expect that they will be protected by the government in the event the bank encounters serious difficulties, those same features of market discipline will again be weakened. This, of course, is the problem of moral hazard associated with too-big-to-fail perceptions, whereby investors or counterparties are willing to extend credit at prices that do not fully reflect the risk associated with the bank.2 The market discipline traditionally associated with the market for corporate control is also affected by bankingregulation and supervision.Mergers and acquisitions involving banking organizations are subject to review, and possible disapproval, on a broad range of grounds beyond the antitrust considerations relevant in all industries. These include an assessment of the adequacy of the financial resources of the firms, the "competence, experience, and integrity" of the officers and directors, and the impact of the acquisition on systemic risk.3Moreover, of course, anyfirm that acquires a commercial bank must be a bank holding company, thereby subject to a range of activity restrictions and other regulatory requirements. There are very good prudential reasons for these constraints upon acquisitions of, and by, banking organizations. But, by screening out transactions that would result in unacceptable increases in risk, either to an institution or to the financial system as a whole, these provisions may in some cases unintentionally limit the salutary disciplining effect on boards and management of the market for corporate control. The third way in which the nature of financial activities and regulation affect the operation of key mechanisms of corporate governance is that the risks associated with financial intermediaries--especially those that are significantly leveraged and that engage in substantial maturity transformation--pose a particular challenge for corporate governance. All firms bear the risk that problems may unexpectedly arise because of, say, product flaws that were unknown to boards of directors and perhaps even senior management. But in the case of financial intermediaries, these problems can be incredibly fast-moving, including runs on funding that can quickly place the very survival of the firm in doubt. These risks have increased during the past 25 years, as many institutions have combined traditional lending activities with capital markets businesses that rely on other funding models. Accordingly, judgments about risk appetite and control systems to manage risk must be effectively executed by senior management and overseen by the board. This imperative, in turn, means that the information and monitoring processes and systems established for, or available to, boards of financial institutions may need to be more extensive than those in large, nonfinancial firms. Financial Regulation and Corporate GovernanceIn the wake of the financial crisis, the public interest in regulation of banks and other financial firms is, I think it fair to say, both self-evident and substantial. A full discussion of the rationales for various forms of regulation is beyond the scope of my remarks today.4But let me briefly note that prudential regulation has two distinct motivations--microprudential and macroprudential. Microprudential regulation is concerned largely with the safety and soundness of a financial institution considered individually. It seeks to protect the DIF by combatting what would otherwise be moral hazard and subsidized funding through capital requirements, activities restrictions, and other measures. Because microprudential regulations were designed primarily to minimize losses to the DIF, they have traditionally focused on insured depository institutions (IDIs); the regulation of owners and affiliates of IDIs is essentially about ensuring that the activities and risks of those other entities do not threaten the IDIs themselves. Up until the last several years, microprudential regulation would have come close to covering the entire field of prudential regulation. The financial crisis highlighted the need to supplement traditional microprudential regulation with a macroprudential approach oriented toward the well-being of the financial system as a whole. Here there are two related objectives, both of which seek to avoid costs that failure or severe stress would impose on the economy beyond those suffered by shareholders of a financial firm. One is protecting against systemic risk--for example, the risk that certain activities or the failure of a firm would result in very large negative externalities, either through a classic domino effect or through contagion effects producing a financial crisis. Losses in a tail event are likely to be correlated for large firms deeply engaged in trading and relying on short-term wholesale funding. This objective, long neglected in financial regulation, is prominently featured in post-crisis statutory, regulatory, and supervisory reforms. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) explicitly establishes financial stability and the containment of systemic risk as the aim of dozens of new regulatory provisions.5Thus, for example, any firm whose failure could pose systemic risk is subject to prudential regulation, quite apart from its relationship with IDIs. A second objective of macroprudential regulation is to avoid a harmful contraction of credit availability in significant regions or sectors of the economy, even if there were little chance of a financial crisis. This outcome could ensue were banks accounting for a material portion of credit extension simultaneously to come under solvency or funding pressures that caused them to pull back from lending. The importance of both macroprudential objectives is that the regulatory framework should aim to reduce the chances of transmission of systemic risk by such firms to a greater extent than traditional, microprudential regulation would. But even stipulating these crucial objectives, why should prudential regulation need to involve itself with corporate governance? After all, there are many important forms of regulation applicable to corporations. A regulatory field may establish certain behavioral norms, require conformity with certain product or byproduct characteristics, or prohibit certain activities. Corporations are expected to conform to these obligations, many of which are extensive and detailed. While some regulatory systems require certain procedures within the regulated entities--particularly as remedial measures following violations--few, if any, create specific and significant ongoing requirements for corporate decisionmaking or oversight. Corporate and securities law may establish a duty of management and directors to limit regulatory violations, but the rationale for these duties is to protect shareholders from the consequences of regulatory violation, not directly to further the public regulatory objective.6 The answer, I think, lies at least in part with the centrality and nature of risk in the activities of financial intermediaries. Risk-taking--whether well- or ill-considered--is perhaps the central activity of all financial intermediaries. Where those intermediaries are significantly leveraged and engaged in maturity transformation, the risk-taking carries substantial potential societal consequences beyond the possible losses to investors, counterparties, and employees of the financial firm. Microprudential and macroprudential regulation each respond to this divergence between the private and social balances of costs and benefits associated with a given level of risk-taking by financial intermediaries. The focus of microprudential regulation is on the distortions to funding costs that may arise when depositors or capital markets do not require the funds they provide fully to price in the risks assumed by banks in using those funds, whether because of federal deposit insurance or expectations of a government safety net. The focus of macroprudential regulation is on the negative externalities that large financial firms can impose on the rest of the economy. In both instances, the private assessment by shareholders and their representatives of the risk-reward tradeoffs of the financial firm's activities will differ from the public's assessment of that risk-reward tradeoff. That is, while the public has an interest in healthy, profitable banks, and thus the interests of shareholders and the public overlap, they are not coincident. At root, then, prudential regulation seeks to influence risk-taking in regulated entities. But this is difficult to do directly. Conceptually, "risk" is not reducible to a single metric, such as--for example--the density of particulate matter in the emissions of a power plant. Practically speaking, a financial institution more or less continually makes risk decisions, the circumstances of which can vary substantially over time, across asset classes, and even contemporaneously in a single asset class based on the differing circumstances of borrowers or counterparties. Prudential rules can limit or prohibit certain bank activities that are thought to be particularly risky. With respect to activities thatarepermitted, prudential regulation can indirectly influence corporate decisions on risk-taking by requiring minimum amounts of capital to be held by the regulated firms. But, fundamental as they are to contemporary prudential regulation, capital requirements--particularly static, backward-looking standards--will necessarily be somewhat imprecisely related to the range of actual risk incident to specific assets or transactions within the various risk categories established by the capital regime. In fact, the capital regime may itself invite arbitrage, as firms look to maximize risk-taking within regulatory risk categories.7 Thus it is also important for prudential regulation to influence theprocessesof risk-taking within regulated financial firms as a complementary tool to capital requirements and other substantive measures. This view is reflected in various banking laws, most notably in the Dodd-Frank Act requirement that all bank holding companies with $10 billion or more in assets have a risk committee, composed of independent directors and "responsible for the oversight of the enterprisewide risk management practices" of the firm.8This provision in itself requires only that the bank holding companies have capable and independent risk committees that, by extension, should be overseeing well-developed risk-management practices and systems of controls in the firms. It does not specify what the risk appetite of the firm should be. However, its inclusion in section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which requires an array of additional prudential measures directed at firms that could pose threats to financial stability, suggests that the risk-committee mandate has a prudential motivation. Of course, good risk management is important for shareholders as well. Regulatory prods for efficient management information systems and well-developed risk-assessment procedures should generally be welcomed by shareholders. Similarly, regulatory insistence on capable and independent oversight of risk management is consonant with shareholder interests, which might be damaged by employees who exercise poor judgment or whose compensation structures may incentivize them to take risks not desirable for the firm as a whole. To a considerable extent, then, fostering sound risk-management practices serves the overlapping interests of both shareholders and regulators. The possible divergence of interests comes not in the architecture of risk management but in substantive decisions on risk appetite. How, then, might corporate governance be changed to incorporate risk considerations consistent with micro- and macroprudential regulatory objectives? One way would be to broaden the fiduciary duties of boards and management. The other, which has already been followed to some degree, is to apply regulatory and supervisory requirements to relevant corporate governance processes. Of course, realization of the first approach would require either changes in state corporate law or amendments to federal securities or financial regulatory statutes. I shall speak briefly to this possibility after describing some examples of the second approach already in place, along with some possibilities for further measures. Aligning Corporate Governance and Financial RegulationWith no claim to comprehensiveness, let me suggest three kinds of regulatory and supervisory measures that can better align corporate governance of financial firms with regulatory objectives. First, regulatory requirements can be directed at changing the incentives of those making decisions within a financial firm. One good example is incentive compensation for senior managers and other bank employees with substantial decisionmaking authority. Compensation arrangements that create high-powered incentives using stock options or other forms of reward dominantly based on equity have their origins in efforts better to align management and shareholder interests. Otherwise, managers who stand to suffer reputational or job loss as their firm declines or fails may have a more conservative risk appetite than diversified shareholders, who value the upside of risk-taking and whose limited liability makes them relatively less concerned with catastrophic downside possibilities. As has been observed by numerous commentators,9however, where these kinds of incentive compensation arrangements have succeeded in better aligning the interests of shareholders and employees, they intensify the conflict between shareholder and regulatory interests.10Ironically, regulatory objectives match up better with the old-style managers for whom the preservation of the firm is considerably more important than for shareholders. Various suggestions for change have been made. Some have proposed making incentive compensation packages more closely reflect the composition of the liability side of a banking organization's balance sheet by including returns on debt, as well as equity, instruments in the calculation of compensation.11Others have proposed the much simpler approach of making a significant part of incentive compensation deferred and subject to clawback and forfeiture, with the employee's ultimate right to the compensation dependent on the firm not having become insolvent, received government assistance, or experienced a similar triggering event. While developing the details of an effective mechanism that also allows for motivating employees to advance shareholder interests will take some work, some measure along these lines is key to adjusting incentives so as to promote prudential objectives across the many risk decisions made within the firm. Incentive realignment can also be achieved by fostering more of the capital market discipline that has, as explained earlier, been limited. One example is a byproduct of measures to increase the total loss absorbency of systemically important financial firms by requiring minimum amounts of debt that could be converted to equity upon a firm's insolvency. As you may know, the Federal Reserve Board intends to issue a proposed rulemaking that would implement such a requirement at the largest financial firms. While the principal motivation of such a requirement is to help ensure that even a very large financial firm can be resolved in an orderly fashion without the injection of public capital, identifying debt instruments as convertible to equity in a context where resolution is a credible option should make the price of those instruments especially sensitive to the relative risk of failure of those firms. Requiring systemically important financial firms to issue a meaningful amount of long-term debt would indirectly influence corporate governance by introducing at-risk debt holders as a constituency whose concerns management must monitor and address. A second kind of measure to align corporate governance at financial firms more closely to regulatory objectives is a substantive requirement or constraint upon decisions made within the firm. As a practical matter, it would be hard to develop a rule setting a comprehensive risk appetite consonant with regulatory objectives. However, there are regulatory requirements that can serve as partial surrogates for such a rule. A good example, already in place, is a feature of the Federal Reserve's program of stress testing and capital planning. A firm may not make capital distributions (whether in the form of dividends or capital repurchases) that would, when added to losses under hypothesized adverse scenarios as projected in our annual supervisory stress test, reduce the firm's capital below certain minimum levels. When we adopted this rule several years ago, we were criticized by some for encroaching on the prerogative of boards of directors of financial firms to decide on capital distribution policies, in accordance with general corporate governance practice. This criticism has always seemed to me misplaced. After all, banking regulators are not only permitted, but obliged, to set minimum capital requirements at banking organizations and other systemically important financial firms. Limiting capital distributions is, conceptually, no different from requiring a firm to build capital in the first place.12A regulation designed to maintain minimum capital levels in large banking organizations in a projected period of stress is consistent with the macroprudential objectives discussed earlier. Indeed, these requirements counteract the practices seen at some banks in the run-up to the financial crisis, whereby boards of directors continued to return capital to shareholders even as conditions deteriorated severely.13Tying capital levels to corporate governance decisions about capital distributions simply recognizes that capital levels and capital distributions are two sides of the same coin. A third kind of measure seeks to affect the institutions and processes of corporate governance, rather than directly to change incentive structures or regulate decisions. Many possible actions of this sort would really be efforts to improve the risk-assessment and risk-management capacities of management and boards, rather than to focus specifically on the divergence between shareholder and regulatory interests with respect to risk appetite. An effective system of controls is important both to shareholders and to regulators. Thus, for instance, the considerable and continuing emphasis we have placed on firms developing and maintaining effective management information systems makes risk assessment work better for shareholders, even as it facilitates supervisory oversight. With respect to the institutional features of board oversight of risk management, there is also substantial overlap in the interests of shareholders and regulators. For example, both shareholders and supervisors should expect a board to include members with the expertise, experience, and time commitment that are appropriate to risk management of the kinds of activities in which the financial firm engages. Of particular interest are three board positions--the nonexecutive chair or lead director, the head of the risk committee, and the head of the audit committee. More generally, shareholders and supervisors must have confidence that globally active institutions with hundreds of thousands of employees have audit and risk committees with the practical ability to provide effective oversight of risk decisions.14I might note in passing that regular discussion between board members and supervisors can also serve the interests of shareholders, since supervisors may have an informed perspective on the firm's operations that enables boards better to fulfill their strategic and risk-oversight functions. Supervisors should also expect a well-conceived process for board review of major firm decisions, which will nearly always carry some implications for risk management and risk appetite. In practical terms, such a process would connect decisions on strategy, risk-appetite setting, and capital planning. Neither we nor shareholders should be comfortable with a process in which strategic decisions are made in one silo, risk-appetite setting in another, and capital planning in yet a third, with the convergence of these efforts coming together only when it is too late for each to affect the other, or for the board to be able to exercise effective oversight. These major decisions need to be made in an integrated manner. While regulators should have clear expectations for boards, we need to make sure that we are creating expectations that lead to boards spending more time overseeing the risk-management and control functions I have emphasized this afternoon. There are many important regulatory requirements applicable to large financial firms. Boards must of course be aware of those requirements and must help ensure that good corporate compliance systems are in place. But it has perhaps become a little too reflexive a reaction on the part of regulators to jump from the observation that a regulation is important to the conclusion that the board must certify compliance through its own processes. We should probably be somewhat more selective in creating the regulatory checklist for board compliance and regular consideration. One example, drawn from Federal Reserve practice, is the recent supervisory guidance requiring that every notice of a "Matter Requiring Attention" (MRA) issued by supervisors must be reviewed, and compliance signed off, by the board of directors.15There are some MRAs that clearly should come to the board's attention, but the failure to discriminate among them is almost surely distracting from strategic and risk-related analyses and oversight by boards. One might ask how the strengthening of systems of controls and risk-appetite decision processes can promote achievement of regulatory interests beyond those shared with the owners of firms. One answer is that it clearly improves the supervisory line-of-sight into the safety and soundness of financial firms. The more timely and accurate the information that can be aggregated by supervisors, the more responsive our supervisory and financial stability oversight can be. A well-developed set of risk and control functions also allows an effective point of entry for pursuing certain regulatory objectives. To date, the best example of this potential is our annual supervisory stress tests and Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) to which I have already referred. As a substantive matter, the CCAR requirements limit capital distributions of large financial institutions based upon a forward-looking assessment of the losses that would be suffered under hypothetical adverse economic scenarios, so that capital will be built and maintained at levels high enough for the firms to remain viable financial intermediaries even under such stressed conditions. In addition to the microprudential improvement that comes from substituting a dynamic for a static capital calculation, there is an important macroprudential motivation, reflected in the design of scenarios and the required levels of post-stress capital. The efficacy of the CCAR process is substantially enhanced as the information systems and internal risk-management capacities of the firm improve. Beyond this important, but discrete regulatory measure, well-developed processes for determining risk appetite give supervisors better insight into risks specific to the activities and strategic decisions of each firm. As a result, supervisors should be better able to identify points at which a firm's risk-taking may diverge from that which is consistent with microprudential and macroprudential objectives. This, in turn, should permit more timely supervisory or regulatory responses. Regulatory Objectives and Fiduciary DutiesThe regulatory focus on risk in corporate governance will produce additional examples of each of the three kinds of measures I have just described. For instance, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency has recently proposed guidance for risk governance at large national banks.16Still, particularly with an audience half composed of corporate law professors, it is natural to ask whether corporate law tools might usefully supplement regulatory measures. Specifically, the question arises as to whether the fiduciary duties of the boards of regulated financial firms should be modified to reflect what I have characterized as regulatory objectives. Doing so might make the boards of financial firms responsive to the broader interests implicated by their risk-taking decisions even where regulatory and supervisory measures had not anticipated or addressed a particular issue. And, of course, the courts would thereby be available as another route for managing the divergence between private and social interests in risk-taking. As I noted at the outset, there is a long history of actual or considered measures to alter the duties or liabilities of those with decisionmaking authority in the corporate governance of banks. A more contemporary variant on these ideas was offered a little over a decade ago by Jon Macey and Maureen O'Hara, who proposed expanded fiduciary duties for directors of insured banks, including giving bank creditors the right to sue for violations of these duties.17In a provocative recent paper, John Armour and Jeff Gordon suggest that the duties of directors of systemically important financial institutions should be modified precisely because diversified shareholders have a strong interest in avoiding risk decisions by these institutions that increase systemic risk.18Their analysis implies that the customary tension between regulatory and diversified shareholders' interests may be considerably mitigated in the case of systemically important firms whose failure could result in financial turbulence and consequent economic loss for the entire economy. A consideration of the merits of these or other such proposals is beyond the scope of my remarks today. Obviously, any such changes in corporate law are beyond the authority of the Federal Reserve. I mention them in the hope and anticipation that corporate law scholars will continue to evaluate such ideas, since whatever one's eventual conclusions on their desirability, the analytic process is sure to yield further insights into the key question of how best to respond to the points of divergence between shareholder and regulatory interests in risk-taking by large financial firms. ConclusionIn the wake of the financial crisis, the changes in finance, in financial regulation, and in the relationship among government agencies that carry out prudential regulation have created any number of opportunities for financial law scholars to collaborate with their colleagues in other disciplines--from administrative law to constitutional law to bankruptcy law. This collaboration is perhaps natural, since major shocks to the economy, and thus the country, have in the past occasioned legal changes whose implications reached far beyond the original area of reform. As I hope you can tell from my remarks today, I have already found the interaction between corporate and financial law scholarship to have been helpful in thinking through the policies that will shape a safer financial system. I look forward to the fruits of the collaborations encouraged by the event sponsored today. 1.For a basic description of corporate governance mechanisms, see Mark J. Roe (2004), "The Institutions of Corporate Governance," in Claude Menard and Mary M. Shirley, eds.,Handbook for New Institutional Economics(The Netherlands: Springer). Useful reviews of corporate governance in financial institutions, reflecting lessons learned from the financial crisis, include Hamid Mehran and Lindsay Mollineaux (2012), "Corporate Governance of Financial Institutions (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 539 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February); Hamid Mehran, Alan Morrison, and Joel Shapiro (2011), "Corporate Governance and Banks: What Have We Learned from the Financial Crisis? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 502 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June); Moonrad Choudhry (2010), "Effective Bank Corporate Governance: Observations from the Market Crash and Recommendations for Policy,"Journal of Applied Finance & Banking, vol. 1 (1), pp. 179-211.Return to text 2.For an argument that shareholders who might otherwise press for breakups of financial conglomerates are disincentivized from doing so for too-big-to-fail institutions, see Mark J. Roe (2014), "Structural Corporate Degradation Due to Too-Big-to-Fail Finance,"University of Pennsylvania Law Review,vol. 162, pp. 1419-64 (forthcoming).Return to text 3.Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 §3, 12 U.S.C. §1842(c). The Bank Merger Act requires consideration of a roughly comparable set of factors. Acquisitions are also subject to special scrutiny where an acquiring firm has less-than-satisfactory supervisory ratings.Return to text 4.For more complete discussions of the reasons for prudential regulation, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Rethinking the Aims of Prudential Regulation," speech delivered at Bank Structure Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May 8; Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "A Macroprudential Perspective on Regulating Large Financial Institutions (PDF)," in Banque de France,Financial Stability Review,no. 18. Consumer and investor protection, anti-money-laundering efforts, and other nonprudential aims provide additional bases for regulation of financial institutions.Return to text 5.Some of the more important of these provisions are discussed in Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), "Financial Stability Regulation," speech delivered at the Distinguished Jurist Lecture, University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, October 10.Return to text 6.For a discussion of this duty, particularly as applied to financial institutions, see Eric J. Pan (2010), "The Duty to Monitor under Delaware Law: FromCaremarktoCitigroup," The Conference Board, Director Notes, No. DN-004.Return to text 7.Of course, strong capital requirements also build a loss absorption buffer that is useful in dealing with risks gone bad ex post, even if they cannot entirely contain those risks ex ante.Return to text 8.Dodd-Frank Act §165(h). This provision further requires that the risk committee include "at least one risk management expert having experience in identifying, assessing, and managing risk exposures of large, complex firms."Return to text 9.See, for example, Lucian Bebchuk and Holger Spamann (2010), "Regulating Bankers' Pay,"Georgetown Law Journal, vol. 98 (2), pp. 247-87; and Kenneth R. French, M. N. Baily, J. Y. Campbell, J. H. Cochrane, D. W. Diamond, D. Duffie, A. K. Kashyap, F. S. Mishkin, R. G. Rajan, D. S. Scharfstein, R. J. Shiller, H. S. Shin, M. J. Slaughter, J. C. Stein, and R. M. Stulz (2010),The Squam Lake Report: Fixing the Financial System(Princeton: Princeton University Press).Return to text 10.Indeed, if the incentives are powerful enough, they may give employees agreaterrisk appetite than even diversified shareholders are presumed to have.Return to text 11.See Bebchuk and Spamann, "Regulating Bankers' Pay." Depending on how closely one would want to tie compensation to the prices of bonds, for example, there may be difficulties owing to the potential at times for interest rate risk fluctuations to overwhelm credit risk fluctuations in the price of debt instruments. Interest rate risk fluctuations would not reflect the performance or risk associated with a specific firm.Return to text 12.Indeed, insured depository institutions are prohibited by statute from making any capital distribution that would render the firm undercapitalized. 12 U.S.C. §1831o(d)(1).Return to text 13.Beverly Hirtle (2014), "Bank Holding Company Dividends and Repurchases during the Financial Crisis," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 666 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March).Return to text 14.There have also been proposals that boards of large financial firms have a small staff, independent of management, who can help the board sift through the often voluminous materials delivered by management to foster informed inquiries of management and decisions on risk appetite. For example, a proposal for a "dedicated secretariat" was offered by a parliamentary committee in the United Kingdom. See U.K. House of Commons Treasury Committee (2009),Banking Crisis: Reforming Corporate Governance and Pay in the City (PDF), (London: House of Commons, May).Return to text 15.An MRA is a supervisory finding that the Federal Reserve communicates to the firm and requires remediation. For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2013), "Supervisory Considerations for the Communication of Supervisory Findings," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 13-13 (June 17).Return to text 16.U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2014), Guidelines Establishing Heightened Standards for Certain Large Insured National Banks, Insured Federal Savings Associations, and Insured Federal Branches; Integration of Regulations, 79 Fed. Reg. 4282 (January 27).Return to text 17.Jonathan R. Macey and Maureen O'Hara (2003), "The Corporate Governance of Banks," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review, vol.9 (April), pp. 91-107.Return to text 18.John Armour and Jeffrey N. Gordon (2013), "Systemic Harms and Shareholder Value," European Corporate Governance Institute Working Paper No. 222 (Brussels: ECGI, August).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board today announced the availability of data that can be used to evaluate the individual systemic footprint of 33 large U.S. bank holding companies. The data will help to ensure comparability when evaluating the systemic risk profile of each banking organization. The data cover five categories often used when considering the potential systemic risk of a banking organization: size; interconnectedness; complexity; substitutability, which is a measure of how easily a firm's activities can be replaced by another firm; and cross-jurisdictional activity, which includes foreign liabilities and claims. The information will be published annually based on data from the previous calendar year. To access the data for year-end 2013, search for an individual holding company on the National Information Center website,www.ffiec.gov/nicpubweb/nicweb/nichome.aspx, recall its regulatory reporting forms, and download the Banking Organization Systemic Risk Report (FR Y-15). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve on Tuesday announced that it has extended the deadline for capital plan resubmissions by Citigroup, Inc., HSBC North America Holdings, Inc., RBS Citizens, Inc., and Santander Holdings USA, Inc. Originally, the firms were required to re-submit the capital plans by June 26, 2014. Now, following requests from the firms, they will not be required to submit capital plans until January 5, 2015, the due date for the next round of annual plans. The Federal Reserve objected to the capital plans from these firms during the 2014 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). The extensions will give the firms additional time to address the capital planning weaknesses identified by the Federal Reserve. The firms will not be able to increase their capital distributions until a new capital plan is approved. CCAR is an annual exercise conducted by the Federal Reserve to ensure that large financial institutions have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks, and to help ensure that they have sufficient capital to continue operations throughout times of economic and financial stress. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today published the first of a series of requests for comments to identify outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome regulations imposed on insured depository institutions. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA) requires the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (agencies) to review regulations issued by the agencies at least every 10 years. It also requires the agencies to categorize the regulations, publish the regulations in each category for comment, report to Congress on any significant issues raised by the comments, and identify areas of regulations that are outdated, unnecessary or unduly burdensome. The agencies have divided the regulations into 12 categories. At regular intervals over the next two years, the agencies will publish jointly three additionalFederal Registernotices for public comment. Each notice will address at least one category of the regulations. The first notice seeks comment on regulations from three categories: Applications and Reporting; Powers and Activities, and International Operations. The public will have until September 2, 2014, to review and comment on this first set of categories. The agencies plan to schedule roundtable discussions with bankers and interested parties and will publish details about these sessions on the EGRPRA website as they are finalized. Submit comment|View comments Related Links:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Federal banking regulators on Friday issued final supplemental guidance on income tax allocation agreements involving holding companies and insured depository institutions. An aim of the guidance is to reduce confusion regarding ownership of tax refunds. The guidance supplements an interagency policy statement on income tax allocation issued by the regulators in 1998. That statement said that a holding company that receives a tax refund from a taxing authority obtains these funds as agent for its subsidiary insured depository institutions and other affiliates. The guidance supplements the policy statement by instructing insured depository institutions and their holding companies to review their tax allocation agreements to ensure the agreements expressly acknowledge that the holding company receives any tax refunds as an agent. In addition, all banking organizations are asked to insert specific language in their tax allocation agreements to further clarify tax refund ownership. The guidance also clarifies how sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act, which establish certain restrictions on and requirements for transactions between depository institutions and their affiliates, apply to tax allocation agreements. The federal banking regulators are issuing the guidance, which is identical to the proposal issued late last year, in response to disputes between holding companies in bankruptcy and failed depository institutions regarding ownership of tax refunds. Courts have come to differing conclusions regarding the ownership of tax refunds between holding companies and depository institutions based on their interpretation of language in tax allocation agreements. Institutions and holding companies should implement the guidance as soon as reasonably possible, which the regulators expect would not be later than October 31, 2014. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
The Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2015: January 27-28 (Tuesday-Wednesday) March 17-18 (Tuesday-Wednesday) April 28-29 (Tuesday-Wednesday) June 16-17 (Tuesday-Wednesday) July 28-29 (Tuesday-Wednesday) September 16-17 (Wednesday-Thursday) October 27-28 (Tuesday-Wednesday) December 15-16 (Tuesday-Wednesday) January 26-27, 2016 (Tuesday-Wednesday) The Chair's quarterly news conferences will take place following the March, June, September, and December meetings. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve on Monday announced a $508 million penalty against BNP Paribas, S.A., Paris, France--the largest penalty ever assessed by the agency--for violations of U.S. sanctions laws. The Federal Reserve also issued a joint cease and desist order with the Autorité de Contrôle et de Prudentiel et de Résolution (ACPR), the home country supervisor of BNP Paribas. The cease and desist order requires BNP Paribas to implement a program to ensure global compliance with U.S. sanctions laws. BNP Paribas continues to operate branches in New York, Chicago, and San Francisco, and an agency in Houston, all of which are covered by the enhanced policies and procedures required by the order. These actions are taken in conjunction with actions by the Asset Forfeiture and Money Laundering Section of the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice, the Office of the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, the United States Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), the New York County District Attorney's Office, and the New York Department of Financial Services for violations of U.S. sanctions laws and various New York State laws. The assessments issued by the agencies, including the Federal Reserve, total $8.9736 billion. The actions were taken by the Federal Reserve for unsafe and unsound practices at BNP Paribas in connection with the firm's deficient policies and procedures for ensuring that activities conducted at its offices outside of the United States complied with U.S. sanctions laws. These deficiencies resulted in the omission or concealment of relevant information in payment messages sent through BNP Paribas's New York branch and other unaffiliated U.S. financial institutions that led to violations of the U.S. sanctions laws. The cease and desist order issued jointly with the ACPR requires the global U.S. sanctions compliance program to include creation of a U.S. OFAC compliance office, which will be located in the United States and have authority over all of the U.S. sanctions compliance programs of BNP Paribas's global offices and business lines. The U.S. compliance office, which will be subject to oversight by U.S. regulators, will have the authority to audit any transaction and overall compliance efforts by any office or business line of the institution regarding U.S. sanctions laws, according to the joint order. BNP Paribas and its branches, affiliates, and global business lines must also comply with payment messaging standards that prohibit the omission, deletion, or alteration of information in payment messages to conceal relevant information from other financial institutions in the payment process. The Federal Reserve and the ACPR, as BNP Paribas's home country supervisor, have the authority to enforce the provisions of this order with respect to BNP Paribas's operations on a worldwide basis. The Federal Reserve order also prohibits BNP Paribas from re-employing or otherwise engaging 11 individuals who were involved in the actions that resulted in the violations of U.S. sanctions laws. The Federal Reserve is pursuing separate enforcement actions against these individuals, which could include fines and orders prohibiting them from participating in the business of banking, including working for any institution subject to the jurisdiction of U.S. federal banking supervisors. The Federal Reserve is also pursuing enforcement actions against individuals who may have personally violated U.S. sanctions laws, and is investigating whether other individuals may have been involved in the conduct underlying the enforcement actions against the institution. BNP Paribas has agreed to cooperate in these investigations, but is not the subject of these investigations. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve on Tuesday announced a new schedule of margins applicable for collateral pledged by depository institutions to secure discount window loans and for payment system risk purposes. The new margins are part of the Federal Reserve's continuing efforts to ensure effective risk-management policies and procedures in its lending programs to depository institutions. They reflect data and methodological improvements that better account for differences in various risk characteristics across collateral types. Details on the changes, effective July 1, 2014, are available atwww.frbdiscountwindow.org. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On June 16, 2014, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.27000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on June 19, 2014, and will mature on June 26, 2014. The interest rate of 0.27000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On June 23, 2014, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.28000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on June 26, 2014, and will mature on July 3, 2014. The interest rate of 0.28000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On June 2, 2014, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.26000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on June 5, 2014, and will mature on June 12, 2014. The interest rate of 0.26000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On June 9, 2014, the Federal Reserve conducted a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits at an interest rate of 0.26000 percent. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on June 12, 2014, and will mature on June 19, 2014. The interest rate of 0.26000 percent will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents for the June 17-18 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the June 17-18 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the appointment of Eric S. Belsky as Director of the Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. He is expected to start at the Board in August. Dr. Belsky will succeed Sandra F. Braunstein, who retired earlier this year after nearly 27 years of service at the Board, including 10 years as director of the division. Currently, Dr. Belsky serves as Managing Director of the Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University and is Lecturer in Urban Planning and Design at the Harvard Graduate School of Design. He previously held a number of positions in the private sector and academia, including as Director of Housing Finance Research at Fannie Mae and as Assistant Professor at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. Dr. Belsky has extensive experience conducting research on housing markets, housing finance, and housing policy, including as Research Director of the Millennial Housing Commission. He holds a Ph.D., M.A., and B.A. from Clark University. The Division of Consumer and Community Affairs ensures that the voices and concerns of consumers and communities are represented at the Federal Reserve. It has primary responsibility for carrying out the Board of Governors' consumer financial protection and community development programs. It also conducts consumer-focused supervision, research, and policy analysis to promote a fair and transparent consumer financial services marketplace. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by First Interstate BancSystem, Inc., Billings, Montana, to merge with Mountain West Financial Corp. and thereby indirectly acquire Mountain West Bank, N.A., both of Helena, Montana. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, will pay a $46 million penalty for misconduct related to the process followed by the bank in the first quarter of 2009 for identifying and reporting non-accrual loans. The Federal Reserve also issued a consent order requiring Regions Bank to continue to improve its relevant policies and procedures. The Federal Reserve's consent order is being issued jointly with the Alabama Department of Banking, which is assessing Regions Bank a $5 million penalty, and in conjunction with actions by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Federal Reserve also announced enforcement actions against three former employees of Regions Bank who were responsible for the misconduct addressed in the action against the bank. The Federal Reserve is initiating administrative proceedings against Thomas A. Neely, Jr., former senior commercial credit executive of the Bank, seeking an order prohibiting him from the banking industry and separately assessing Neely a $2.4 million civil money penalty. The Federal Reserve is also issuing consent orders, jointly with the Alabama Department of Banking, against Michael J. Willoughby, the former chief credit officer of Regions Bank, and Jeffrey C. Kuehr, former head of the Bank's problem loan workout department, prohibiting them from further participation in the banking industry. The enforcement actions are based on deficiencies in the controls and procedures in place at Regions Bank in the first quarter of 2009 for identifying loans for non-accrual status and for assuring that accurate and complete information was provided to Federal Reserve and Department of Banking examiners in connection with an examination focused on the bank's non-accrual process. The enforcement actions against the former employees are based on their participation in the deficient non-accrual loan process in the first quarter of 2009 and on their providing inaccurate, incomplete, and misleading information to examiners about that process. Separately, the Securities and Exchange Commission is taking action against the three former employees of Regions Bank for their misconduct in connection with the first quarter 2009 reporting of non-accrual loans. The Securities and Exchange Commission also entered into a deferred prosecution agreement with Regions Financial Corp., Regions Bank's parent holding company. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 SEC Announces Fraud Charges Against Three Former Regions Bank Executives in Accounting Scheme
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Anchor Commercial Bank, Juno Beach, FloridaPrompt Corrective Action Directive issued October 11, 2011Terminated May 12, 2014 Columbia Commercial Bancorp, Hillsboro, OregonWritten Agreement issued March 18, 2009Terminated June 2, 2014 Patriot Bancshares, Inc., Houston, Texas, and Patriot Holdings Nevada, Inc., Reno, NevadaWritten Agreement issued November 17, 2011Terminated May 29, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday invited comment on a proposal to modify the regulations for capital planning and stress testing. The proposed rule would shift the start date of the capital plan and stress test cycles from October 1 of a calendar year to January 1 of the following calendar year. Under the proposed rule, a bank holding company with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more would be required to submit its capital plan and stress test results to the Federal Reserve by April 5, three months later than under the current rulemakings. A bank holding company with total consolidated assets of more than $10 billion and less than $50 billion would be required to submit its stress test results to the Federal Reserve by July 31. Savings and loan holding companies and state member banks who are subject to the stress tests under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act also would be required to submit their results several months later than under the current rules. Although the dates would be shifted forward, the Federal Reserve would apply the same capital planning and stress testing processes during a 15-month transition period until the new schedule takes effect. The proposed rule would make the new schedule effective beginning with the 2015-2016 capital plan and stress test cycles. For the upcoming 2014-2015 capital plan cycle, the schedule would be unchanged from prior years. A large bank holding company would submit a capital plan on January 5, 2015, and the Federal Reserve would issue an objection or non-objection to a capital plan by March 31, 2015. The proposed rule includes a number of further measures to alter the capital planning and stress test processes. It would: Comments on the proposed rule will be accepted until August 11, 2014. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Comments on this proposal:Submit|View Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Allied First Bancorp, Inc. (PDF), Oswego, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated June 6, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: CBOA Financial, Inc. (PDF), Tucson, ArizonaWritten Agreement dated May 28, 2014 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Foundation Bancorp, Inc., Bellevue, WashingtonWritten Agreement dated December 23, 2010Terminated May 28, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: First Southern Bank (PDF), Boca Raton, FloridaOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated June 12, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April indicates that growth in economic activity has rebounded in recent months. Labor market indicators generally showed further improvement. The unemployment rate, though lower, remains elevated. Household spending appears to be rising moderately and business fixed investment resumed its advance, while the recovery in the housing sector remained slow. Fiscal policy is restraining economic growth, although the extent of restraint is diminishing. Inflation has been running below the Committee's longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions will continue to improve gradually, moving toward those the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as nearly balanced. The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, and it is monitoring inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term. The Committee currently judges that there is sufficient underlying strength in the broader economy to support ongoing improvement in labor market conditions. In light of the cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions since the inception of the current asset purchase program, the Committee decided to make a further measured reduction in the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in July, the Committee will add to its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $15 billion per month rather than $20 billion per month, and will add to its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $20 billion per month rather than $25 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee's sizable and still-increasing holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger economic recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with the Committee's dual mandate. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in further measured steps at future meetings. However, asset purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee's decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the Committee's outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The Committee continues to anticipate, based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Stanley Fischer; Richard W. Fisher; Narayana Kocherlakota; Loretta J. Mester; Charles I. Plosser; Jerome H. Powell; and Daniel K. Tarullo. Statement Regarding Purchases of Treasury Securities and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities
On June 23, 2014, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.28000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $10,000,000,000. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's May 9, 2014,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of its policy tools designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the operation is listed below; the operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Operation Date: Monday, June 23, 2014 Notification Date (summary results): $10,000 Tender Increment: $10,000 Maximum Tender Amount (per institution): $10,000,000,000 Award Minimum Amount: $10,000 Award Maximum Amount: $10,000,000,000 All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full at the interest rate shown above. The minimum tender amount is $10,000; the maximum amount is $10,000,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. All tenders must be submitted between the opening and closing time on the operation date. Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On June 16, 2014, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.27000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $10,000,000,000. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's May 9, 2014,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of its policy tools designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the operation is listed below; the operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Operation and Tender Parameters All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full at the interest rate shown above. The minimum tender amount is $10,000; the maximum amount is $10,000,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. All tenders must be submitted between the opening and closing time on the operation date. Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On June 9, 2014, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.26000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $10,000,000,000. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's May 9, 2014,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of its policy tools designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the operation is listed below; the operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Operation and Tender Parameters All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full at the interest rate shown above. The minimum tender amount is $10,000; the maximum amount is $10,000,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. All tenders must be submitted between the opening and closing time on the operation date. Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On June 30, 2014, the Federal Reserve will conduct a fixed-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with an interest rate of 0.29000 percent and a maximum tender amount of $10,000,000,000. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's May 9, 2014,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of its policy tools designed to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. Additional information regarding the operation is listed below; the operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Description of Operation and Tender Parameters All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full at the interest rate shown above. The minimum tender amount is $10,000; the maximum amount is $10,000,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. All tenders must be submitted between the opening and closing time on the operation date. Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Lael Brainard took the oath of office as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on Monday. Jerome H. Powell was also sworn in for a second term on the Board and Stanley Fischer was sworn in as Vice Chairman of the Board. The oaths were administered by Chair Janet L. Yellen in the Board Room. President Obama nominated the three in January 2014. Dr. Brainard and Mr. Powell were confirmed as Board members by the United States Senate on June 12, and their terms expire on January 31, 2026, and January 31, 2028, respectively. Dr. Fischer was confirmed by the U.S. Senate as a Board member on May 21, and confirmed as Vice Chairman on June 12. His term as Vice Chairman expires June 12, 2018. A biography of each Board member will be available on the Board's website:www.federalreserve.gov/bios/. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Louise L. Roseman, Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems Submitted to the Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Campbell, Ranking Member Clay, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to submit a statement for the record on behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System for the hearing entitled "The Production and Circulation of Coins and Currency." I welcome the opportunity to update the Subcommittee on activities of the Federal Reserve related to currency developments and management of coin distribution. Roles in Currency and Coin DistributionFirst, it may be helpful to describe briefly the Federal Reserve's role in currency and coin distribution. Each year, the Federal Reserve Board projects the need for new currency, which it acquires from the Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP) within the Department of the Treasury, at approximately the cost of production. The Board issues the nation's currency in the form of Federal Reserve notes, which are liabilities on the books of the Reserve Banks. The Reserve Banks distribute currency and coin for general circulation through depository institutions. The Reserve Banks also receive deposits of currency and coin from these institutions. Currently, 28 Reserve Bank cash offices provide cash services to approximately 8,700 banks, savings and loans, and credit unions in the United States. The remaining depository institutions obtain currency and coin from correspondent banks rather than directly from the Federal Reserve. The value of Federal Reserve notes in circulation as of May 29, 2014, was more than $1.2 trillion, which represents, on average, an increase of nearly 8 percent per year over the past five years.1 The Federal Reserve's role in coin operations is more limited than its role in currency operations. The United States Mint issues circulating coins that the Reserve Banks purchase at face value and record as assets on their balance sheets. The U.S. Mint determines annual coin production; however, the Reserve Banks influence the process by providing the U.S. Mint with monthly coin orders and a 12-month, rolling coin-order forecast. The Reserve Banks distribute new and circulated coin to depository institutions to meet the public's demand and take as deposits coin that exceeds the public's needs. The Reserve Banks store coin in their vaults and also contract with coin terminals to store and distribute coin on their behalf.2Armored carrier companies operate the coin terminals, which have improved the efficiency of the coin-distribution system. The value of U.S. coins in circulation as of May 29, 2014, was approximately $43 billion, or about 3.5 percent of total currency and coin in circulation.3 Currency RedesignMaintaining the integrity of and confidence in U.S. currency is a shared responsibility among the Treasury, the BEP, the Federal Reserve, and the United States Secret Service (USSS). These agencies work collaboratively to redesign Federal Reserve notes in order to improve their security and protect the public from counterfeiters. Through an interagency cooperative agreement, these agencies make up the Advanced Counterfeit Deterrence Steering Committee (ACD) and recommend design changes to the Secretary of the Treasury, who has sole statutory authority to approve new currency designs. Although U.S. currency is designed as a family of notes, decisions about each denomination are guided by the ACD's evaluation of the range of counterfeit threats--from digital technology to traditional printing processes--and by advancements in banknote security features. The U.S. government redesigns its currency primarily for security reasons. Finding the right set of security features to address specific counterfeiting threats requires years of development work. New features must be innovative and easy for the public to use, but difficult for counterfeiters to simulate. New designs must also include characteristics and features that can be effectively used by banknote equipment manufacturers to denominate and authenticate currency, and must meet specific requirements of the Federal Reserve to guarantee authenticity. Beginning in 1996, the United States produced the first major redesign of U.S. currency in 65 years (the Series-1996 design family). This redesign began with the $100 note in March 1996 and concluded with the $5 and $10 notes issued together in May 2000. The 1996-design family incorporated new security features, such as portrait watermarks, embedded security threads, and color-shifting ink to combat the predominant threat of the professional counterfeiter. To address a phenomenon known as "opportunistic counterfeiting," or the use of digital technology by non-professional or casual counterfeiters to simulate notes, the ACD recommended another redesign of the currency, which began with the $20 note in October 2003; followed by the $50 note in 2004; the $10 note in 2006; the $5 note in 2008; and most recently, the $100 note in October 2013.4 The redesigned $100 note builds on the ACD's efforts to improve security for new notes and includes state-of-the-art features such as the 3-D security ribbon and the color-shifting bell in the inkwell. As of April 30, the Federal Reserve had distributed 2.2 billion redesigned $100 notes--18 percent of the nearly 9.6 billion $100 notes in circulation. The launch of the redesigned $100 note was a partnership between the BEP, the USSS, the State Department, and the Board. Because one-half to two-thirds of the value of U.S. currency--predominately the $100 note--circulates abroad,5educational seminars and public education events were planned at U.S. embassies and consulates worldwide and were aimed at educating global users about the redesign of the $100 note, the new security features, and how to authenticate them. This educational effort began with issuance of the note and is ongoing. The ACD is in the early stages of identifying and developing new security features and processes to address a wide range of ongoing counterfeiting threats from around the world. Developing new security features and integrating them into a banknote design effectively is a complex and time-consuming process. The design of U.S. currency must be resilient to counterfeiting threats, as well as address the needs of a global user base. In addition, our nation's currency must perform reliably in sophisticated authentication and fitness-sorting machines around the world. Finally, there are a growing number of automated transactions, using equipment ranging from bill acceptors at self-checkouts to high-speed sorting equipment at financial institutions and the Federal Reserve. These machines have differing levels of technological sophistication and make use of numerous characteristics in the notes to determine authenticity and fitness. U.S. currency needs to be not only highly secure but also accessible for blind and visually impaired persons.6There are a variety of methods and evolving technologies on the market that could assist with providing meaningful access. The current design family of notes includes large, high-contrast numerals on the reverse side of the notes, and the BEP has developed an application for smartphones that denominates notes quickly and accurately. The Board also supports the BEP's currency reader program, which will provide currency readers to visually impaired individuals free of charge. Additionally, we are working with the BEP to evaluate various tactile features based on usability, durability, cost, and risk. Cost and risk to society are significant with this project, as machine manufacturers may need to adjust transport and sensor systems, and banks and armored carriers may need to increase vault and truck capacity to accommodate thicker notes. Durability is also a challenge because Federal Reserve notes facilitate commerce throughout the world and are subjected to many different climates and uses. The Federal Reserve will continue to work with the BEP and other stakeholders to evaluate and recommend solutions that effectively meet the needs of the blind and visually impaired community. Currency Production QualityThe Board and the BEP are engaged collaboratively in establishing a quality assurance program at the BEP. The foundation of this initiative is to produce notes more efficiently, integrate security features more effectively, and align note designs more intently with production constraints and circulation needs. Through these and other improvements, we expect to achieve significant cost savings in future years by reducing spoilage and increasing production efficiency. The improvement of the BEP's quality system will more effectively and efficiently produce future currency designs that better meet the needs of the public. Management of Coin DistributionThe Federal Reserve implemented a program to manage coin distribution from a national perspective beginning in 2008, which has improved the efficiency of the Reserve Banks' coin activities. Before the Federal Reserve moved to centralized management of coin distribution, each Reserve Bank made independent ordering and distribution decisions. Today, the Reserve Banks' Cash Product Office (CPO) manages coin nationally for the Federal Reserve, taking into account the Reserve Banks' input regarding local estimates of coin demand. The CPO produces a consolidated monthly coin order on behalf of the Reserve Banks for the U.S. Mint. Along with the order, the CPO provides the U.S. Mint with a 12-month, rolling coin-order forecast for planning purposes. The order and forecast are developed based on expected net payments and Reserve Banks' coin inventory levels and are targeted to ensure sufficient inventories are positioned at each Reserve Bank office and coin terminal to meet the forecasted demand. As a result of improved inventory management, the Reserve Banks have been able to use inventories of previously circulated pennies, nickels, and dimes more efficiently to fill orders from depository institutions, rather than new coins.7Reserve Bank orders for new coins of these denominations are about 38 percent less than the average orders in the six years before the centralized inventory-management program began. The CPO is also testing a new concept of coin exchanges, whereby it identifies participating depository institutions with net supply of or demand for coin based on ordering and depositing patterns, and the Reserve Banks facilitate the transfer of coin directly between those institutions and settle the transactions on the institutions' accounts at the Reserve Banks. If successful, the coin exchanges will reduce transportation and coin handling expenses. In a recent report, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) recognized the improvements the Federal Reserve has made to its coin inventory management and its collaboration with supply chain stakeholders.8To further improve efficiency, the GAO recommended that the Board direct the Reserve Banks to (1) develop a process to assess coin operations costs, (2) establish performance metrics for managing coin inventory, and (3) implement a process to assess the accuracy of forecasts for new coin orders. The Board generally agrees with the report's recommendations to further improve coin management and is working with the CPO to implement them. The CPO is defining new metrics to measure the productivity and cost of Reserve Bank coin operations and is working with its vendor to refine the accuracy of forecasted coin demand. Metal Content of CoinsAs the issuing authority for banknotes, the Federal Reserve appreciates the importance of identifying and incorporating cost-effective materials into the production of our nation's money. Changing the metal content of pennies and nickels, which could change the weight and electronic signature of the coins, would not have a material adverse effect on the operations of the Reserve Banks. In fact, the Reserve Banks stopped routinely weighing penny and nickel deposits a decade ago, after concluding that the small dollar value of the differences found were more than offset by the cost of weighing the coin bags. Instead, the Reserve Banks credit depository institutions' accounts for deposits of coin on a "said to contain" basis. Changing the metal content of dimes, quarters, half-dollars, and $1 coins--if it changes the respective weights--could, however, affect Reserve Bank coin terminal operations. Coin terminal operators generally weigh incoming deposits for these denominations. A change in a coin's weight or electronic signature could also affect businesses that use coin-accepting machines or sorting equipment that relies on these characteristics to identify coins by denomination, such as the vending industry, armored carriers, and some commercial banks. Those businesses are in a better position to comment on the extent to which they would be required to modify equipment to recognize coins of the same denomination that have different weights and electronic signatures. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve will continue to work to meet demand for currency and coin efficiently and effectively and collaborate with our partners at Treasury, the BEP, and the USSS to develop designs and security features that protect the public from counterfeiting. 1.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), Statistical Release H.4.1, "Factors Affecting Reserve Balances" (May 29).Return to text 2.These armored carrier companies do not charge the Reserve Banks a fee for these services. In the 1990s, the Federal Reserve and the armored carrier companies reached a mutually beneficial agreement that the armored carriers would provide coin services to depository institution customers on behalf of the Federal Reserve at no cost in exchange for access at the armored carrier terminals to Reserve Bank coin inventories, which significantly reduced the transportation expenses incurred by the armored carriers in obtaining the coin from Reserve Bank locations.Return to text 3.Board of Governors, Statistical Release H.4.1.Return to text 4.The Board had previously announced that the redesigned $100 note would begin circulating in February 2011, but had to postpone the introduction because of production problems.Return to text 5.Seewww.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/coin_about.htm.Return to text 6.The BEP has been working to meet the requirements of a 2008 court order requiring the Secretary of the Treasury to provide meaningful access for individuals who are blind or visually impaired to denominate U.S. currency. The court has accepted the Treasury's recommendation to continue using the large, high-contrast numeral on all redesigned notes, to develop and implement a tactile feature in the next redesign of notes, and to develop a currency reader program.Return to text 7.The 50 State Quarters and Presidential $1 Dollar Coin programs resulted in Reserve Banks building significant inventory of coins. Driven by public demand, these inventories could not be reduced to efficient levels as quickly as the other denominations. By the end of 2013, inventories of quarters declined to efficient levels, but Reserve Bank inventories of $1 coins have held steady at about 1.4 billion pieces for the past two years.Return to text 8.Government Accountability Office (2013),U.S. Currency: Coin Inventory Management Needs Better Performance Information(Washington: GAO,November 27).Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Federal Reserve Third Annual Stress Test Modeling Symposium, Boston, Massachusetts Born of necessity during the depths of the financial crisis as part of an effort to restore confidence in the U.S. financial system, supervisory stress testing has in the intervening five years become a cornerstone of a new approach to regulation and supervision of the nation's largest financial institutions. First, of course, it is a means for assuring that large, complex financial institutions have sufficient capital to allow them to remain viable intermediaries even under highly stressful conditions. More broadly, supervisory stress testing and the associated review of capital planning processes have provided a platform for building out a regulatory framework that is more dynamic, more macroprudential, and more data-driven than pre-crisis practice. Each year we have refined elements of both the substance and process of the stress tests. These changes have been informed not only by our own experience, but also by critiques and suggestions offered by others. This annual symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has become an important channel for eliciting reactions and advice from outside experts and the banks subject to the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). Although the major elements of our approach have now been successfully established, I anticipate that we will continue to make enhancements. If supervisory stress testing is to give regulators, banks, and the public a dynamic view of the capital positions of large financial firms, it must itself respond to changes in the economy, the financial system, and risk-management capabilities. This morning I will give a retrospective on the first five years of supervisory stress testing, highlighting some of the accomplishments and identifying some areas in which we may consider changes in the future. Then I would like to turn to a topic that has gained increasing attention in the past couple of years--the qualitative assessment of firms' capital planning processes that we conduct in parallel with our quantitative assessment of firms' capital positions. From SCAP to CCARThe potential value of comprehensive stress testing had been much discussed among academics, analysts, and regulators in the years preceding the financial crisis, but only during the crisis was this supervisory tool first used at the same time across the largest firms. The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) demonstrated in practice, not just in theory, the value of simultaneous, forward-looking projections of potential losses and revenues based on each bank's portfolio and circumstances. The forward-looking feature overcame the limitations of static capital ratios. The simultaneity, along with stress test features such as the use of common macroeconomic scenarios, introduced a critical macroprudential dimension that offered insights into the condition of the entire financial system, including whether banks were sufficiently resilient to continue to lend to households and businesses under such adverse conditions. The Federal Reserve's basic approach to stress testing has not changed materially since the SCAP. We continue to take a multidisciplinary approach, drawing on a wide range of staff expertise. We create hypothetical macroeconomic scenarios that incorporate an assumed sharp deterioration in economic and financial conditions. Supervisors estimate each bank's expected losses and revenues and use these estimates to project post-stress capital levels and ratios under the hypothetical scenarios. The estimated capital ratios are then compared with regulatory benchmarks. We use common scenarios for all firms; for the firms with the largest trading activities, we add a market-shock scenario that incorporates market turbulence of severity similar to that of the latter half of 2008. While the basic approach has remained consistent, much else has changed. In the first place, of course, the requirement for stress testing has become statutory, as Congress drew on the lessons of SCAP in crafting prudential standards for large financial firms in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act).1Second, the annual supervisory stress test has been incorporated into CCAR, a broader program that requires large banking organizations to submit a capital plan annually. The CCAR process gives supervisors an opportunity to evaluate plans for capital distributions against the backdrop of the firm's overall capital position under both baseline and hypothesized stressed conditions. It also provides a regular, structured, and comparative way to assess the capacity of these firms to manage their capital positions and, by implication, more generally to manage their risks. I will return to this feature of CCAR a bit later. Third, there have been substantial enhancements to the supervisory stress test. Perhaps the most important change has been the development of independent supervisory models. Because the original SCAP was developed on the fly and under considerable time pressure, supervisors necessarily had to rely on firms' own estimates of losses and revenues as a starting point for analysis, although they evaluated the firms' estimates and made significant adjustments. In each stress test that has followed, and building upon the considerable progress in data collection, we have made completely independent estimates of a progressively greater proportion of potential net income or losses. These improvements in data and models have increased our ability to distinguish risks within portfolios. We have also refined the formulation of the hypothetical scenarios that form the basis of the stress tests. The severely adverse scenario is designed to reflect, at a minimum, the economic and financial conditions typical of a severe post-World War II U.S. recession.2In devising recession scenarios, we draw on many of the same macroeconomic modeling tools used in making monetary policy. Because not all significant risks facing banks are tied to the business cycle, our scenarios now incorporate other adverse developments such as an exceptionally large decline in house prices, sharp drops in the value of stocks and other financial assets, or a worsening of global economic conditions more severe than might normally be expected to accompany a deep recession in the United States. We have implemented the Dodd-Frank requirement for an "adverse," as well as a "severely adverse," scenario not by simply hypothesizing a milder recession, but by testing for somewhat different risks. The past two years we have used the adverse scenario to test the impact of a sudden, significant increase in interest rates. More discrete changes of note include the assumption of default by each firm's largest counterparty and the incorporation of salient risks beyond those in the overall scenarios.3The former obviously serves a microprudential purpose, but it also could promote systemic stability objectives if it were to identify a single exceptionally large exposure for the entire financial system. The incorporation of salient risks helps to use stress tests to "lean against the wind," not just build a buffer for future losses. For example, the 2011 and 2012 scenarios incorporated possible severe stress in Europe. Inclusion of this factor may have led to greater awareness and better risk management of U.S. firms' European exposures. Finally, I might mention a change made this year that actually reverted to a feature of the SCAP. We did not allow banks to assume their balance sheets would shrink in the stress scenarios as a way of meeting the minimum capital charge, something that many banks had done in the stress tests of the past few years.4Foreclosing this assumption serves the macroprudential goal of helping to ensure that the major financial firms remain sufficiently capitalized to support lending in a severe downturn. As I have already suggested, we are likely to continue to hone the supervisory stress test. In particular, I expect that we will devote more attention to developing the macroprudential elements of the stress tests. For example, we might sharpen our focus on the risks to the financial system of significant common exposures among firms. We have already adjusted the market shock applied to the trading books of the six largest firms to ensure that firms are not incentivized to hold significant amounts of certain assets simply because they performed well in the second half of 2008.5But there is more that could be done. One idea would be to test whether individual firms that are revealed by the tests to be vulnerable to serious stress might engage in asset fire sales that could produce knock-on damage to other firms. Another would be to incorporate more assumptions pertaining to the increased cost of, or reduced access to, funding in stressed environments, when lots of credit lines may be drawn simultaneously. In short, we do not regard the supervisory stress test and CCAR as finished products. In fact, we shouldneverregard them as finished products, since to do so would be to overlook changes in the real economy, financial innovations, and shifts in asset correlations across firms. But I think it fair to say that supervisory stress testing and the CCAR have already made important contributions to financial stability and, in the process, have led the way in transforming supervision of the nation's largest financial firms. First, they have played a key role in strengthening dramatically the capital position of the industry. The firms participating in CCAR have more than doubled their tier 1 common capital since 2009, an increase of $500 billion of additional, high-quality capital in the U.S. financial system. It is noteworthy that supervisors in other countries have themselves been moving toward greater use of stress tests as a centerpiece of efforts to build strong capital positions for their banks. Most members of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision now use some form of stress testing.6The European Union and the United Kingdom are currently conducting supervisory stress tests whose results will be publicly released. Second, they have been the leading edge of a movement toward greater supervisory transparency. The Federal Reserve's decision in spring 2009 to disclose the results of the SCAP on a firm-specific basis proved to be an important step in re-establishing market and public confidence in the U.S. financial system. In the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress endorsed the practice of disclosing both supervisory and firm stress test results in normal times, as well as in crisis periods. During the past five years we have progressively increased disclosures of firm-specific information, the methodologies we use, and the details of the stress test scenarios. From the outset, we have published the broad framework and methodology used in the supervisory stress test, including information about the types of models we use.7We solicited comments on our design framework for scenarios in 2012, and incorporated into the final document some of the ideas we received--such as providing more information about the economic and financial conditions represented by paths of the variables in the scenarios.8And this past spring, we published the additional set of stress test results that described how the firms would perform under the adverse scenario, in addition to the results of the severely adverse scenario, which we had previously released.9 Because bank portfolios are often quite opaque and thus difficult for outsiders to value, this information should allow investors, counterparties, analysts, and markets more generally to make more informed judgments on the condition of U.S. banking institutions. Coupled with other regulatory measures, this transparency should in turn increase market discipline. This level of transparency also subjectsusto greater outside scrutiny and analysis, a process that increases our accountability as regulators and helps us improve our assumptions and methodology over time. These choices for greater transparency in the supervisory stress tests and CCAR have prompted healthy discussion on the merits of disclosure in other supervisory areas. As I think everyone in this audience knows, we have not disclosed the supervisory models themselves. We do not want firms simply to copy our modeling in their own assessment of risks and capital needs. And we certainly do not want them to construct their portfolios in an effort to game the model--a kind of analogue to teaching to a test. But even though we do not publicly release the models, we have put systems in place to ensure oversight and accountability. The models are evaluated by a special model validation group made up of experts within the Federal Reserve who do not work on the stress tests. We have also created a Model Validation Council made up of outside experts to provide independent views and advice.10 The third important effect of the supervisory stress tests and CCAR has been to pave the way for other horizontal, simultaneous supervisory exercises. We created the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) in 2010 to implement an approach to supervision of systemically important firms that was better coordinated, more data-driven, and more focused on the largest institutions as a group.11While CCAR includes a number of firms that are not in the LISCC portfolio, the stress tests and CCAR have been the proving ground for LISCC, and as the committee has evolved to administer these programs more efficiently, these exercises have shown the way to other horizontal supervisory exercises or assessments. Some, like the newer Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review, which focuses on assessing liquidity sufficiency and banks' internal liquidity risk-management practices, are intended to be recurring. Others are ad hoc efforts responsive to more episodic or transitory concerns. Fourth, and in some sense an extension of the prior point, CCAR in particular has defined an approach toward developing and maintaining better risk management within the banking organizations subject to these exercises. Let me turn now address this topic in somewhat greater detail. Ensuring Strong Risk ManagementHere again, the origins of our current program lie in our experience with the SCAP in 2009, during which we learned a great deal beyond just post-stress loss and capital numbers. The horizontal, cross-firm nature of the exercise also allowed us to evaluate and compare the effectiveness of the firms' processes for determining and addressing their own capital needs. We discovered that, at the time, many of the firms had critical deficiencies in the fundamental risk-measurement and risk-management practices necessary to assess their capital needs. Many firms did not have a systematic program for assessing their capital needs and even lacked the basic data on firm-wide risks and exposures needed to begin such a program. Not surprisingly, there appeared to be a correlation between firms found to be insufficiently capitalized to withstand further financial and economic stress and firms lacking effective processes for assessing their risks and vulnerabilities. In response to these deficiencies, the Federal Reserve initiated the annual CCAR process for assessing the capital adequacy and internal capital planning processes of large, complex bank holding companies (BHCs). CCAR is premised on the belief that thorough, rigorous risk management must underpin all the activities of all such firms. Risks that are identified and understood can be evaluated and, where appropriate, assumed with proper safeguards and capital planning. Risks that are overlooked, misunderstood, or taken outside of a well-considered and comprehensive risk-management framework plant the seeds for serious trouble for individual firms and potentially for the financial system. Through CCAR, we have sought to ensure not only that all large BHCs have strong capital positions as determined through our supervisory stress test, but also that they have strong capital planning practices that are appropriately focused on the capital needed to withstand possible losses from the specific risks in each firm's business model. These processes, grounded in strong quantitative and qualitative risk management, also give supervisors a clearer window into each firm's activities and thus increase the effectiveness of regular supervision. Since the first CCAR there has been notable improvement in the firms' capital planning processes. Many firms have made meaningful investments in their risk-measurement processes, including significant enhancements to their internal data and management information systems. Many firms have adopted a formal framework to inform their capital planning through an analysis of their vulnerabilities and capital adequacy under a range of potential adverse scenarios. They have also taken steps to enhance the integrity of their risk measures, analysis, and the decision-making around their capital levels and distributions. Despite these advances, there is continuing need for improvement in the firms' capital planning processes. Some firms still lack reliable information about their businesses and exposures. Firms also are sometimes unable to measure or understand how stressful conditions can change the performance of their material business lines. In particular, the capacity to assess the impact of tail risks remains in need of further development at many firms. These deficiencies are, in some instances, compounded by weak oversight by senior management and boards of directors, and lack of effective checks and accountability in the process. The Qualitative Assessment in CCARThe importance we attach to these risk-management and capital planning processes is reflected in the component of CCAR known as the qualitative assessment. This assessment covers a range of topics, including the extent to which the design of a firm's internal scenario captures the specific risks from the firm's activities, the firm's methods for projecting losses under stress scenarios, and how the firm identifies appropriate capital levels and plans for distributions. As detailed in our CCAR regulation, where these processes are found to be inadequate, or to raise safety and soundness concerns, they may form the basis for an objection by the Board of Governors to the capital distribution plans of a firm.12If a firm's internal processes are unreliable, supervisors will necessarily be concerned that a firm may not properly have assessed risks clearly and, where needed, assured adequate capital for the many risks that cannot be fully captured by standardized stress tests. As the process and expectations for the quantitative test have become better understood, attention has shifted a bit to the qualitative assessment. To place that part of the CCAR in context, let me make several additional points. First, as I have already noted, many firms had a long way to go to meet high standards of capital planning backed by strong risk management when we began CCAR. Given that initial gap, we have allowed time for firms to work toward full achievement of those standards. Thus, what may be perceived as a raising of the bar every year is better understood as our effort to provide a demanding, but still realistic, glide path for firms to reach that goal. We do, however, expect firms to continue to make steady progress each year. Second, the horizontal nature of the qualitative assessment does not mean that every year one or more firms must receive an objection on qualitative grounds. The comparative approach helps ensure that firms are evaluated consistently and fairly. And it does allow us to see where specific firms may be outliers from good practices followed in the rest of the industry. But this is not a PGA tournament--there is no foreordained cut that some participants will miss. Third, while there are minimum standards for all CCAR firms, the standards are more stringent for firms of greater systemic importance.13It is not enough for the largest and most complex banking organizations to meet only the minimum standards in CCAR. We expect the more systemically important firms to establish and maintain the most sophisticated risk-management and capital planning practices. Their risk management and capital adequacy should be sufficiently strong to help ensure their resiliency to a range of unexpected stress events, since their distress could pose a threat to the financial system and to the broader economy. Fourth, precisely because of its importance to our supervisory program, the qualitative assessment will continue to be progressively more integrated into year-round supervision of the CCAR firms. While some important features of capital planning are observable only during the formal CCAR process, most of the risk-management and capital planning standards incorporated in CCAR are operative and observable by supervisors throughout the year. These should be an important focus of ongoing supervisory oversight and of discussions between firms and supervisors. Only in unusual circumstances should supervisors learn for the first time during CCAR of significant problems in the quality of the capital planning processes, and only in unusual circumstances should firms be surprised at the outcome of the qualitative assessment. We have already taken steps to further this integration of CCAR and regular supervision. At the end of each CCAR process our supervisors send to each firm a letter detailing their conclusions concerning the qualitative assessment. To the extent weaknesses or areas for improvement are identified, those letters provide a basis for regular stocktaking by both firms and supervisors. More generally, last year we released a paper on our expectations for all aspects of capital planning, providing greater detail than what is included in the annual CCAR instructions.14 I anticipate that we will take additional steps to integrate ongoing supervisory assessments of risk-management and other internal control processes with the annual CCAR exercise, and to assure that communications in both directions are heard. One such step has just recently begun: The committee chaired by senior Board staff that is responsible for the oversight of CCAR, supported by the relevant horizontal assessment teams, will directly engage with firms during the course of the year to evaluate progress in remediating weaknesses or other issues identified in the post-CCAR letters. Increasingly, our regular supervisory work on topics such as risk-identification and internal audit will focus on processes that are critical to risk management and capital planning at the firms, areas of focus for CCAR. The aim of these and additional measures is to make CCAR more the culmination of year-round supervision of risk-management and capital planning processes than a discrete exercise that takes place at the same time as the supervisory stress tests. Finally, I would note that, to provide investors, counterparties, analysts, and the public with better information on the meaning of an objection on qualitative grounds to a capital distribution plan, we now release our decisions on each capital plan and, for firms whose capital plans were objected to, provide a summary of the specific reasons for those objections.15 ConclusionAlthough strong capital regulation is critical to ensuring the safety and soundness of our largest financial institutions, it is not a panacea, as indeed no single regulatory device can ever be. Similarly, supervisory stress testing and CCAR, while central to ensuring strong capital positions for large firms, are not the only important elements of our supervisory program. Having said that, however, I hope you will take at least these three points away from my remarks today. First, supervisory stress testing has fundamentally changed the way we think about capital adequacy. The need to specify scenarios, loss estimates, and revenue assumptions--and to apply these specifications on a dynamic basis--has immeasurably advanced the regulation of capital adequacy and, thus, the safety and soundness of our financial system. The opportunities it provides to incorporate macroprudential elements make it, in my judgment, the single most important advance in prudential regulation since the crisis. Second, supervisory stress testing and CCAR have provided the first significant form of supervision conducted in a horizontal, coordinated fashion, affording a single view of an entire portfolio of institutions, as well as more data-rich insight into each institution individually. As such, these programs have opened the way for similar supervisory activities and continue to teach us how to organize our supervisory efforts in order most effectively to safeguard firm soundness and financial stability. Finally, supervisory stress testing and CCAR are the exemplary cases of how supervision that aspires to keep up with the dynamism of financial firms and financial markets must itself be composed of adaptive tools. If regulators are to make the necessary adaptations, they must be open to the comments, critiques, and suggestions of those outside the regulatory community. For this reason, transparency around the aims, assumptions, and methodologies of stress testing and our review of capital plans must be preserved and extended. With that point, I end where I began--by emphasizing the importance of forums such as this one, and thanking you for your participation. 1.Dodd-Frank Act §165(i), 12 U.S.C. §5365(i).Return to text 2.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing (PDF)," final rule (Docket No. OP–1452),Federal Register, vol. 78 (November 29), p. 71443.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013),Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2014 Summary Instructions and Guidance(Washington: Board of Governors, November 1) (PDF), p. 8.Return to text 4.Prior to CCAR 2014, the Board sent CCAR participants a letter detailing the Federal Reserve'sprocedure for independently projecting the firms' balance sheets and risk-weighted assets in the supervisory stress test and the implications of the independent projections. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Federal Reserve Independent Balance Sheet and RWA Projections," December 16.Return to text 5.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,2014 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November 1), p. 5.Return to text 6.See Bank for International Settlements (2012),Peer Review of Supervisory Authorities' Implementation of Stress Testing Principles (PDF)(Basel: BIS, April), p. 8.Return to text 7.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014),Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2014: Supervisory Stress Test Methodology and Results(Washington: Board of Governors, March) (PDF).Return to text 8.See Board of Governors, "Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing," p. 71437.Return to text 9.See Board of Governors,Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2014,p. 39.Return to text 10.For more information about the Model Validation Council, seewww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/mvc.htm.Return to text 11.For information on LISCC, seewww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm.Return to text 12.See 12 CFR 225.8(e)(2)(ii).Return to text 13.It is also worth emphasizing that both elements of CCAR--the qualitative and the quantitative assessments--only apply to BHCs with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets. The Dodd-Frank Act requires companies with between $10 and 50 billion in assets to conduct an annual company-run stress test. The Federal Reserve does not conduct a CCAR-like exercise to evaluate these company-run stress tests, although we do review the firms' company-run stress tests and capital planning processes in the normal course of supervision. This review is tailored to the smaller size, reduced complexity, and limited systemic risk of these firms. See footnote 5, p. 14160, of Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2014), "Supervisory Guidance on Implementing Dodd-Frank Act Company-Run Stress Tests for Banking Organizations with Total Consolidated Assets of More Than $10 Billion but Less Than $50 Billion," final supervisory guidance (Docket No. OCC–2013–0013),FederalRegister, vol. 79 (March 13) (PDF). For other, smaller banking organizations--those with $10 billion or less in total consolidated assets--there is no supervisory expectation or regulatory requirement that these firms will conduct capital stress testing.Return to text 14.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013),Capital Planning at Large Bank Holding Companies: Supervisory Expectations and Range of Current Practice(Washington: Board of Governors, August) (PDF).Return to text 15.See Board of Governors,Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2014, p. 7.Return to text