Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) on Thursday permanently adjusted the annual resolution plan filing deadline for American International Group, Inc., General Electric Capital Corporation, Inc., MetLife Inc., and Prudential Financial, Inc., from July 1 to December 31 beginning in 2016. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires that certain banking organizations with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) for supervision by the Federal Reserve periodically submit resolution plans to the Federal Reserve and FDIC. Each plan must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under the U.S. bankruptcy code in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. The agencies previously temporarily extended the 2015 resolution plan deadlines for American International Group, General Electric Capital Corporation, and Prudential Financial to December 31. MetLife will submit its first resolution plan by December 31, 2016. Each firm was previously designated by the FSOC for enhanced supervision by the Federal Reserve. Board Votes
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Federal Reserve Board and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced that they have permitted Wells Fargo and its subsidiary national banks to begin using the "advanced approaches" capital framework starting in the second quarter of 2015. Under this framework, firms must meet specific risk-measurement and risk-management criteria when calculating their risk-based capital requirements. The framework implements standards developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and applies to large, internationally active banking organizations--generally those with at least $250 billion in total consolidated assets or at least $10 billion in total on-balance sheet foreign exposure--and includes the depository institution subsidiaries of those firms. Before a banking organization may use the advanced approaches framework, it must conduct a satisfactory trial, or "parallel run," using the framework. Under the supervision of its regulator, a firm must show it can comply with the framework during the parallel run period for at least four consecutive calendar quarters by using risk-measurement and risk-management systems that adhere to the advanced approaches framework. Wells Fargo and Company and its subsidiary national banks (Wells Fargo Bank Northwest, National Association; Wells Fargo Bank South Central, National Association; Wells Fargo Bank, National Association; and Wells Fargo Financial National Bank) have each completed a parallel run. These firms will use the advanced approaches framework to calculate and publicly disclose their risk-based capital ratios beginning in the second quarter of 2015. The firms must meet the minimum risk-based capital ratios under both the advanced approaches and the generally applicable risk-based capital frameworks.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) on Monday announced that they had completed the reviews of resolution plans submitted in 2014 by three large, foreign banking organizations and had issued feedback letters to each institution. In their review of the resolution plans from BNP Paribas, HSBC Holdings plc, and The Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc, the agencies noted some improvements from the original plans. However, the agencies have jointly identified specific shortcomings with the 2014 resolution plans that will need to be addressed in the 2015 submissions. The letters to each institution detail the specific shortcomings of each firm's plan and the expectations of the agencies for the 2015 submission. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires that certain banking organizations with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for supervision by the Federal Reserve periodically submit resolution plans to the Federal Reserve and the FDIC. Each plan, commonly known as a living will, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under the U.S. bankruptcy code in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. While the shortcomings of the plans varied across the firms, the agencies have identified several common features of the plans' shortcomings. These common features, among other things, include: The agencies will require that the annual plans submitted by these three institutions on or before December 31, 2015, demonstrate that the firms are making significant progress to address all the shortcomings identified in the letters, and are taking actions to improve their resolvability under the U.S. bankruptcy code. These actions include: Agency staff will discuss with each of these firms expected improvements in the resolution plans and the efforts, both proposed and already in progress, to facilitate each firm's preferred resolution strategy. The agencies are also committed to finding an appropriate balance between transparency and confidentiality of proprietary and supervisory information in the resolution plans and will work with the institutions to explore ways to enhance the public transparency of future plan submissions. Based on the review of the 2014 plans, the FDIC Board of Directors determined pursuant to section 165(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act that the plans submitted by these three filers are not credible and do not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. bankruptcy code. The Federal Reserve Board determined that the three foreign banking organizations must take immediate action to improve their resolvability and reflect those improvements in their 2015 plans. The agencies agreed that in the event that these filers have not, on or before December 31, 2015, submitted plans responsive to the identified shortcomings, the agencies expect to use their authority under section 165(d) to determine that a resolution plan does not meet the requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcementactions listed below: Coast Bancorp, San Luis Obispo, CaliforniaWritten Agreement issued April 22, 2010Terminated March 26, 2015 Prairie Star Bancshares, Inc., Olathe, KansasWritten Agreement issued December 22, 2010Terminated March 25, 2015 Universal Financial, Inc., West Covina, CaliforniaCease and Desist Order issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated September 17, 2010Terminated March 26, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents for the March 17-18 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the March 17-18 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by KSRS, LLC, Osceola, to become a bank holding company by retaining control of Bancorp II, Inc., Kansas City, and thereby indirectly retaining control of its subsidiary bank, Citizens Community Bank, Pilot Grove, all of Missouri. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced a $200 million penalty and consent cease and desist order against Commerzbank AG, of Frankfurt am Main, Germany, relating to violations of U.S. sanctions, the Bank Secrecy Act, and other anti-money laundering laws. The order requires Commerzbank, including its branch in New York, to implement an enhanced program to ensure global compliance with U.S. sanctions and anti-money laundering laws. The actions were taken by the Federal Reserve for unsafe and unsound practices at Commerzbank. The firm did not have sufficient policies and procedures to ensure that activities conducted at its offices outside of the United States complied with U.S. sanctions laws. The Federal Reserve also identified failures by Commerzbank and its New York branch to comply with anti-money laundering requirements, which resulted in large transactions being processed without adequate customer due diligence or suspicious activity reporting. The Federal Reserve's order is being taken in conjunction with actions by the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control, the New York County District Attorney's Office, and the New York Department of Financial Services for violations of U.S. sanctions, anti-money laundering requirements, and various New York state laws. The penalties issued by all of the agencies total $1.71 billion. The Federal Reserve order also prohibits Commerzbank from re-employing the individuals involved in the past actions or retaining them as consultants or contractors. The Federal Reserve is also investigating whether enforcement actions are appropriate against these or other individuals who may have been involved in the conduct underlying the enforcement actions against the institution. Commerzbank has agreed to cooperate in these investigations, but is not the subject of these investigations. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced a proposal that would require banking organizations to include their existing Legal Entity Identifiers (LEIs) on certain regulatory reporting forms. The LEI is a unique reference code to enable easier identification of a firm's legal entities. During the financial crisis, regulators and the public were often unable to fully assess the extent of a firm's exposures across all of its legal entities. The LEI is a 20-character alphanumeric code assigned to a legal entity of a financial or non-financial firm, allowing more effective measurement and monitoring of the exposures of a firm's legal entities, especially in times of stress. The Federal Reserve's proposal builds on the framework introduced by the Financial Stability Board--an international body of financial regulators that monitors and makes recommendations about the global financial system--to implement a global identifier system that would uniquely identify parties to financial transactions. LEIs are assigned by Local Operating Units of the Global LEI System, which are responsible for registering legal entities and assigning LEIs to institutions in local jurisdictions. The Global LEI System was initiated by the Financial Stability Board. The proposal would require banking organizations to include LEIs for its relevant units on certain reporting forms as of June 30, 2015. Comments on the proposal are requested within 60 days of publication in the Federal Register. Federal RegisterNotice:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Citizens Bancshares of Woodville, Inc., Hudson, WisconsinWritten Agreement issued March 31, 2010Terminated March 10, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcementaction listed below: Ocean Bankshares, Inc., Miami, FloridaWritten Agreement issued December 19, 2008Terminated March 23, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January suggests that economic growth has moderated somewhat. Labor market conditions have improved further, with strong job gains and a lower unemployment rate. A range of labor market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources continues to diminish. Household spending is rising moderately; declines in energy prices have boosted household purchasing power. Business fixed investment is advancing, while the recovery in the housing sector remains slow and export growth has weakened. Inflation has declined further below the Committee's longer-run objective, largely reflecting declines in energy prices. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of energy price declines and other factors dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this target range, the Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Consistent with its previous statement, the Committee judges that an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April FOMC meeting. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. This change in the forward guidance does not indicate that the Committee has decided on the timing of the initial increase in the target range. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Charles L. Evans; Stanley Fischer; Jeffrey M. Lacker; Dennis P. Lockhart; Jerome H. Powell; Daniel K. Tarullo; and John C. Williams.
The Federal Reserve on Monday released details for participation in two task forces described in its recently published "Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System" paper. The Faster Payments Task Force and Secure Payments Task Force are open to all interested stakeholders with relevant payment knowledge and experience who can commit the required time and resources to these key initiatives. Participants on the Faster Payments Task Force will identify and evaluate alternative approaches for implementing safe, ubiquitous, faster payment capabilities in the United States. The Secure Payments Task Force will advise the Federal Reserve on payment security matters, consult on security aspects of the Faster Payments Task Force work, and help determine priorities for future action to advance payment system safety, security and resiliency. "Diverse and committed membership will ensure a broad range of perspectives are considered as we pursue improvements to the U.S. payment system," said Esther George, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and executive sponsor of the effort. "We welcome and actively seek participation from the entire spectrum of payment system participants, including businesses and consumers." For additional information about the task forces, including charters, participation agreements, and registration forms, visit the Get Involved page at FedPaymentsImprovement.org. The Federal Reserve will host Task Force teleconferences on March 20 and March 31 to field questions from interested individuals. To register and submit advance questions for these sessions visitFedPaymentsImprovement.org. To participate in the inaugural Faster Payments Task Force meeting, registration must be completed by April 17. The registration deadline for participation in the first Secure Payments Task Force meeting is May 15.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday announced it has not objected to the capital plans of 28 bank holding companies participating in the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). One institution received a conditional non-objection based on qualitative grounds, and the Federal Reserve objected to two firms' plans on qualitative grounds. In its fifth year, CCAR evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest U.S.-based bank holding companies, including the firms' planned capital actions such as dividend payments and share buybacks and issuances. Strong capital levels act as a cushion to absorb losses and help better ensure that banking organizations have the ability to lend to households and businesses even in times of stress. When considering an institution's capital plan, the Federal Reserve considers both quantitative and qualitative factors. These include, respectively, a firm's projected capital ratios under a hypothetical scenario of severe economic and financial market stress and the strength of the firm's capital planning processes. The Federal Reserve may object to a capital plan based on quantitative or qualitative concerns. After the Federal Reserve objects to a capital plan, the institution may not make any capital distribution unless expressly permitted by the Federal Reserve. "Our capital plan review helps ensure that the capital distribution plans of large banks will not compromise their ability to continue lending to businesses and households even during a period of serious financial stress," Federal Reserve Gov. Daniel K. Tarullo said. "It also provides a structured assessment of their risk management capacities." The Federal Reserve did not object to the capital plans of Ally Financial, Inc.; American Express Company; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; BB&T Corporation; BBVA Compass Bancshares, Inc.; BMO Financial Corp.; Capital One Financial Corporation; Citigroup, Inc.; Citizens Financial Group; Comerica Incorporated; Discover Financial Services; Fifth Third Bancorp; Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; HSBC North America Holdings, Inc.; Huntington Bancshares, Inc.; JP Morgan Chase & Co.; Keycorp; M&T Bank Corporation; Morgan Stanley; MUFG Americas Holdings Corporation; Northern Trust Corp.; The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.; Regions Financial Corporation; State Street Corporation; SunTrust Banks, Inc.; U.S. Bancorp; Wells Fargo & Company; and Zions Bancorporation. Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., JP Morgan Chase & Co., and Morgan Stanley met minimum capital requirements on a post-stress basis after submitting adjusted capital actions. The Federal Reserve did not object to the capital plan of Bank of America Corporation, but is requiring the institution to submit a new capital plan by the end of the third quarter to address certain weaknesses in its capital planning processes. The Federal Reserve objected to the capital plans of Deutsche Bank Trust Corporation and Santander Holdings USA on qualitative concerns. The Federal Reserve did not object to any plans based on quantitative grounds. U.S. firms have substantially increased their capital since the first round of stress tests led by the Federal Reserve in 2009. The common equity capital ratio--which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets--of the 31 bank holding companies in the 2015 CCAR has more than doubled from 5.5 percent in the first quarter of 2009 to 12.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2014, reflecting an increase in common equity capital of more than $641 billion to $1.1 trillion during the same period. The firms, collectively, are projecting that they will continue building capital from the second quarter of 2015 through the second quarter of 2016. The 31 institutions tested this year represent more than 80 percent of assets held by domestic bank holding companies, or $14 trillion as of the fourth quarter of 2014. Also on Wednesday, the Federal Reserve released corrected results from last week'sDodd-Frank Act stress tests. Four participating firms submitted incorrect data, which affected their starting tier 1 common capital ratios and by extension their post-stress minimum and ending tier 1 common capital ratios in the severely adverse and adverse scenarios. The corrections led to increases in these ratios for the affected firms. Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2015: Assessment Framework and Results (PDF)|HTML Board Votes For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The largest U.S.-based bank holding companies continue to build their capital levels and to strengthen their ability to lend to households and businesses during a period marked by severe recession and financial market volatility, according to the results of supervisory stress tests announced by the Federal Reserve on Thursday. The most severe hypothetical scenario projects that loan losses at the 31 participating bank holding companies would total $340 billion during the nine quarters tested. The "severely adverse" scenario features a deep recession with the unemployment rate peaking at 10 percent, a decline in home prices of 25 percent, a stock market drop of nearly 60 percent, and a notable rise in market volatility. The 31 firms' aggregate tier 1 common capital ratio, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, would fall from an actual 11.9 percent in the third quarter of 2014 to a minimum level of 8.2 percent in the hypothetical stress scenario. This hypothetical post-stress minimum is significantly higher than the 31 firms' aggregate tier 1 common capital ratio of 5.5 percent measured in the beginning of 2009. Capital is important to banking organizations, the financial system, and the economy because it acts as a cushion to absorb losses and helps to ensure that losses are borne by shareholders, not taxpayers. The Federal Reserve's stress scenario estimates are the outcome of deliberately stringent and conservative assessments under hypothetical economic and financial market conditions. The results are not forecasts or expected outcomes. "Higher capital levels at large banks increase the resiliency of our financial system," Federal Reserve Governor Daniel K. Tarullo said. "Our supervisory stress tests are designed to ensure that these banks have enough capital that they could continue to lend to American businesses and households even in a severe economic downturn." This is the fifth round of stress tests led by the Federal Reserve since 2009 and the third round required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The 31 firms tested represent more than 80 percent of domestic banking assets. The Federal Reserve uses its own independent projections of losses and incomes for each firm. In addition to releasing results under the severely adverse hypothetical scenario, the Federal Reserve on Thursday also released results from the "adverse" scenario, which features a more moderate recession, but a rapid increase in short- and long-term interest rates. In this scenario, the aggregate tier 1 common capital ratio of all 31 firms would fall from an actual 11.9 percent in the third quarter of 2014 to the minimum level of 10.8 percent. The quantitative results from the Dodd-Frank stress tests are one component of the Federal Reserve's analysis during the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which is an annual exercise to evaluate the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of large financial institutions. CCAR results will be released on Wednesday, March 11, at 4:30 p.m. EDT. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2015: Supervisory Stress Test Methodology and Results:HTML|PDF
The use of mobile phones to access bank accounts, credit cards, or other financial accounts continued to increase among adults in the United States last year, according to a Federal Reserve Board report,Consumers and Mobile Financial Services 2015(PDF). The report is the Board's fourth looking at how consumers access banking services using mobile phones ("mobile banking"), and their payments for goods and services using mobile phones ("mobile payments"), as well as their use of mobile phones to inform their shopping decisions. As of December 2014, 39 percent of adults with mobile phones and bank accounts reported using mobile banking--an increase from the 33 percent a year earlier. The most common use of mobile banking remains checking account balances or recent transactions. Transferring money between accounts is the second-most common mobile banking activity. More than half of mobile banking users received an alert from their financial institution through a text message, push notification, or e-mail--making this the third most common use of mobile banking. Remote Deposit Capture, or depositing a check to a bank account electronically using a mobile phone camera, was also a common mobile banking activity. In the latest survey, 51 percent of mobile banking users reported depositing a check using their mobile phones, up from 38 percent a year earlier. Twenty-two percent of all mobile phone users made a mobile payment in the 12 months prior to the survey, up from 17 percent a year earlier. For smartphone owners who reported using mobile payments, the most common types of mobile payments were paying bills through an online system or mobile app, followed by making online or in-app purchases. Paying for a product or service in a store was the next most common type of mobile payment. The survey found that while the underbanked make up 14 percent of consumers, 90 percent of that group has access to a mobile phone (73 percent of which are smartphones), and the underbanked represent a higher incidence of mobile banking (48 percent) than the fully banked (37 percent). The unbanked make up 13 percent of consumers and 67 percent of this group have access to a mobile phone (65 percent of which are smartphones). Mobile phones are also used to help make decisions while shopping. Among smartphone owners, 47 percent had used their phone to compare prices over the Internet, and 33 percent had scanned a barcode to find the best price, while shopping at a retail store. Forty-two percent of smartphone users had used their phones to browse product reviews while in a store. More than two-thirds of those who had used their phone to do price comparisons had changed where they made their purchase based on that information. For the first time, the survey looked at differences in mobile banking and mobile payment use in rural areas versus urban areas. Residents of rural areas have a lower incidence of mobile banking and mobile payment use than residents of urban areas. The Federal Reserve Board completed its firstSurvey of Consumers' Use of Mobile Financial Servicesin December 2011, and released a summary report in March 2012. The Board has conducted the survey annually to understand how the rapidly expanding use of this technology affects consumer decisionmaking. The survey was conducted on behalf of the Board by GfK, an online consumer research firm. The 2014 survey was conducted from December 5-21, 2014. More than 2,900 respondents completed the survey. A report and video summarizing the survey's mobile financial services findings may be found at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/mobile_finance.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve System on Friday released the 2014 combined annual financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as statements for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks, Maiden Lane LLC, and the Board of Governors. These financial statements are audited annually by an independent auditing firm and, consistent with prior years, received unmodified audit opinions for 2014. The audited financial statements provide a significant amount of information about the assets, liabilities, and earnings of the Reserve Banks, Maiden Lane LLC, and the Board as of December 31, 2014, including information about the composition, fair value, and earnings related to the $4.4 trillion of U.S. Treasury securities, government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) debt securities, and federal agency and GSE mortgage-backed securities (MBS) acquired through open market operations. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York provides additional detailed information about open market operations and securities holdings on an ongoing basis on its website atwww.newyorkfed.org/markets/pomo_landing.html. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2014 earnings, inclusive of other comprehensive income, were $99.7 billion. The Reserve Banks provided for remittances to the U.S. Treasury of $96.9 billion. Interest income on securities acquired through open market operations totaled $115.9 billion, an increase of $25.5 billion from the previous year. Interest expense on depository institutions' reserve balances during the year was $6.9 billion. Losses from the daily revaluation of foreign currency denominated asset holdings were $2.9 billion. Reserve Bank operating expenses were $6.1 billion, including assessments of $1.9 billion for Board expenses, currency costs, and the operations of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. Total Reserve Bank assets as of December 31, 2014, were $4.5 trillion, which is an increase of $500 billion over the balance on December 31, 2013. Holdings of U.S. Treasury securities increased by $237 billion, and federal agency and GSE MBS holdings increased by $255 billion. GSE debt securities holdings decreased by $19.1 billion. Asset holdings of Maiden Lane LLC totaled $1.8 billion on December 31, 2014. Maiden Lane II LLC, Maiden Lane III LLC, and TALF LLC, which were created to respond to strains in financial markets, were dissolved in 2014 and all the residual assets were distributed to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and to the respective entity's other beneficial interest holders. The Federal Reserve System financial statements are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Citizens Budget Commission, New York , New York Watch live Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today, it is great to be back in New York. The Citizens Budget Commission has played an important role over the years as a forum to discuss issues of interest to New Yorkers that are often also of national and even global importance. Given New York's preeminence as a center of global finance, I thought it would be appropriate to discuss just such a topic, which is how the Federal Reserve oversees the largest financial institutions, many of which are headquartered or have a major presence here, and how that oversight has strengthened since the financial crisis.1 The Financial Crisis and Large Financial InstitutionsThe crisis had many causes, including the numerous factors that drove a lengthy housing boom and the expansion of a largely unregulated "shadow banking system" rivaling the traditional banking sector in size. A self-reinforcing financial panic magnified the damage from risks that had built up over many years throughout the country and across the financial system. But to a considerable extent, large and complex financial institutions were the epicenter of the crisis. These institutions, some of which were not subject to Federal Reserve oversight at the time, were the locus for much of the excessive risk-taking that led to the crisis. Due to their primacy and interconnections with the rest of the financial system, these large institutions were also the means by which the crisis spread quickly and with devastating effect through the economy. The financial crisis and the recession caused great hardship for millions of individuals and families in this city and in communities throughout our country. I believe all Americans share a common interest in working to make sure that our financial system is strong, resilient, and able to serve a healthy and growing economy. A critical part of our work since the crisis to promote a stable financial system has therefore involved greater effort to ensure that large institutions are operating safely and soundly and are prepared to continue serving households and businesses even when faced with stressful financial conditions. In the run-up to the crisis, large firms failed to adequately anticipate and manage risks that grew and concentrated in their increasingly sprawling, diverse, and complex operations. Partly as a result, these firms had trouble retaining the trust of markets and creditors when the financial system came under stress. Doubts quickly mounted about whether these institutions could sustain losses in the value of many assets they held. Further doubts were raised about whether these firms had enough cash and other liquid assets to meet the immediate or potential demands of short-term creditors and large institutional customers. In the lead-up to the crisis, many large institutions had become heavily reliant on very short-term borrowing, at relatively low rates, to fund lending and other operations providing higher returns. While this approach may have appeared to be an easy source of profit, it had the disadvantage of leaving those banks exposed to devastating runs if short-term funding dried up, as it did in the crisis. Large financial institutions, of course, were not alone in failing to see these risks. The checks and balances that were widely expected to prevent excessive risk-taking by large financial firms--regulatory oversight and market discipline--did not do so. Government agencies, including the Fed, failed to recognize the extent of the risks or how severely they could damage the financial system and the economy. Investors failed to anticipate and understand the risks of large financial institutions' activities that materialized during the crisis. Background on Financial Regulation and SupervisionBefore I turn to the Fed's actions to improve oversight of large financial institutions, let me be clear about what I mean by "large institutions." Generally, I have in mind those firms whose financial distress would pose a significant risk to financial stability--firms that are, in that sense, "systemically important." This would include U.S. banking organizations with large, complex, and often international operations; foreign banking organizations with extensive U.S. operations; and other large and complex financial firms. Today the Federal Reserve subjects 16 of those firms to significantly higher levels of oversight than are applied to other institutions.2To put the scale and importance of these firms in perspective, the 8 U.S. bank holding companies among these 16 firms hold nearly 60 percent of all assets in the U.S. banking system.3 The Federal Reserve's oversight of large financial institutions is aimed at ensuring the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions as well as the resiliency of the financial system. The Fed expects the banks it oversees, including the largest banks, to be financially sound. Two core elements of soundness are capital and liquidity. Capital is the funds provided by a bank's shareholders that serve as a buffer to enable the firm to absorb unexpected losses, including during times of economic downturn or financial stress. A bank's liquidity is its ability to meet current and future obligations to customers and others with whom it enters into financial transactions. Liquidity is the lifeblood of a financial firm, because once liquidity dries up, the firm is no longer able to operate. Beyond focusing on capital and liquidity, the Fed also promotes safety and soundness by seeking to ensure that banks are well managed and subject to strong governance by a board of directors responsible to shareholders. It is unfortunate that I need to underscore this, but we expect the firms we oversee to follow the law and to operate in an ethical manner. Too often in recent years, bankers at large institutions have not done so, sometimes brazenly. These incidents, both individually and in their totality, raise legitimate questions of whether there may be pervasive shortcomings in the values of large financial firms that might undermine their safety and soundness.4 While the Federal Reserve looks closely at the individual safety and soundness of large financial firms, as I noted earlier, it is not sufficient to view each of these firms in isolation. The safety and soundness of large firms affects, and is affected by, the stability of the broader financial system. In the decades of relative financial stability leading up to the crisis, it is fair to say that the Fed focused too much on individual firms and not enough on their role in the financial system and the implications of those firms' operations for financial stability. To use an apt metaphor, we looked closely at the trees and not as intently as we should have at the forest. One of the most fundamental changes in the Fed's oversight of large institutions since the crisis, a principle that undergirds everything I will discuss today, is elevating the importance of financial stability in that oversight. The Fed oversees financial institutions through regulation and supervision. While they are often closely related, these are two distinct activities. On the one hand, regulation refers primarily to the rules that firms must follow. Regulation starts with laws passed by Congress which are the basis for specific and detailed rules written by the Fed and other agencies. Supervision, on the other hand, involves monitoring and examining the day-to-day operations of these firms, including their financial condition, how they manage risks, and their corporate governance, to make sure they are complying with laws and regulations and operating in a safe and sound manner. The Federal Reserve Board writes the regulations firms must follow, establishes supervisory policies and, in close collaboration with the 12 regional Reserve Banks, is deeply engaged in the supervision of large financial institutions. Much of the day-to-day work of supervision, particularly for smaller banks, occurs locally through the Reserve Banks. For systemically important firms, the Board several years ago established the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) in order to assure well-coordinated supervision. I consider the effective supervision of large institutions, to ensure their safety and soundness and the stability of the financial system, to be one of the Federal Reserve Board's most important responsibilities, and one of my most important responsibilities as Chair. In improving the oversight of large firms, the Federal Reserve has made it a top priority to ensure that we appropriately tailor our regulation and supervision of banks to their size, complexity, and risks.5We will use statutory authorities to ensure that we avoid a one-size-fits-all approach as we promulgate rules and regulations. As we continue this work, we will communicate to the Congress should we identify discrete issues that may benefit from further clarification or technical changes without undermining safety and soundness, such as those addressed by Congress last year related to capital requirements for insurance companies. Post-Crisis Regulation and Supervision of Large Financial Institutions Regulatory ReformRegulatory changes since the crisis have been extensive.6While my emphasis today is on steps taken in the United States, I should also note that we work closely with our international colleagues to ensure that standards for systemically important financial firms are raised globally as well. We have made significant progress on our regulatory reform agenda both domestically and internationally, but we still have work to do. I will briefly describe five regulatory changes that have been among the most important in helping the Federal Reserve improve its oversight of the largest institutions. First, all banks are required to hold significantly more capital, with higher standards applied to the largest, most systemically important firms. Second, large institutions have also been required to substantially increase their liquidity. The blueprint for these higher capital and liquidity standards is an international agreement known as Basel III, which establishes minimum standards for internationally active banks around the world; the United States, however, has gone even further to raise capital requirements for the largest firms. Third, large firms are now required to show that they can continue to operate safely and serve their customers in stressful conditions similar to those that occurred during the crisis, an exercise known as stress testing. Fourth, under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), Congress authorized a new regime, known as "resolution," to manage the failure of large firms in an orderly manner and reduce the chances that such a failure would threaten financial stability. The Congress empowered the Fed and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to require large firms to develop resolution plans. The fifth and final regulatory change I want to mention is that the Dodd-Frank Act also gave the Federal Reserve more explicit responsibilities for safeguarding financial stability. As applied to large institutions, more stringent capital requirements and the other regulatory changes I have just described are intended to promote the stability of the financial system. In addition, to address the fragmentation of responsibility for financial stability across different agencies, the Fed is part of a new interagency body, the Financial Stability Oversight Council, which helps U.S. regulators work together more effectively to better promote the stability of the financial system. Enhanced SupervisionAlong with the additional tools provided by these regulatory changes, the Federal Reserve has fortified its supervision of large financial institutions. We significantly enhanced the manner by which we assess whether these firms have sufficient capital and liquidity and are meeting new regulatory requirements in this area. We have substantially raised our expectations for how well the firms we supervise should be managing their risks, maintaining internal controls, and exercising governance. And we have reorganized our supervision of large financial institutions to increase the quality, consistency, and range of perspectives brought to bear on supervisory strategy and decisionmaking. One of the most important enhancements to large bank supervision since the financial crisis is our assessment of whether large institutions are holding enough capital to deal with stressful financial conditions. The program includes stress testing and a yearly review of how firms are planning their future capital needs.7The latest results will be disclosed in the coming days. Capital stress testing for banks is not new but the Federal Reserve has employed it much more extensively since the crisis.8Using information on a bank's finances and operations, these tests gauge how a firm's capital position would be affected by hypothetical scenarios covering a range of adverse economic and financial conditions. Such tests show the potential harm faced by individual banks in stressful conditions and thus the potential that such problems could affect the stability of the financial system. The goal is to see that large institutions have enough capital not just to survive in these conditions, but also to continue serving their customers. The Federal Reserve conducts stress tests once a year, and the firms are required to run their own tests and disclose results to the public twice a year. Stress testing is an important tool, but it is not sufficient to provide a full picture of the capital adequacy of large firms.9The Fed also looks at other aspects of large banks' capital planning, such as their risk management, internal controls, and governance. If the Federal Reserve is not satisfied with the results from capital stress tests or identifies shortcomings in a firm's capital planning, we may restrict the firm's ability to pay dividends, buy back shares, or take other actions that would reduce its capital base. In addition to these steps related to capital, in 2012 the Federal Reserve began a comprehensive assessment of large banks' liquidity.10We review the firms' own liquidity stress tests, and we conduct an independent assessment of their liquidity. These liquidity exercises provide a regular opportunity for Fed supervisors to respond to evolving liquidity risks and firm practices over time. Through this effort, we can require large firms to take specific actions to bolster their liquidity or enhance the way they manage their liquidity risks. Through stress testing and other improvements to supervision, the Federal Reserve is requiring more of large institutions. We are also requiring more of ourselves. Before the crisis, the Fed's supervision of large institutions did not make the fullest and most effective use of the expertise of our staff across the Federal Reserve System. To improve our supervision of the largest systemically important firms, we have created the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee, which I mentioned earlier. The LISCC brings together experts from around the Federal Reserve System in the areas of supervision, research, legal, financial markets, and payment systems in a centralized body led by the Federal Reserve Board. The LISCC program enhances supervision in several ways. First, by looking at firms both individually and collectively, it helps ensure supervisors are well positioned to identify issues at individual firms as well as trends across and interconnections among firms that may pose risks to financial stability. The LISCC also promotes high standards and consistency in the supervision of large firms through a centralized yet Systemwide approach. By bringing together staff members from across the Federal Reserve System, the LISCC is designed to ensure that diverse views and perspectives are brought to bear on important decisions about the supervision of systemically important firms. Lastly, the diversity of skills among the Fed experts involved in the LISCC allows it to consider financial stability risks from the broader economy, financial markets, and other sources. The LISCC also builds on the comprehensive analysis of financial stability by the Board's Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, which was established after the financial crisis. The Federal Reserve has significant responsibilities for supervising large financial institutions, but we cannot guarantee their stability on our own. It is important that we communicate and coordinate with other U.S. financial regulatory agencies with responsibilities that affect the safety and soundness of large institutions. We also need to cooperate with supervisors in other countries where these firms operate. This cooperation helps us understand developments in a complex and global financial system that have implications for individual firms or for large institutions generally. It can also provide information and perspective about firms whose supervision we may share with other agencies or governments. In addition, it facilitates a coordinated approach to ensuring that large firms are operating in a safe and sound manner. To be effective, regulation and supervision must be independent of the entities subject to oversight. You may know or have heard the term "regulatory capture." Regulatory capture is when a regulatory agency advances the interests of the industry it is supposed to oversee rather than the broader public interest it should represent.11Regulatory capture, which may occur in the oversight of any industry, can happen in both intentional and inadvertent ways. The most blatant ways involve tangible conflicts of interest--for example the expectation government officials might have of future rewards from the industry they oversee. But experience and extensive research shows that regulatory capture also occurs in less tangible ways, when close contact and familiarity between individuals leads those enforcing the rules to sympathize with those they oversee. Whatever the source, the risk of regulatory capture is something the Federal Reserve takes very seriously and works very hard to prevent. We enforce strict ethics rules and promote strong values among our employees, among them a commitment to public service. It is important that anyone serving the Fed feel safe speaking up when they have concerns about bias toward industry, and that those concerns be addressed. The broadening of expertise and participation in supervision conducted by the LISCC, as overseen by the Board, represents yet another check to the risk of regulatory capture in the oversight of large firms. The Results of Improved SupervisionI believe the changes I have described have significantly improved the strength and stability of large financial institutions and the financial system. As I mentioned earlier, strong capital and liquidity are fundamental to the resiliency of large institutions. The good news is that the amount and quality of capital and the strength of liquidity positions at large firms are greatly improved since the crisis. While some of the improvement in the capital positions of large firms is due to the regulatory changes I have described that are being phased in over the next several years, some of it has come as a direct result of the Fed's capital planning and stress-testing requirements. From early 2009 through 2014, capital held by the eight most systemically important U.S. bank holding companies more than doubled, reflecting an increase of almost $500 billion in the strongest form of capital held by these companies.12Likewise, the Federal Reserve's increased focus on liquidity has contributed to significant increases in firms' liquidity. The high-quality liquid assets held by these eight firms has increased by roughly one-third since 2012, and their reliance on short-term wholesale funding has dropped considerably. Beyond these very tangible gains, we see some evidence of improved risk management, internal controls, and governance at large firms. But large firms still have room for improvement in this area, and supervisors will be watching closely. The compliance breakdowns in recent years that I mentioned earlier in my remarks undermine confidence in large firms' risk management and controls, which has implications for financial stability. The Fed has taken and will continue to take swift and meaningful action to ensure that firms focus on their risk-management practices and continue to strengthen them. Both the Federal Reserve and the large firms we oversee have become more forward looking in evaluating these firms' capacity to withstand significant financial stress, which has enhanced financial stability. Much of this new perspective has come through our capital and liquidity reviews, which require both firms and supervisors to make financial projections into the future rather than simply relying on current and past performance. Likewise, requiring firms to plan for their possible demise and orderly resolution has forced them to think more carefully about the sustainability of their business models and corporate structures. We have a more consistent and industry-wide perspective on risks and vulnerabilities than we had prior to the crisis. The focus on individual firms is still extremely important, but we now supplement this approach more systematically with reviews of issues across multiple firms simultaneously. These reviews allow us to identify common themes and unacceptable practices among large firms that will enable us to take consistent and effective action. Lastly, I believe the resolution authority enacted by the Congress and our work with the FDIC on the orderly resolution of large institutions are reducing the problem of firms considered "too big to fail" by addressing the risks a failure of a large firm would pose to the financial system. The plans developed by the largest firms to date still have a number of shortcomings, but the Federal Reserve has asked for and expects these institutions to make substantial progress in the coming months which will leave firms and the government better positioned to manage the failure of a large institution in an orderly way.13 The goal, through this and other actions I have described today, is to do whatever can be done to avert the dire threat and lasting damage of a severe financial crisis. We cannot eliminate the possibility of another crisis, but we can make a crisis less likely and less damaging by limiting excessive risk-taking by firms we oversee and by helping ensure that the most systemically important firms are better prepared to weather a crisis. We have focused our efforts on the largest firms because they were and continue to be crucial to the financial system and its ability to support the financial needs of households and businesses. By working to promote the safety and soundness of large firms, the Federal Reserve is trying to ensure that these and many other banks can continue to serve the people of New York and every community in America. 1.Although the Federal Reserve supervises entities with a range of legal forms, including depository institutions and holding companies, for the purposes of my remarks today, "financial institutions," "firms," "banks," and "banking organizations" are used interchangeably unless indicated otherwise.Return to text 2.A current list of these firms is available on the Federal Reserve Board's webpage "Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee". This list may evolve based on changes in firms' relative systemic importance. Financial Stability Oversight Council determinations of nonbank financial institutions subject to Federal Reserve oversight are available on theU.S. Department of Treasury's website.Return to text 3.Information is based on data from the most recent FR Y-9C report, which is filed quarterly by bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies. To access the report, see the Board's webpage "Reporting Forms".Return to text 4.For more information, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Good Compliance, Not Mere Compliance," speech delivered at "Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry," a conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, N.Y., October 20.Return to text 5.See Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "A Tiered Approach to Regulation and Supervision of Community Banks," speech delivered at the Community Bankers Symposium, Chicago, Ill., November 7; and Janet L. Yellen (2014), "Tailored Supervision of Community Banks," speech delivered at the Independent Community Bankers of America 2014 Washington Policy Summit," Washington, May 1.Return to text 6.Several of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, as well as Board staff, have spoken extensively about the post-crisis regulatory reform agenda. See, for example, Tarullo (2014), "Liquidity Regulation," speech delivered at the Clearing House 2014 Annual Conference, New York, November 20; Tarullo (2014), "Dodd-Frank Implementation," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, September 9; Stanley Fischer (2014), "Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We?," speech delivered as the Martin Feldstein Lecture at the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10; Scott G. Alvarez (2014), "Regulatory Rulemakings," statement before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, April 8; Tarullo (2014), "Dodd-Frank Implementation," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 6; and Tarullo (2013), "Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, May 3.Return to text 7.The Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review applies to a larger number of institutions than the most systemically important firms discussed in these remarks.Return to text 8.In addition to ad hoc stress testing that was conducted throughout the crisis, in 2009 the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. federal banking agencies undertook the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program at the 19 largest U.S. bank holding companies. This exercise played a key role in publicly identifying capital deficiencies at the largest firms and bolstering market confidence by requiring companies to address these deficiencies.Return to text 9.For more information about the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review exercise and interagency Dodd-Frank Act stress-testing requirements, see the webpage "Stress Tests and Capital Planning" on the Board's website.Return to text 10.This Federal Reserve assessment is known as the Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review.Return to text 11.A body of economic literature addresses regulatory capture, with perhaps one of the most influential works being George J. Stigler (1971), "The Theory of Economic Regulation,"Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, vol. 2 (Spring), pp. 3-21. See also Ernesto Dal B (2006), "Regulatory Capture: A Review,"Oxford Review of Economic Policy, vol. 22 (Summer), pp. 203-25.Return to text 12.Specifically, for the period from 2009 to 2013, tier 1 common equity as defined in the Board's regulatory capital regulations, and in 2014, common equity tier 1 capital, due to changes in regulatory capital regulations.Return to text 13.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2014), "Agencies Provide Feedback on Second Round Resolution Plans of 'First-Wave' Filers," joint press release, August 5.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York For over six years, the federal funds rate has, effectively, been zero. However it is widely expected that the rate will lift off before the end of this year, as the normalization of monetary policy gets underway. The approach of liftoff reflects the significant progress we have made toward our objectives of maximum employment and price stability. The extraordinary monetary policy accommodation that the Federal Reserve has undertaken in response to the crisis has contributed importantly to the economic recovery, though the recovery has taken longer than we expected. The unemployment rate, at 5.5 percent in February, is nearing estimates of its natural rate, and we expect that inflation will gradually rise toward the Fed's target of 2 percent. Beginning the normalization of policy will be a significant step toward the restoration of the economy's normal dynamics, allowing monetary policy to respond to shocks without recourse to unconventional tools. I would like to take this occasion to look back on some lessons learned during our time at the effective lower bound on the interest rate, and also to look forward.1 Monetary Policy since the CrisisLet me first take a step back in time. Prior to the crisis, the financial system was more fragile than we realized. Key vulnerabilities included excessive leverage, overdependence on short-term funding, and deficiencies in credit ratings, underwriting standards, and risk management. Importantly, interconnections across financial institutions heightened the risk of contagion through cascading losses. Some of these interconnections emerged from the use of complicated financial instruments that created seemingly safe and liquid assets. At the time, it was common to say that risk was being dispersed and allocated to those best able to bear it. But rather than distributing risk widely, these instruments concentrated risk on the balance sheets of a relatively small number of highly levered financial institutions. As a result, as the subprime crisis developed, market participants pulled back from risk taking, leading to deleveraging spirals and fire sales.2The damage spread across the globe. Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers on September 15, international trade collapsed as panic and financial connections transmitted distress across borders.3Of course, the economy's vulnerabilities did not stem from the private sector alone: in the public sector, gaps in the regulatory structure allowed important financial institutions to escape comprehensive supervision, and regulators were insufficiently focused on the stability of the system as a whole. The Federal Reserve responded aggressively to the crisis.4By the end of 2008, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) had reduced the target federal funds rate from 5-1/4 percent to, effectively, zero. The Fed also acted forcefully as the lender of last resort--in its traditional role of providing short-term liquidity to depository institutions, and also by providing liquidity directly to borrowers and investors in key credit markets.5 In addition, the worldwide scope of the crisis called for concerted international action. Because of the global nature of dollar funding markets, the Fed authorized dollar liquidity swap lines with major central banks, beginning in December 2007. In October 2008, central bankers coordinated reductions in policy rates and the Group of Seven agreed to use all available tools to prevent the failure of systemically important financial institutions.6The next month, the Group of Twenty announced a broad common strategy, including fiscal expansion. These steps likely prevented a second Great Depression, but they were not sufficient to avoid a severe global contraction. In the United States, with the federal funds rate at its effective lower bound by the end of 2008, the FOMC judged that it could not provide much additional accommodation via its conventional tool--reducing the federal funds rate.7Instead, the FOMC used two unconventional tools: large-scale asset purchases and enhanced forward guidance. To varying extents, foreign central banks have also been using these tools. The Fed's asset purchases did not have the conventional aim of increasing reserve balances to pull down short-term rates.8Rather, purchases of longer-term securities loweredlonger-term yieldsthrough portfolio balance effects. The evolution of our asset purchases reflected a learning process for policymakers. In the early programs, the FOMC specified the expected quantities of assets to be acquired over a defined period. In contrast, with QE3 (the most recent round of quantitative easing, implemented from September 2012 to October 2014), the FOMC announced that we would continue to purchase securities at a certain monthly pace until the outlook for the labor market improved substantially in a context of price stability. Later, the FOMC noted that the pace of purchases was also data dependent, allowing the pace to be revised based on its assessment of progress toward its long-run objectives. With the federal funds rate near zero and the Fed creating and adjusting new asset purchase programs, it became difficult for the public to anticipate how the FOMC would likely conduct monetary policy and respond to changing economic conditions. Thus, the FOMC began to rely heavily on enhanced forward guidance to communicate its intentions. Forward guidance works in part because it also constrains the flexibility of decisionmakers when the time comes to make their future decisions.9 Nonetheless, a number of potential costs might be associated with unconventional tools. When interest rates are extremely low, risks to financial stability might grow. In addition, elevated securities holdings could reduce the Fed's income and remittances to the U.S. Treasury when rates eventually rise.10 Further, the Fed's quantitative easing appeared significantly to affect foreign asset markets, and to have contributed to a surge of capital inflows to emerging-market economies (EMEs).11Our asset purchase programs were even called a "currency war." However, eventually, most EMEs seemed glad to receive those flows. Interestingly, the asset purchases recently announced by the European Central Bank (ECB) appear to be putting downward pressure onlonger-terminterest rates in the United States. In addition, the ECB's policy should increase growth in Europe, which will be beneficial for U.S. exports. Although some of these benefits may be offset by the recent appreciation of the dollar, much of that increase likely reflects other factors including the relatively strong performance of the U.S. economy. Looking back, there is ample evidence that supports the view that the Fed's asset purchases contributed to a stronger U.S. recovery, by raising the prices of the assets purchased and close substitutes, as well as those of riskier assets.12Our experience also shows that forward guidance helped better align market expectations of Fed policy with the Committee's policy intentions.13In brief, unconventional policies helped bring down long-term yields both by reducing term premia and by lowering the expected path of future short-term rates. The Recovery from the Financial CrisisDespite monetary stimulus, the recovery from the financial crisis has been even more sluggish than we had expected. The slow recovery provides more evidence that severe financial crises have long-lived effects, as Reinhart and Rogoff, and others, have documented.14 The gradual pace of the recovery has likely reflected both demand and supply factors. With respect to aggregate demand, the economy faced several important headwinds: efforts by households and businesses to rebuild their balance sheets, persistently tight credit conditions, the extreme weakness of the housing sector, the significant drag from fiscal policy in the years from 2011 to 2013, and the growth slowdown in Europe and other parts of the world. Turning to aggregate supply, it appears that productivity growth has slowed.15One notable manifestation of slow productivity growth is that last year, unemployment fell significantly further than we had anticipated as of the start of the year--a pattern that occurred in the prior four years as well--whereas gross domestic product growth fell short of our expectations, as it had in three of the four prior years. However, productivity is extremely difficult to predict. For my part, I believe that the enormous gains in human welfare that the information technology explosion seems to be generating are likely to continue, and will perhaps eventually return measured productivity growth to its long-run historical pace. Conditions for LiftoffAlthough the recovery has been slow, there has been significant cumulative progress. An increase in the target federal funds range likely will be warranted before the end of the year. Liftoff should occur when the expected return from raising the interest rate outweighs the expected costs of doing so. In deciding when that time has come, we will continue to monitor a wide range of information regarding labor market conditions, inflation, and financial and international developments. We anticipate that it will be appropriate to raise the target range when there has been further improvement in the labor market and we are reasonably confident that inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. Policy NormalizationFull normalization of monetary policy would allow the Fed to rely on its traditional policy framework of adjustments to the federal funds rate. However, as long as our balance sheet remains sizable, we will not be able to implement monetary policy with our traditional tool of repurchases. It is important that, when we change the rate for the first time in a long time, we are certain that we have the operational tools to control the federal funds rate--and, accordingly, we have developed and tested new operational tools to control the federal funds rate. As discussed in the FOMC's statement titled Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, which was published following the September 2014 FOMC meeting, we will use the rate of interest on excess reserves (IOER) as our primary tool to control the federal funds rate.16We also plan to use an overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility, as needed. In an ON RRP operation, counterparties may invest funds with the Fed at a given rate, possibly subject to a cap on the aggregate amount invested. Because ON RRP counterparties include many money market participants that are not eligible to receive IOER, the facility can be a powerful tool for controlling money market interest rates. Indeed, testing to date by the New York Fed suggests that ON RRP operations have generally established a soft floor for such rates.17 However, an ON RRP program also has certain risks. For example, a large and persistent program could have unanticipated and adverse effects on the structure of money markets. In addition, in times of stress, demand for the safety and liquidity of ON RRPs with the central bank might increase sharply, potentially exacerbating disruptive flight-to-quality flows.18To mitigate these risks, the FOMC has agreed that it will use an ON RRP facility only to the extent necessary and will phase it out when it is no longer needed. In addition, the Fed has been discussing and testing other supplementary tools, such as term reverse repurchase agreements and term deposits, and can use these tools as needed to help support money market rates. With regard to balance sheet normalization, the FOMC has indicated that it does not anticipate selling agency mortgage-backed securities. When the time comes, we plan to normalize the balance sheet primarily by ceasing reinvestment of principal payments on existing holdings. When the FOMC chooses to cease reinvestments, the balance sheet will naturally contract, with a corresponding reduction in reserve balances. This runoff of our securities holdings will also gradually remove accommodation, an effect that we will need to take into account in setting the stance of policy. During normalization, we will, no doubt, learn more about our different tools and make adjustments to our operating framework. In part because of this adaptability, I am confident that by using IOER and, as needed, these supplementary tools, we will be able to raise short-term interest rates when it becomes appropriate. Monetary Policy after LiftoffThe focus of the great bulk of the discussion on monetary policy during the last few years, has been on liftoff--on the circumstances under which the FOMC will choose to raise the federal funds rate, on the date on which that will happen, and on the effect of the Fed's very large portfolio on how it will manage the liftoff process. Those questions are natural after more than six years during which the federal funds rate has been held at its effective lower bound. But as liftoff approaches, we need to think also about what will happen next. For liftoff is only the start of the process of normalization, and, going forward, the FOMC will once again be changing the federal funds rate as necessary, both up and down. Accordingly, discussion of monetary policy needs to begin to shift to the future path of interest rates, and thus to the basis on which the FOMC will set interest rates following liftoff. There has been a lively discussion of one element of the future path of the federal funds rate: whether liftoff should be sooner with a gradual rise in the rate, or whether liftoff should occur later and be followed by a steeper path of the rate.19These discussions are useful when considering the appropriate timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate. But what comes after the first increase? Standard interest rate projections might incline one to believe that the path of the federal funds rate after liftoff will consist of a steady rate of increase from zero to the longer-run normal nominal federal funds rate, which will be equal to the natural real rate of interest plus our 2 percent inflation goal. One might even look back to the period from 2004 to 2007 and conclude that the FOMC will raise the federal funds rate by 25 basis points every meeting, or every second meeting, or every third meeting, depending on the date of liftoff. I know of no plans for the FOMC to behave that way. Why not? Isn't that what the calculation of optimal control paths shows? Yes. But a smooth path upward in the federal funds rate will almost certainly not be realized, because, inevitably, the economy will encounter shocks--shocks like the unexpected decline in the price of oil, or geopolitical developments that may have major budgetary and confidence implications, or a burst of greater productivity growth, as the Fed dealt with in the mid-1990s. When shocks happen, as they do, policymakers will have to respond to at least some of them. Accordingly there is considerable uncertainty about the level of future interest rates--a degree of uncertainty that can be estimated statistically, and that should be taken into account by market participants and recognized by the FOMC when it discusses future levels of interest rates. The uncertainty about future levels of the federal funds rate can be represented in a "fan chart"--that is, a figure showing the expected path of the federal funds rate as well as a range representing the degree of uncertainty around that path.20 The two sure elements of forward guidance that the FOMC will be able to offer after liftoff are that monetary policy will continue to be aimed at fostering the Committee's dual objectives, and that it will be data driven. As we move away from the zero lower bound, the data to which we will be responding will be driven less and less by the financial crisis and Great Recession, and increasingly by post-liftoff economic developments. Whatever the state of the economy, the federal funds rate will be set at each FOMC meeting on the basis of what the members of the FOMC believe will best enable us to meet our dual goals of maximum employment and price stability over the course of time. As the FOMC responds to incoming information, it will continue to be absolutely transparent in explaining its decisions and how and why they contribute to meeting the legally mandated dual goals of monetary policy. That transparency serves three purposes: First, it is required if we are to be accountable to the public; second, it is the best way of ensuring that monetary policy decisionmakers continue to follow sensible and rational policies; and third, it is the best way of informing the private sector of the basis on which monetary policy decisions are made and will continue to be made. With respect to forward guidance: its role has been and continues to be important in the long period in which eventual liftoff has been the key interest rate decision confronting the FOMC and the focus of market expectations. However, as monetary policy is normalized, interest rates will sometimes have to be increased, and sometimes decreased. Market participants will be able to form their expectations of future interest rates on the basis of three elements: first, the policy record of the FOMC, which might be approximated as a reaction function; second, their analysis of the current economic and financial situation and outlook; and, third, whatever guidance the FOMC will provide as to how it sees monetary policy decisions likely to unfold given the economic situation and outlook. It is likely that explicit long-term forward guidance will play less of a role in monetary policy after liftoff than it has during the past few years. Policymakers' behavior is sometimes summarized as a reaction function, which can be an algebraic description of how the interest rate is set--for instance, a Taylor-type rule in which the federal funds rate reacts simultaneously to the rate of inflation and expectations of inflation as well as to the rate of unemployment and expected changes in the level of unemployment.21However, a simple rule of that sort will, by necessity, leave out many factors that appropriately influence monetary policy, such as financial developments, temporary divergences in relationships between different measures of economic activity or inflation, and the like. A simple rule can provide the starting point for the decisions made by the FOMC, but in reaching their interest rate decision, members of the Committee will always have to use their judgment to identify the special circumstances confronting the economy, and how to react to them. To ensure that monetary policy operates in as stabilizing a way as possible, the FOMC will continue to set out, as clearly as it can, the basis of every decision that it makes, and to provide guidance on its expectations of future decisions. And on the basis of the information provided by the FOMC, of their understanding of the historical record of Fed policy decisions, and of their analysis and expectations of the state of the economy and, particularly, the financial markets, market participants will make the best decisions they can. ReferencesAhmed, Shaghil, and Andrei Zlate (2014). "Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World?"Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 48 (November), pp. 221-48. Bank of Canada, Bank of England, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, European Central Bank, Sveriges Riksbank, and Swiss National Bank (2008). "FOMC Statement: Federal Reserve and Other Central Banks Announce Reductions in Policy Interest Rates," press release, October 8. Bernanke, Ben S. (2010). "Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble," speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, January 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014a). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, September 17. ------ (2014b). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 17-18, 2014," press release, July 9. ------ (2014c). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 29-30, 2014," press release, August 20. ------ (2015). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, January 27-28, 2015," press release, February 18. Bordo, Michael D., and Joseph G. Haubrich (2012). "Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries, and Financial Crises: Evidence from the American Record (PDF)," Working Paper 12-14. Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, June. Bowman, David, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza (2014). "U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1109. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Caballero, Ricardo J., and Alp Simsek (2013). "Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity,"Journal of Finance, vol. 68 (December), pp. 2549-87. Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena (2008). "Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery,"American Economic Review, vol. 98 (March), pp. 439-57. Chor, Davin, and Kalina Manova (2012). "Off the Cliff and Back? Credit Conditions and International Trade during the Global Financial Crisis,"Journal of International Economics, vol. 87 (May), pp. 117-33. Coulibaly, Brahima, Horacio Sapriza, and Andrei Zlate (2011). "Trade Credit and International Trade during the 2008-09 Global Financial Crisis (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1020. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol.108 (May), pp. 425-48. Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2006). "The Deflation Bias and Committing to Being Irresponsible,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 38 (March), pp. 283-321. Engen, Eric, Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Fernald, John (2014). "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2014-15. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June. Fischer, Stanley (1980). "Dynamic Inconsistency, Cooperation and the Benevolent Dissembling Government,"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,vol. 2 (February), pp. 93-107. Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013). "On the International Spillovers of U.S. Quantitative Easing (PDF)," Working Paper Series1557. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, June. Frost, Josh, Lorie Logan, Antoine Martin, Patrick McCabe, Fabio Natalucci, and Julie Remache (2015). "Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: Some Design Considerations (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-010. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). "Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review,vol. 17 (May), pp. 41-59. Gilchrist, Simon, David Lpez-Salido, and Egon Zakrajek (2014). "Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound," NBER Working Paper Series 20094. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44 (February), pp. 3-46. Howard, Greg, Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2011). "Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different? (PDF)" International Finance Discussion Papers 1037. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977). "Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,"The Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (June), pp. 473-91. Lucas, Robert E., and Nancy L. Stokey (1983). "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an Economy without Capital,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 12 (1), pp. 55-93. Neely, Christopher J. (2011). "The Large-Scale Asset Purchases Had Large International Effects (PDF)," Working Paper Series2010-018C. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, January. Reifschneider, Dave, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2013). "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-77. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). "The Aftermath of Financial Crises," NBER Working Paper Series 14656. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. Rogers, John H., Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright (2014). "Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Comparison (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1101. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor (2012). "Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008,"American Economic Review, vol. 102 (April), pp. 1029-61. Stein, Jeremy C. (2014). "Challenges for Monetary Policy Communication," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, May 6. Svensson, Lares E.O. (1997). "Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets,"European Economic Review, vol. 41 (June), pp. 1111-46. Sveriges Riksbank (2015). "Current Forecast for the Repo Rate, Inflation and GDP," webpage, February 12, figure ("Repo Rate with Uncertainty Bands"). Werning, Ivn (2012). "Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy," unpublished paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, March. Yellen, Janet (2011). "Unconventional Monetary Policy and Central Bank Communications," speech delivered at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York, February 25. ------. "Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications," speech delivered at the University of California, Berkeley, Haas School of Business, Berkeley, Calif., November 13. ------ (2013). "Challenges Confronting Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the 2013 National Association for Business Economics Policy Conference, Washington, March 4. 1.The views that I offer are my own and not necessarily those of any other member of the Federal Open Market Committee or of the Committee itself.Return to text 2.For a model in which fire sales can arise from uncertainty about the network of cross-exposures among banks, see Caballero and Simsek (2013).Return to text 3.The fallout from the crisis was large even in countries that had not experienced an acute financial crisis. As an example, in six Asian countries, including China and India, exports fell more than 30 percent by the beginning of 2009, and industrial production declined about 10 percent. See the discussion of China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and Taiwan in Coulibaly, Sapriza, and Zlate (2011). Regarding the role of credit conditions in the collapse of international trade, see Chor and Manova (2012).Return to text 4.A key trigger for the crisis was the decline in housing prices, which began in 2006 and led to uncertainty about mortgage investments. In the summer of 2007, two large financial institutions--The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and BNP Paribas Group--suspended redemptions from certain investment funds, perhaps marking the beginning of the financial crisis. In 2008, the crisis intensified with the near collapse of Bear Stearns in March and the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings in September; a full-scale financial panic ensued across much of the global financial system.Return to text 5.In our role as lender of last resort, we worked closely with the Treasury Department and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). For example, to stem the run on money market funds, the Treasury provided a temporary guarantee and the Fed created a backstop liquidity program. In addition, the FDIC established the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program to guarantee certain unsecured liabilities of depository institutions and some bank holding companies.Return to text 6.On October 8, 2008, the Federal Reserve and five other major central banks jointly announced a reduction in policy interest rates. See Bank of Canada and others (2008).Return to text 7.A handful of central banks in Europe have recently set certain policy rates below zero. Specifically, the Danmarks Nationalbank, the European Central Bank, the Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank have set negative policy rates. In the United States, when the Federal Reserve sought to provide more accommodation despite the federal funds rate being, essentially, zero, we chose not to use negative rates, judging at the time that the small additional support for aggregate demand was not worth the accompanying risks to U.S. money markets and the intermediation of credit.Return to text 8.Indeed, the maturity extension program--also known as Operation Twist--did not increase reserves at all.Return to text 9.There is a long literature in monetary economics about time inconsistency. Time inconsistency is the notion that, to achieve good outcomes, a central bank may need to make commitments about how it will act in the future--commitments that must be credible but that, ex post, the central bank might find hard to follow through on. For canonical papers, see Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Lucas and Stokey (1983); see also Fischer (1980). The early literature focused on the inability of central banks, in normal times, to commit to high future interest rates and low inflation. Interestingly, at the zero lower bound, central banks may face nearly the opposite commitment problem: To escape a liquidity trap, a central bank may want to commit to keep interest rates low and accommodate an output boom even after the headwinds from a crisis have dissipated. See, for example, Eggertsson (2006) and Werning (2012). For additional discussion of Federal Reserve communications, see Yellen (2012) and Stein (2014).Return to text 10.For a discussion of the Federal Reserve's remittances, see Yellen (2013). Though it is likely that remittances to the Treasury will decline later in the decade as interest rates increase, such developments would not impair the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy, and it is highly likely that average annual remittances over the period affected by our asset purchases will be higher than pre-crisis norms. In addition, the asset purchases also affect Treasury revenue by lifting economic activity and thereby tax revenue, as well as by lowering interest rates and thereby debt service costs.Return to text 11.Regarding the effects on foreign asset markets, see Neely (2011); Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub (2013); and Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014). Regarding the effects on EMEs, it appears that both conventional and unconventional policies in the United States--among other factors--have driven capital flows into EMEs. See, for example, Ahmed and Zlate (2014) and Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2014).Return to text 12.See, for example, D'Amico and King (2013); Gagnon and others (2011); Gilchrist, Lpez-Salido, and Zakrajek (2014); and Hamilton and Wu (2012).Return to text 13.See, for example, Yellen (2011).Return to text 14.See Cerra and Saxena (2008); Reinhart and Rogoff (2009); Schularick and Taylor (2012); Bordo and Haubrich (2012); and Howard, Martin, and Wilson (2011).Return to text 15.The slowdown in productivity growth may predate the recession and may have been exacerbated by it. See Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox (2013) and Fernald (2014).Return to text 16.See Board of Governors (2014a).Return to text 17.Policymakers have discussed the benefits and costs of an ON RRP facility. For further discussion on this topic, see, for example, the FOMC minutes for June 2014, July 2014, and January 2015; see Board of Governors (2014b, 2014c, 2015).Return to text 18.See Frost and others (2015). As the authors note, an ON RRP facility can also potentially contribute to financial stability by crowding out risky short-term borrowing by financial institutions and businesses.Return to text 19.For a discussion of the tradeoffs between the risks that would be associated with departing either earlier or later from the effective lower bound, see, for example, the FOMC minutes for January 2015; see Board of Governors (2015).Return to text 20.For example, the Sveriges Riksbank publishes a fan chart that displays a forecast for its policy repurchase agreement (or repo) rate, along with uncertainty bands based on historical forecast errors, showing the ranges in which the repo rate is forecast to fall with 50 percent, 75 percent, and 90 percent confidence. For the chart, see Sveriges Riksbank (2015).Return to text 21.Svensson (1997) notes that the reaction function might take the form of a "targeting rule" expressing how the policymaker's target variables are expected to move over time. Bernanke (2010) discusses the practical importance of targeting forecast, as opposed to realized, variables.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Central Banking in the Shadows: Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Postcrisis," 20th Annual Financial Markets Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Stone Mountain, Georgia It is an honor to speak at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's 20th Financial Markets Conference, and I am grateful to President Lockhart and the organizers for inviting me to do so.1This evening I would like to take stock of progress on financial reforms in the nonbank financial sector and highlight some principles for approaching prudential regulation of this sector to further strengthen financial stability. The nonbank sector includes firms with diverse business models and practices, many of which differ greatly from those of banks. Even so, nonbank firms and activities can pose the same key vulnerabilities as banks, including high leverage, excessive maturity transformation, and complexity, all of which can lead to financial instability. The reforms undertaken to date reflect both the differences and similarities between the nonbank and bank sectors. While there has been progress on the financial reform front, we should not be complacent about the stability of the financial system. Regulation often creates incentives for activity to move outside the regulatory perimeter, and market participants respond to incentives. Thus we should expect that further reforms will certainly be needed down the road. The Nonbank Sector Was an Important Source of Vulnerability in the CrisisAs you know, the nonbank financial sector in the United States is larger, and plays a more important role, than it does in most other countries. In recent years, about two-thirds of nonfinancial credit market debt has been held by nonbanks, which includes market-based funding by securitization vehicles and mutual funds as well as by institutions such as insurance companies and finance companies. Nonbanks are involved in many activities within the financial system as well, such as securities lending. The nonbank sector has produced material benefits: increased market liquidity, greater diversity of funding sources, and--it is often claimed--a more efficient allocation of risk to investors. However, threats to the stability of the overall financial system have also increased, as was evident in the recent financial crisis. It is now eight years since major cracks in the financial system that led to the Global Financial Crisis first appeared in nonbank entities and activities. While the causes of the crisis were complex, I will start by telling part of the tale of how nonbank distress was transmitted to the broader financial system. The story begins with nonbank mortgage companies, which were important originators of subprime and prime mortgage loans, typically securitizing them or selling them to investment banks to be securitized. Rumors of troubles among these firms were circulating in 2006 as house prices started to decline, and a large firm filed for bankruptcy in December 2006.2Then New Century, at one point the second largest subprime lender, filed for bankruptcy in April 2007 because its funding had disappeared as a result of fears about losses. Many more followed in 2007 and 2008. Replacement of nonbank lenders' capacity to process mortgage applications and to fund mortgage loans occurred only partially and slowly. Next step: The distress in mortgage markets was amplified in the broader financial system in several ways, including something similar to a bank run but which instead occurred on asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) vehicles. These vehicles invested in private-label mortgage securitizations and other long-term debt securities but were funded with short-term commercial paper. Buyers of the commercial paper issued by the ABCP vehicles withdrew funding starting in the late summer of 2007. The volume of assets in the vehicles was large, about $700 billion, and after the run, the ability of the financial system to fund credit through many types of asset-backed securities became constrained.3The runs on ABCP also put considerable pressure on the banking system because of the liquidity backstops that banks had provided to the vehicles.4 Some of the guarantors also insured mortgage-backed securities, and when doubts arose about the ability of the guarantors to pay claims on mortgage-backed securities, the credibility of their guarantees of municipal securities was also reduced. Municipalities then found it more difficult and costly to issue debt even though their activities were otherwise unrelated to subprime mortgages.5 Next, the crisis spread to nonbank finance companies, which made a substantial fraction of consumer loans in the United States--for example, auto and credit card loans. As the crisis went on, the ability of such lenders to fund themselves through securitizations and commercial paper became increasingly constrained. For a period after the failure of Lehman Brothers, many investors were unwilling to buy commercial paper and asset-backed securities at any price, and, as a result, finance companies faced tight funding constraints. In turn, the finance companies cut credit availability, which sharply depressed purchases of consumer durables, including automobiles. These examples highlight five lessons. One is that the recent crisis first manifested itself in the nonbank sector and was worse for the nonbank sector than for banks. Almost all the examples of financial distress mentioned so far occurred before stress in the commercial banking system became acute, and in most cases well before. For example, only three commercial banks failed in the United States in 2007, and commercial bank distress did not peak until the end of 2008 and later. A second lesson is that nonbank distress can harm the real economy. Mortgages, auto loans, and credit through securities issuance became harder to obtain. Some of the slack was taken up by commercial banks, but credit contracted sharply, and millions of Americans suffered. Third lesson: Many of the problems at nonbanks were similar to the problems that plagued banks. These problems included insolvency, illiquidity (by which I mean the loss of access to funding even if the nonbank was solvent), and a general loss of confidence, in which counterparties of all kinds became reluctant to deal with some nonbanks. Fourth lesson: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) can handle a bank insolvency by keeping the bank's functions running while it pays off depositors and finds buyers for the bank's assets. The Federal Reserve, as a central bank, can address bank illiquidity using its lender-of-last-resort authority. Bank supervisory agencies can address a loss of confidence by actions such as the stress tests conducted in the spring of 2009. However the lack of such powers for nonbanks made it much more difficult for the authorities to address the distress of nonbanks and its influence on the financial system. Before the crisis, the authorities had few policy levers to provide liquidity or to resolve failures of nonbanks in a way that would avoid serious spillovers. Liquidity was ultimately provided to some nonbank markets, such as the markets for securities backed by consumer and business assets, but the facilities were far from simple and took substantial time to create and implement.6 Finally, nonbank distress can transmit to the banking sector through many channels, such as counterparty relationships, disruptions in funding markets, and knock-on effects of asset fire sales. The failure of Lehman provides a good example. It was a nonbank, and its failure both imposed direct losses on its many types of counterparties and disrupted many markets with negative effects on banks. Principles for Prudential Regulation of Nonbank Intermediaries and ActivitiesIt is widely understood that any regulation of nonbanks should fit their activities and the vulnerabilities they pose, which implies that not every nonbank financial institution or activity necessarily needs to be regulated. The two key principles for prudential regulation of nonbanks when it is warranted, are simple: First, we should be attentive to solvency and liquidity; second, we should recognize that the financial system will change over time, and thus close monitoring and analysis of the system are essential. Insolvency and illiquidity are classic financial stability concerns. And as mentioned, they were common themes of the distress at nonbanks that we observed during the crisis. Thus, we will not go far wrong if we begin by considering how to promote solvency and liquidity, taking into account the unique structures and activities of each type of nonbank. Liquidity challenges vary across nonbank firms and activities. In some, the issue is whether a firm can fund itself in a distressed situation. For example, a broker-dealer that relies heavily on short-term wholesale funding may find its funding evaporating at the first sign of trouble--a situation that could force the sale of assets at fire sale prices. One way to mitigate such problems is by having direct restrictions on the structure of liabilities, such as on their duration or on the use of wholesale funding. Analogously with banks, one could also imagine requiring some nonbanks to maintain buffers of highly liquid assets that are sized according to the risk that their liabilities will run off quickly in a stress situation. In other nonbanks, withdrawable liabilities are part of the structure of the entity or activity, and what varies is the degree of mismatch between the liquidity of assets and liabilities. For example, some open-ended mutual funds offer daily withdrawal privileges but invest in assets that take longer to sell and settle, giving investors an incentive to withdraw quickly when distress arises. The fire sales of assets that may result can depress asset prices and increase volatility, with knock-on effects on other institutions and markets. Concerns have grown about this liquidity mismatch as the aggregate value of less liquid assets in such funds has grown. In part because of this concern, in a DecemberFederal Registernotice last year, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) requested public comment on potential systemic risks posed by asset manager activities and products. To promote solvency, one could impose ratio-type capital requirements, such as leverage ratio requirements or risk-based requirements. An alternative is to require that firms perform regular stress tests to demonstrate that they can remain solvent and continue to lend even under stress. In the Fed's case, it has chosen to impose all of these requirements on banks, but these requirements cannot simply be applied, as is, to nonbanks. It is well known that solvency and liquidity can be difficult to separate during stress periods because fears about solvency, even if unfounded, can prompt a run. Thus, one could also imagine promoting both solvency and liquidity at some nonbanks by imposing restrictions on their structure or activities in ways that reduce the likelihood of runs. An example of this is recent changes by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in regulations for prime money market mutual funds. Starting in 2016, prime institutional money funds will be required to publish a floating net asset value rather than a stable value of $1 per unit. Stable-value funds, as we saw during the crisis, can be vulnerable to an unexpected "break the buck" event that leads to a run. Under the new rules, funds can also impose limitations on withdrawals of liabilities and can impose liability redemption fees. The SEC considered requiring money market funds to hold some capital but chose not to do so. Only time will tell whether the adopted reforms have the intended run-damping effects, but if they do, capital will be much less necessary. Some may raise concerns that increased regulation of nonbanks will only increase moral hazard and increase risk to the system on net. But moral hazard may already be present. Over the past 20 years and more, governments have sometimes acted to contain damage from distress at nonbanks because of the economic damage that might have resulted from a failure to act. We should always be mindful of moral hazard incentives and seek to contain them, but well-designed regulation might reduce rather than increase moral hazard. In the banking sector, bank regulators have focused on improving resolution planning at banks and enhancing the ability of the FDIC to manage the resolution of a systemically important firm in a way that mitigates spillovers to the economy. For example, proposals are now under consideration to require the largest and most interconnected banks to maintain a buffer of debt that could be converted to equity or that could otherwise absorb losses upon failure. Such proposals could be viewed as a form of solvency regulation and this form of loss-absorbing capital might be appropriate for some of the largest and most interconnected nonbanks as well. In addition, nonbank intermediation often involves complex chains of activity encompassing many entities and markets. Such chains tend to increase the web of interconnections in the financial system that, in some circumstances, can increase the likelihood or severity of systemic stress. For example, movements in collateral values can trigger margin calls and fire sales of assets, and thus activities that depend on market-valued collateral can be vulnerable. The Financial Stability Board is currently considering reforms for margins on securities financing transactions. Other interconnections involve exposures to counterparty default. The new regulatory regime for derivatives, which I will discuss in a moment, seeks to mitigate counterparty risk. It is often said that stronger regulation of the banking sector will cause activity to move outside the perimeter of regulation. This evolution also could lead to greater complexity, such as longer chains of interconnections, which makes it more difficult for market participants to understand the risks arising from their exposures. Examples of migration that have already occurred include the movement of many loans made to large corporations from banks to collateralized loan obligations, the securitization of many credit card receivables, and the securitization of mortgages. This kind of migration makes close monitoring by regulators particularly important. Authorities should monitor for changes that may arise in response to the new regulations or to changing economic and financial conditions. They will need information to do so, but for many nonbank entities, the flow of information is currently nonexistent or very limited and informal. Another force for evolution in the nonbank sector is the demand for safe money-like assets. Some argue that this demand for private money creation prompted the growth in "shadow banking" prior to the crisis.7Indeed, whenever shortages develop, we might expect the nonbank financial system to create assets that appear safe but that could in certain circumstances pose systemic risks. Progress to DateWe have seen some progress in improving the regulation of the nonbank financial sector. Let me mention four areas of reform. The first is the Dodd-Frank Act's creation of the FSOC and the power it was given to designate individual nonbank firms as systemically important and thus subject to prudential regulation by the Federal Reserve. The FSOC has designated four nonbank firms as systemically important.8The FSOC is also a useful venue for regulators to collaborate on identifying emerging threats. And it is an important mechanism through which agencies can cooperate in responding to practices or firms that migrate outside of traditional regulatory perimeters. Second: securitization reform. A regulation that is now in the process of implementation requires securitizers to retain some of the risk of the securities that they create. That should incentivize them to structure securitizations in ways that better protect the holders of senior tranches from credit risk, although qualifying residential mortgages are exempt from the requirement. A third area is derivative reforms. To reduce complexity and pro-cyclicality, these reforms include moving standardized derivatives to central counterparties (CCPs) and requiring initial and variation margin for noncleared derivatives. Relatedly, as CCPs have gained prominence, regulators have become more focused on and concerned with their resilience, recovery, and resolution. In addition, regulators are working to improve the quality and standardization of data reported to swap data repositories, and are actively participating in international efforts to develop uniform identification standards to facilitate the aggregation of such data.9A key issue is to understand how and to what extent market participants who use derivatives are exposed to each other. Besides the new money market mutual fund rules that I have already mentioned, a fourth example is additional data collection on specific holdings of money funds, which has enhanced stability by providing investors with more information to better evaluate risks. In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act mandated the establishment of the Office of Financial Research in order to help promote financial stability through the measurement and analysis of risks, the conduct of essential research, and the collection and standardization of financial data. Data collection has begun for hedge funds and progress is being made in collecting data on repurchase agreements and securities lending. Nevertheless, some nonbank firms and activities--including concerning the volume and uses of derivatives--are still opaque. To sum up, much has been done to strengthen prudential regulation and supervision of the nonbank financial system, but more will need to be done. We must remain vigilant for changes in the system that increase systemic risk, and we should make appropriate changes to regulation and the structure of regulation as necessary. Recent regulatory changes, including a macroprudential approach on the part of U.S. regulators, should help us to do that.10But we should never forget the International Monetary Fund's all-purpose warning whenever it has been tempted to give an economy a clean bill of health: Complacency must be avoided. 1.The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2.Ownit Mortgage Solutions, one of the top 20 subprime mortgage originators nationally, filed for bankruptcy on December 28, 2006. Virtually all such firms have since either failed or been acquired.Return to text 3.See Daniel Covitz, Nellie Liang, and Gustavo Suarez (2013), "The Evolution of a Financial Crisis: Collapse of the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market,"Journal of Finance,vol. 68 (June), pp. 815-48.Return to text 4.Runs on the repurchase agreement (repo) funding of asset-backed securities were also troublesome for both banks and nonbanks. See Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick (2012), "Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 104 (June), pp. 425-51.Return to text 5.Moreover, state and municipal borrowers had been issuing long-term debt while paying short-term interest rates by using structures such as variable-rate demand notes (VRDNs), which gave holders the right to put the securities back to liquidity providers on short notice. When the money market fund investors that held VRDNs became worried about their ability to get their money out at short notice, the volume of putbacks rose, and these developments ultimately led to increased payment obligations for some municipalities.Return to text 6.See Gorton and Metrick, "Securitized Banking," in note 4, op.cit.; Jeremy Stein (2012), "Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 127, pp. 57-95; Robin Greenwood, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy Stein (2014), "A Comparative-Advantage Approach to Government Debt Maturity,"Journal of Finance,vol.65, pp. 993-1028.Return to text 7.See Gorton and Metrick, "Securitized Banking," in note 4; Samuel G. Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C. Stein, and Robert W. Vishny (forthcoming), "Banks and Patient Fixed-Income Investors,"Journal of Financial Economics; and Zoltan Pozsar, Tobias Adrian, Adam Ashcraft, and Hayley Boesky (2010), "Shadow Banking," Staff Report 458 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July; revised February 2012).Return to text 8.The four firms designated by the FSOC as systemically important are American International Group, Inc.; Prudential Financial, Inc.; General Electric Capital Corporation, Inc.; and MetLife, Inc.Return to text 9.Due to the critical nature of overseas derivatives data and the need to standardize these data for regulatory analysis, the CFTC and the OFR in 2014 formed a partnership to standardize and enhance the quality of the data collected by CFTC-registered swap data repositories. Important work on standardizing derivatives data is also under way at the international level.Return to text 10.This change is reflected in the setting up of the LISCC--the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California I would like to thank President Williams for his kind introduction and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco for inviting me to what promises to be a very stimulating and important conference. As you know, last week the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) changed its forward guidance pertaining to the federal funds rate. With continued improvement in economic conditions, an increase in the target range for that rate may well be warranted later this year. Of course, the timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate and its subsequent path will be determined by the Committee in light of incoming data on labor market conditions, inflation, and other aspects of the current expansion. In my remarks today I will discuss some factors that will likely guide our decisions as we adjust the stance of monetary policy over time. I will also discuss why most of my colleagues and I believe the return of the federal funds rate to a more normal level is likely to be gradual. In doing so, I will address three questions. First, why does the Committee judge that an increase in the federal funds rate target is likely to become appropriate later this year? Second, how are economic and financial considerations likely to shape the course of monetary policy over the next several years? And, finally, are there special risks and other considerations that policymakers should take into account in the current environment? Current Economic Conditions and the OutlookBefore turning to these questions, however, let me first review where the economy is now and where it's likely headed--a necessary backdrop for understanding why, after more than six years of maintaining a near-zero federal funds rate and accumulating a large portfolio of longer-term securities, the Committee is now giving serious consideration to beginning to reduce later this year some of the extraordinary monetary policy accommodation currently in place. Although the recovery of the labor market from the deep recession following the financial crisis was frustratingly slow for quite a long time, progress has been more rapid of late. The unemployment rate has fallen markedly over the past few years and now stands at 5.5 percent, down from 10 percent at its peak. Payroll gains have averaged 275,000 per month over the past year, well above the pace needed to sustain further declines in the unemployment rate. Of course, we still have some way to go to reach our maximum employment goal. The unemployment rate has not yet declined to the 5.0 to 5.2 percent range that most FOMC participants now consider to be normal in the longer run. Involuntary part-time employment remains high by historical standards. Labor force participation is still somewhat lower than I would expect after accounting for demographic trends.1And wage growth continues to be quite subdued. But I think we can all agree that the recovery in the labor market has been substantial. I am cautiously optimistic that, in the context of moderate growth in aggregate output and spending, labor market conditions are likely to improve further in coming months. In particular, and despite the somewhat disappointing tone of the recent retail sales data, I think consumer spending is likely to expand at a good clip this year given such robust fundamentals as strong employment gains, boosts to real incomes from lower energy prices, continued increases in household wealth, and a relatively high level of consumer confidence. Of course, not all sectors of the economy are doing as well: dollar appreciation appears to be restraining net exports, low oil prices are prompting a cutback in drilling activity, and the recovery in residential construction remains subdued. But overall, I anticipate that real gross domestic product is likely to expand somewhat faster than its potential in coming quarters, thereby promoting further gains in employment and declines in the unemployment rate. In assessing the actual strength of the labor market and the broader economy, we must bear in mind that these very welcome improvements have been achieved in the context of extraordinary monetary accommodation. While the overall level of real activity now appears to be much closer to its potential than it was a year or two ago, the economy in an "underlying" sense remains quite weak by historical standards, for the simple reason that the increases in hiring and output that have been achieved thus far have required exceptionally low levels of short- and longer-term interest rates, reflecting a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy. Interest rates have been, and remain, very low, and if underlying conditions had truly returned to normal, the economy should be booming. As I will discuss shortly, this assessment concerning the underlying strength of real activity has important policy implications. While there has been considerable progress on the maximum employment leg of our dual mandate, progress on the price stability leg has been notably absent. Inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures has been running below the FOMC's longer-run goal of 2 percent for a number of years, and on a 12month basis is currently 1/4 percent. Some of the weakness in inflation likely reflects continuing slack in labor and product markets. However, much of this weakness stems from the sharp decline in the price of oil and other one-time factors that, in the FOMC's judgment, are likely to have only a transitory negative effect on inflation, provided that inflation expectations remain well anchored. In this regard, I take comfort from the continued stability of survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations. And although market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined appreciably since last summer and bear close watching, I suspect that these declines are primarily driven by changes in risk premiums and market factors that I expect to prove transitory. On balance, I therefore think it is appropriate for monetary policy to remain accommodative for some time, fostering an environment of tightening labor and product markets that, together with stable inflation expectations, will help move inflation up to 2 percent over the medium term. Why Might an Increase in the Federal Funds Rate Be Warranted Later This Year?The Committee's decision about when to begin reducing accommodation will depend importantly on how economic conditions actually evolve over time. Like most of my FOMC colleagues, I believe that the appropriate time has not yet arrived, but I expect that conditions may warrant an increase in the federal funds rate target sometime this year. So let me spell out the reasoning that underpins this view. I would first note that the current stance of monetary policy is clearly providing considerable economic stimulus. The near-zero setting for the federal funds rate has facilitated a sizable reduction in labor market slack over the past two years and appears to be consistent with further substantial gains. A modest increase in the federal funds rate would be highly unlikely to halt this progress, although such an increase might slow its pace somewhat. Second, we need to keep in mind the well-established fact that the full effects of monetary policy are felt only after long lags. This means that policymakers cannot wait until they have achieved their objectives to begin adjusting policy. I would not consider it prudent to postpone the onset of normalization until we have reached, or are on the verge of reaching, our inflation objective. Doing so would create too great a risk of significantly overshootingbothour objectives of maximum sustainable employment and 2 percent inflation, potentially undermining economic growth and employment if the FOMC is subsequently forced to tighten policy markedly or abruptly. In addition, holding rates too low for too long could encourage inappropriate risk-taking by investors, potentially undermining the stability of financial markets. That said, we must be reasonably confident at the time of the first rate increase that inflation will move up over time to our 2 percent objective, and that such an action will not impede continued solid growth in employment and output. An important factor working to increase my confidence in the inflation outlook will be continued improvement in the labor market. A substantial body of theory, informed by considerable historical evidence, suggests that inflation will eventually begin to rise as resource utilization continues to tighten.2It is largely for this reason that a significant pickup in incoming readings on core inflation willnotbe a precondition for me to judge that an initial increase in the federal funds rate would be warranted. With respect to wages, I anticipate that real wage gains for American workers are likely to pick up to a rate more in line with trend labor productivity growth as employment settles in at its maximum sustainable level. We could see nominal wage growth eventually running notably higher than the current roughly 2 percent pace. But the outlook for wages is highly uncertain even if price inflation does move back to 2 percent and labor market conditions continue to improve as projected. For example, we cannot be sure about the future pace of productivity growth; nor can we be sure about other factors, such as global competition, the nature of technological change, and trends in unionization, that may also influence the pace of real wage growth over time. These factors, which are outside of the Federal Reserve's control, likely explain why real wages have failed to keep pace with productivity growth for at least the past 15 years. For such reasons, we can never be sure what growth rate of nominal wages is consistent with stable consumer price inflation, and this uncertainty limits the usefulness of wage trends as an indicator of the Fed's progress in achieving its inflation objective. I have argued that a pickup in neither wage nor price inflation is indispensable for me to achieve reasonable confidence that inflation will move back to 2 percent over time. That said, I would be uncomfortable raising the federal funds rate if readings on wage growth, core consumer prices, and other indicators of underlying inflation pressures were to weaken, if market-based measures of inflation compensation were to fall appreciably further, or if survey-based measures were to begin to decline noticeably. Under normal circumstances, simple monetary policy rules, such as the one proposed by John Taylor, could help us decide when to raise the federal funds rate.3Even with core inflation running below the Committee's 2 percent objective, Taylor's rule now calls for the federal funds rate to be well above zero if the unemployment rate is currently judged to be close to its normal longer-run level and the "normal" level of the real federal funds rate is currently close to its historical average. But the prescription offered by the Taylor rule changes significantly if one instead assumes, as I do, that appreciable slack still remains in the labor market, and that the economy's equilibrium real federal funds rate--that is, the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term--is currently quite low by historical standards.4Under assumptions that I consider more realistic under present circumstances, the same rules call for the federal funds rate to be close to zero.5Moreover, I would assert that simple rules are, well, too simple, and ignore important complexities of the current situation, about which I will have more to say shortly. The FOMC will, of course, carefully deliberate about when to begin the process of removing policy accommodation. But the significance of this decision should not be overemphasized, because what matters for financial conditions and the broader economy is the entire expected path of short-term interest rates and not the precise timing of the first rate increase. The spending and investment decisions the FOMC seeks to influence depend primarily on expectations of policy well into the future, as embedded in longer-term interest rates and other asset prices. More important than the timing of the Committee's initial policy move will be the strategy the Committee deploys in adjusting the federal funds rate over time, in response to economic developments, to achieve its dual mandate. Market participants' perceptions of that reaction function and the implications for the likely longer-run trajectory of short-term interest rates will influence the borrowing costs faced by households and businesses, including the rates on corporate bonds, auto loans, and home mortgages. How Are Economic and Financial Considerations Likely to Shape the Course of Monetary Policy over the Next Several Years?Let me therefore turn to the second question I posed earlier: How are economic and financial considerations likely to shape the course of monetary policy over the next few years? Let me first be clear that the FOMC does not intend to embark on any predetermined course of tightening following an initial decision to raise the funds rate target range--one that, for example, would involve similarly sized rate increases at every meeting or on some other schedule. Rather, the actual path of policy will evolve as economic conditions evolve, and policy tightening could speed up, slow down, pause, or even reverse course depending on actual and expected developments in real activity and inflation. Reflecting such data dependence, as well as some historically unusual policy considerations that I will discuss shortly, the average pace of tightening observed during previous recoveries could well provide a highly misleading guide to the actual course of monetary policy over the next few years. Our goal in adjusting the federal funds rate over time will be to achieve and sustain economic conditions close to maximum employment with inflation averaging around 2 percent, responding, as best we can, to the inevitable twists and turns of the economy. Keeping in mind the all-important proviso that policy is never predetermined but is always data dependent, what can we say about the appropriate path of policy, assuming the most likely outcomes for real activity, inflation, and related factors? The answer is that it depends, of course, on one's outlook for the economy. Today I will focus on the modal outlook presented by FOMC participants' submissions to the March Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which assumes that no further unanticipated disturbances buffet the economy. As I noted at my press conference after last week's FOMC meeting, participants generally project that the unemployment rate will continue to fall through late 2017 to levels at or somewhat below estimates of its longer-run sustainable level, accompanied by growth in real gross domestic product that runs somewhat above its estimated longer-run trend with inflation moving up to around 2 percent. This solid economic performance is projected to be consistent with a gradual normalization of monetary policy: The median funds rate projection in the March SEP increases apercentage point per year on average through the end of 2017. The projected combination of a gradual rise in the nominal federal funds rate coupled with further progress on both legs of the dual mandate is consistent with an implicit assessment by the Committee that the equilibrium real federal funds rate--one measure of the economy's underlying strength--is rising only slowly over time. In the wake of the financial crisis, the equilibrium real rate apparently fell well below zero because of numerous persistent headwinds. These headwinds include tighter underwriting standards and restricted access to some forms of credit; the need for households to reduce their debt burdens; contractionary fiscal policy at all levels of government after the initial effects of the fiscal stimulus package had passed; and elevated uncertainty about the economic outlook that made firms hesitant to invest and hire, and households reluctant to buy houses, cars, and other discretionary goods. Fortunately, the overall force of these headwinds appears to have diminished considerably over the past year or so, allowing employment to accelerate appreciably even as the level of the federal funds rate and the volume of our asset holdings remained nearly unchanged.6Stated differently, the economy's underlying strength has been gradually improving, and the equilibrium real federal funds rate has been gradually rising. Although the recent appreciation of the dollar is likely to weigh on U.S. exports over time, I nonetheless anticipate further diminution of the headwinds just noted over the next couple of years, and as the equilibrium real funds rate continues to rise, it will accordingly be appropriate to raise the actual level of the real federal funds rate in tandem, all else being equal.7At present, the equilibrium real federal funds rate, which by some estimates is currently close to zero, appears to be well below the longer-run normal levels assessed by the FOMC. The median SEP estimate of this longer-run normal rate--that is, the long-run projection of the nominal funds rate less 2 percent inflation--stood at 1-3/4 percent in the FOMC's recent projections.8Provided that inflation shows clear signs over time of moving up toward 2 percent in the context of continuing progress toward maximum employment, I therefore expect that a further tightening in monetary policy after the first increase in the federal funds rate will be warranted. Should incoming data, however, fail to support this forecast, then the actual path of policy will need to be adjusted appropriately. Are There Special Risks and Other Considerations That Policymakers Should Take into Account in the Current Environment?As I noted, my FOMC colleagues and I generally anticipate that a rather gradual rise in the federal funds rate will be appropriate over the next few years, conditional on our baseline forecasts for real activity, inflation, and other aspects of the economy's performance. So far in my remarks, I have emphasized one key rationale for such a judgment--namely, that the equilibrium real federal funds rate is at present well below its historical average and is anticipated to rise only gradually over time as the various headwinds that have restrained the economic recovery continue to abate. If incoming data support such a forecast, the federal funds rate should be normalized, but at a gradual pace. Several additional factors reinforce this conclusion, and that brings me to my third question: Are there special risks and other considerations that policymakers should take into account in the current environment? Keeping in mind that the actual course of monetary policy in the future will primarily depend on events as they unfold, I see three additional considerations that are relevant.9 The first, which is closely related to my expectation that the headwinds holding back growth are likely to continue to abate gradually, pertains to the risk that the equilibrium real federal funds rate may not, in fact, recover as much or as quickly as I anticipate. Substantial uncertainty surrounds all estimates of the equilibrium real interest rate, and, as I will discuss momentarily, market participants appear to be fairly pessimistic about the odds that it will rise significantly over time. Moreover, some recent studies have raised the prospect that the economies of the United States and other countries will grow more slowly in the future as a result of both demographic factors and a slower pace of productivity gains from technological advances. At an extreme, such developments could even amount to a type of "secular stagnation," in which monetary policy would need to keep real interest rates persistently quite low relative to historical norms to promote full employment and price stability, absent a highly expansive fiscal policy.10 Such a risk has important implications for monetary policy in the near term, when the ability of the economy to adjust to significant rate increases will be especially uncertain. The experience of Japan over the past 20 years, and Sweden more recently, demonstrates that a tightening of policy when the equilibrium real rate remains low can result in appreciable economic costs, delaying the attainment of a central bank's price stability objective. International experience therefore counsels caution in removing accommodation until the Committee is more confident that aggregate demand will continue to expand in line with its expectations--a view that is also supported by the research literature.11 A second reason for the Committee to proceed cautiously in removing policy accommodation relates to asymmetries in the effectiveness of monetary policy in the vicinity of the zero lower bound. In the event that growth in employment and overall activity proves unexpectedly robust and inflation moves significantly above our 2 percent objective, the FOMC can and will raise interest rates as needed to rein in inflation. But if growth was to falter and inflation was to fall yet further, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates could limit the Committee's ability to provide the needed degree of accommodation. With an already large balance sheet, for example, the FOMC might be concerned about potential costs and risks associated with further asset purchases. Research suggests that, the higher the probability of monetary policy becoming constrained by the zero lower bound in the near future because of adverse shocks, and the more severe the attendant consequences for real activity and inflation, the more current policy should lean in accommodative direction.12In effect, such a strategy represents insurance against the zero lower bound by aiming for somewhat stronger real activity and a faster rise in inflation under the modal outlook. Given the modal outlook envisioned in FOMC participants' recent forecasts, with headwinds continuing to diminish, the equilibrium real rate rising, and inflation moving back up to 2 percent over the next few years, the risk that the funds rate would need to return to near zero should be declining appreciably. Consistent with this assessment, almost all FOMC participants now view the risks to the outlook for real activity as largely balanced, although some also see inflation risks as weighted to the downside. That said, it is sobering to note that many market participants appear to assess the risks to the outlook quite differently. For example, respondents to the Survey of Primary Dealers in late January thought there was a 20 percent probability that, after liftoff, the funds rate would fall back to zero sometime at or before late 2017.13In addition, both the remarkably low level of long-term government bond yields in advanced economies and the low prevailing level of inflation compensation suggest that financial market participants may hold more pessimistic views than FOMC participants concerning the risks to the global outlook. Since long-term yields reflect the market's probability-weighted average of all possible short-term interest rate paths, along with compensating term and risk premiums, the generally low level of yields in advanced economies suggests that investors place considerable odds on adverse scenarios that would necessitate a lower and flatter trajectory of the federal funds than envisioned in participants' modal SEP projections.14 A final argument for gradually adjusting policy relates to the desirability of achieving a prompt return of inflation to the FOMC's 2 percent goal, an objective that would be advanced by allowing the unemployment rate to decline for a time somewhat below estimates of its longer-run sustainable level. To a limited degree, such an outcome is envisioned in many participants' most recent SEP projections. A tight labor market may also work to reverse some of the adverse supply-side developments resulting from the financial crisis. The deep recession and slow recovery likely have held back investment in physical and human capital, restrained the rate of new business formation, prompted discouraged workers to leave the labor force, and eroded the skills of the long-term unemployed.15Some of these effects might be reversed in a tight labor market, yielding long-term benefits associated with a more productive economy. That said, the quantitative importance of these supply-side mechanisms are difficult to establish, and the relevant research on this point is quite limited. Of course, taking a gradualist approach is not without risks. Proceeding too slowly to tighten policy could have adverse consequences for the attainment of the Committee's inflation objective over time, especially if it were to undermine the FOMC's inflation credibility. Inflation could, for example, exhibit nonlinear dynamics in which high levels of unemployment place relatively little downward pressure on inflation, but tight labor markets generate marked upward pressure. If so, a decline in unemployment below its natural rate could cause inflation to quickly rise to an undesirably high level. Rapid increases in short-term interest rates to arrest such an unwelcome development could, in turn, have adverse effects on financial markets and the broader economy. Proceeding too cautiously could also have undesirable effects on financial stability. An environment of prolonged low short-term rates could prompt an excessive buildup in leverage or cause underwriting standards to erode as investors take on risks they cannot measure or manage appropriately in a reach for yield.16At this point the evidence indicates that such vulnerabilities do not pose a significant threat, but the Committee is carefully monitoring developments in this area.17Moreover, in my view, macroprudential regulatory and supervisory tools should serve as our first line of defense in addressing these risks.18 ConclusionTo conclude, let me emphasize that in determining when to initially increase its target range for the federal funds rate and how to adjust it thereafter, the Committee's decisions will be data dependent, reflecting evolving judgments concerning the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. We cannot be certain about the underlying strength of the expansion, the maximum level of employment consistent with price stability, or the longer-run level of interest rates consistent with maximum employment. Policy must adjust as our understanding of these factors changes. However, if conditions do evolve in the manner that most of my FOMC colleagues and I anticipate, I would expect the level of the federal funds rate to be normalized only gradually, reflecting the gradual diminution of headwinds from the financial crisis and the balance of risks I have enumerated of moving either too slowly or too quickly. Nothing about the course of the Committee's actions is predetermined except the Committee's commitment to promote our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. 1.For a discussion of the influence of demographics and other factors on the labor force participation rate in recent years, see Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Washington: Brookings Institution, Fall). In addition, for evidence that the labor force participation rate is currently unusually low from a cyclical perspective, see Robert E. Hall (2014), "Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial Crisis," in Jonathan Parker and Michael Woodford, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, vol. 29 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press); and Council of Economic Advisers (2014), "The Labor Force Participation Rate since 2007: Causes and Policy Implications (PDF)" (Washington: CEA, July).Return to text 2.For recent evidence on the relationship between labor market slack and wages, see Anil Kumar and Pia Orrenius (2014), "A Closer Look at the Phillips Curve Using State Level Data (PDF)," Working Papers 1409 (Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas); and Daniel Aaronson and Andrew Jordan (2014), "Understanding the Relationship between Real Wage Growth and Labor Market Conditions," Chicago Fed Letter No. 327 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, October). The price Phillips curve is discussed extensively in the literature; for instance, see Robert J. Gordon (2013), "The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU during the Slow Recovery," NBER Working Paper Series 19390 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August). In addition, the apparent lack of disinflationary pressure seen during the recent recession is not necessarily a puzzle for the New Keynesian Phillips curve, as shown in Marco Del Negro, Marc P. Giannoni, and Frank Schorfheide (2015), "Inflation in the Great Recession and New Keynesian Models,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 7 (January), pp. 168-96.Return to text 3.For the original exposition of the Taylor rule, see John B. Taylor (1993), "Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 39, pp. 195-214. For a discussion of policy rules in general, see John B. Taylor and John C. Williams (2010), "Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B (San Diego: Elsevier), pp. 829-59.Return to text 4.The equilibrium real rate is typically viewed as the level of the short-term interest rate, less inflation, estimated to be consistent with maximum employment and stable inflation in the long run, assuming no future disturbances to the economy. Accordingly, the equilibrium real rate is usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy, on the assumption that the influences of such disturbances on real activity and inflation fade away after a few years. In the aftermath of the financial crisis, however, the U.S. economy has been subject to various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards, such as the ongoing repair of household balance sheets and other persistent headwinds. These atypical processes imply that, in determining the appropriate stance of monetary policy over time, policymakers in the current environment need to take account of slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply that were not important factors during previous tightening episodes. For this reason, it is useful to think of the equilibrium real rate in present circumstances as not only time-varying but also having a predictable element that evolves over the medium term.Return to text 5.For example, the Taylor rule isRt= RR* + t+ 0.5(t-2) + 0.5Yt, whereRdenotes the federal funds rate,RR*is the estimated value of the equilibrium real rate,  is the current inflation rate (usually measured using a core consumer price index), andYis the output gap. The latter can be approximated using Okun's law,Yt= -2 (Ut- U*), whereUis the unemployment rate andU*is the natural rate of unemployment. IfRR*is assumed to equal 2 percent (roughly the average historical value of the real federal funds rate) andU*is assumed to equal 5-1/2 percent, then the Taylor rule would call for the nominal funds rate to be set a bit below 3 percent currently, given that core PCE inflation is now running close to 1-1/4 percent and the unemployment rate is 5.5 percent. But if RR* is instead assumed to equal 0 percent currently (as some statistical models suggest) and U* is assumed to equal 5 percent (an estimate in line with many FOMC participants' SEP projections), then the rule's current prescription is less than 1/2 percent.Return to text 6.Although the FOMC suspended its asset purchase program last October, the stimulus provided by this type of unconventional monetary policy action depends primarily on the stock of longer-term assets held by the Federal Reserve, not the flow of securities bought. Because the FOMC has held the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet constant since October while continuing to keep the federal funds rate near zero, the overall stance of monetary policy is thus little changed over this period. However, the downward pressure on long-term interest rates from the Federal Reserve's asset holdings should decline over time, particularly after the FOMC suspends its current reinvestment policy, because the average duration of the assets held in the portfolio will be steadily falling and because the relative size of the portfolio to the stock of publicly held debt will be shrinking.Return to text 7.If resource utilization was at a normal level and inflation was equal to 2 percent, policymakers would presumably opt to set the real federal funds rate equal to the equilibrium real rate in order to maintain those conditions. Accordingly, if the equilibrium rate is rising over time, the "neutral" setting of monetary policy should be rising in tandem.Return to text 8.For example, the estimate of the equilibrium real rate from the Laubach-Williams model for 2014:Q4 is negative 0.16. For information on the model, see Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams (2003), "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp.1063-70; updated estimates of the baseline model are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco website atwww.frbsf.org/economic-research/economists/john-williams/Laubach_Williams_updated_estimates.xlsx. Another recent study, however, concludes that the equilibrium real rate is probably in the range of 1 to 2 percent while also emphasizing that estimates in this area are quite imprecise; see James D. Hamilton, Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015), "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)," working paper (San Diego: University of California at San Diego, March). Note that the concept of the equilibrium real rate used in the latter study is explicitly long-run in nature and so excludes the effects of forces that have persistently restrained the pace of the current expansion but are expected to eventually fade away, such as household balance sheet repair; for this reason, the paper's estimate is higher than the medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate discussed in the speech.Return to text 9.In principle, the three considerations--uncertainty about the value of the equilibrium real federal funds rate, the asymmetric risks associated with the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, and the potential benefits of allowing the unemployment rate to temporarily undershoot its sustainable longer-run rate--should influence both the timing of the onset of policy normalization and the subsequent pace at which that normalization proceeds. And in fact, I view all three considerations as helping to explain why the FOMC has held the federal funds rate near zero for so long. I also view such considerations as consistent with a likely increase in the target federal funds rate later this year, because such an increase would be part of a broader strategy for only gradually reducing accommodation over time (subject, of course, to adjustments in response to incoming information on real activity, inflation, and other factors).Return to text 10.The concept of "secular stagnation" was first coined back in the late 1930s; see Alvin H. Hansen (1938), "The Consequences of Reducing Expenditures,"Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science, vol. 17 (January), pp. 60-72; and Alvin H. Hansen (1939), "Economic Progress and Declining Population Growth,"American Economic Review, vol. 29 (March), pp. 1-15. This possibility, and its applicability to the United States and other developed economies in coming years, has received considerable attention of late; see Robert J. Gordon (2014), "The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections," NBER Working Paper Series 19895 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February); Robert E. Hall (2014), "Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial Crisis," in Jonathan Parker and Michael Woodford, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual,vol. 29 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press); and Lawrence H. Summers (2014), "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 6573. For a more skeptical assessment of the secular stagnation hypothesis, see Hamilton and others, "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate," in note 8.Return to text 11.A number of studies have shown, using model simulations, that policymakers can improve macroeconomic performance by adjusting the stance of monetary policy more cautiously in response to changes in economic conditions when the economys equilibrium real interest rate is uncertain. For a survey of the literature on this issue, see John B. Taylor and John C. Williams (2010), Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy, in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B (San Diego: Elsevier), pp. 829-59.Return to text 12.For example, see Klaus Adam and Roberto M. Billi (2007), "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54 (3), 728-52; Taisuke Nakata (2013), "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Occasionally Binding Zero Bound Constraints (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-40 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April); Taisuke Nakata (2013), "Uncertainty at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-09 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 2012); and Charles Evans, Jonas Fisher, Francois Gourio, and Spencer Krane (forthcoming), "Risk Management for Monetary Policy Near the Zero Lower Bound," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Washington: Brookings Institution).Return to text 13.See Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Markets Group (2015),Responses to Survey of Primary Dealers(PDF)(New York: FRBNY, January).Return to text 14.Of course, low long-term yields in the United States may not reflect investor pessimism about U.S. economic prospects but instead an expectation that weak economic performance abroad may result in persistent upward pressure on the dollar, thereby putting downward pressure on U.S. net exports, employment, inflation, and thus short-term interest rates. On a closely related issue concerning evidence that investors' perceptions of the likelihood of high inflation versus low inflation have shifted noticeably in recent months, see Justin Wolfers (2015), "A Prediction Market for Inflation, or Deflation," The Upshot,New York Times, March 6. This piece relies heavily on work by Yuriy Kitsul and Jonathan H. Wright (2013), "The Economics of Options-Implied Inflation Probability Density Functions,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 110 (December), 696-711.Return to text 15.For a discussion of these effects, see Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2015), "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"IMF Economic Reviewadvance online publication, March 17, doi: 10.1057/imfer.2015.1.Return to text 16.Jeremy C. Stein (2013), "Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses," speech delivered at "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter," a research symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, February 7.Return to text 17.See Janet L. Yellen (2014), "Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress," testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, July 15.Return to text 18.See Janet L. Yellen, (2014) "Monetary Policy and Financial Stability," speech delivered at the 2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, International Monetary Fund, Washington, July 2.Return to text
No content found
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on the threshold in section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) for application of enhanced prudential standards to bank holding companies. In my testimony this morning I will try to provide, from a regulator's perspective, some context for the committee's consideration of this subject by explaining how the Federal Reserve has differentially implemented prudential regulations based on the size, scope, and range of activities of banking organizations, as well as how we have organized our supervisory portfolios. In both our supervisory and regulatory practices, we are pursuing a tiered approach to prudential oversight. Regulatory Differentiation in the Dodd-Frank ActTraditionally, statutes creating prudential regulatory requirements or authorities generally took what might be termed a unitary approach. That is, the statutes simply made a particular requirement or authority applicable to banks or banking organizations generally, with few clear distinctions based on the characteristics of the regulated entities. The federal banking agencies did adopt some regulations with requirements that applied only to larger institutions. And, as I will describe a bit later, through supervisory practice they administered some statutory requirements differently based on the size of banks and the scope of their activities. But the starting point was a more or less similar set of statutory requirements. The Dodd-Frank Act explicitly broke with this traditional approach by creating prudential requirements that vary with the size or systemic importance of banking organizations. Of particular importance is the Dodd-Frank Act emphasis on financial stability, both in markets generally and with respect to the largest financial firms, which had been associated with market perceptions that they were too big to fail. The law created some new authorities for financial regulators and instructed regulators to use authorities they already had to put in place regulations to contain systemic risk. As to regulations applicable to individual firms, the Dodd-Frank Act creates thresholds for various prudential regulations at asset sizes of $1 billion, $10 billion, and $50 billion. Of special note is that section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act requires the Federal Reserve to establish enhanced prudential standards for bank holding companies with total assets of $50 billion or more and other financial firms designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council. Among other areas, these standards include capital, liquidity, risk management, resolution planning, and single-counterparty credit limits. Of particular significance is the section 165 requirement that these enhanced standards increase in stringency depending on the size, interconnectedness, role in credit intermediation, and other factors specified in the law. In addition to these enhanced, graduated standards, section 165 requires that firms with greater than $50 billion in assets be subject to annual supervisory stress tests. The Federal Reserve has implemented the section 165 requirement of graduated stringency for enhanced prudential standards by creating what are, in effect, three categories within the universe of banking organizations with $50 billion or more in assets. As required by statute, all firms within this universe are subject to basic enhanced standards. Firms with assets of between $50 billion and $250 billion are subject only to these basic enhanced standards. Firms with at least $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign assets are also subject to more stringent requirements, including the advanced approaches risk-based capital requirements, the supplementary leverage ratio, the countercyclical capital buffer, and the full-scope liquidity coverage ratio. Finally, the eight U.S. bank holding companies that have been designated as global systemically important banking organizations will be subject to an additional set of regulatory requirements. An enhanced supplementary leverage ratio, equally applicable to all eight firms, has already been adopted. We are also working on two requirements that will vary in stringency even among these eight firms, based on their relative systemic importance. One is the set of risk-based capital surcharges for which we issued a notice of proposed rulemaking late last year. The other, on which we anticipate issuing a notice of proposed rulemaking in the coming months, is a long-term debt requirement designed to support effective orderly resolution processes. In sum, the stringency of the Federal Reserve's prudential regulations increases in proportion to the systemic importance of the banking organizations. With this tiered approach to regulation, the Federal Reserve aims not only to achieve the Dodd-Frank Act goal of mitigating risks to U.S. financial stability, but to do so in a manner that limits regulatory costs and the expenditure of supervisory resources where not needed to promote safety, soundness, and financial stability. Tiered Regulatory and Supervisory ExperienceThe Federal Reserve also takes a tiered approach to supervision. We organize the firms we supervise into portfolios based predominately, although not exclusively, on asset size. We have four such groups: (1) community banking organizations, which are generally those with $10 billion or less in total assets; (2) regional banking organizations, which have total assets between $10 billion and $50 billion; (3) large banking organizations, which have total assets over $50 billion but are not among the largest and most complex banking organizations; and (4) firms overseen by the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC), which are the largest and most complex banking organizations.1 As with tiered regulation, our tiered supervision is intended to take into account differences in business models, risks, relative regulatory burdens, and other salient considerations. Where specific regulatory goals for the different portfolios vary, the supervisory programs reflect those differences. And even where the goals are similar across portfolios, supervisory programs should nevertheless take account of the differences among the firms in the four portfolios. In general, we shape our supervisory expectations for each portfolio by considering the increase in safety and soundness that we are likely to achieve through a specific practice or requirement, in light of the regulatory costs for the banking organizations in the portfolio and the impact that the stress or failure of those institutions would likely have on credit intermediation, the deposit insurance fund, and financial stability. So, for example, there are heightened expectations with regard to corporate governance for large banking organizations that are not applied to regional or community banking organizations. Among other areas, the Federal Reserve expects the boards of directors of these larger firms to set direction and oversight for revenue and profit generation, risk management, and control functions; to ensure that senior management has the expertise and level of involvement required to manage core business lines, critical operations, banking offices, and other material entities; and to maintain a corporate culture that emphasizes the importance of compliance with laws, regulation, and consumer protection. While strong corporate governance is important at all banking organizations, it is vital at large banking organizations, given that their systems and operations are typically much broader and more complex than those of the smaller-scale and more localized regional and community banking organizations. While asset size is the principal determinant of the general supervisory program for a banking organization, other factors are taken into account as appropriate. For example, if a regional banking organization were to become involved in activities typically undertaken only by larger banking organizations, we might add to that firm's supervision an expectation or practice drawn from the large banking organization portfolio. Moreover, in determining which banking organizations belong in the LISCC portfolio, the Federal Reserve has focused on the risks to the financial system posed by individual firms--size has not been the dispositive factor. For example, three large banking organizations are not in that portfolio, even though they have larger balance sheets than the processing- and custody-focused bank holding companies that are in the LISCC portfolio. The stress or failure of these large, essentially regional banking organizations could have a serious effect on credit intermediation across a significant part of the country and, in some situations of generalized stress, might have consequences for the financial system as a whole. However, we judge that the functions of the two processing- and custody-focused LISCC firms implicate systemic concerns to a greater extent than the substantial balance sheets of the larger regionals. The Role of Statutory ThresholdsAs I hope by now is apparent, the Federal Reserve has done considerable work to tailor our supervision of banking organizations by reference to their size, business model, and systemic importance. Similarly, using the statutory discretion granted us, and frequently in cooperation with other regulatory agencies, we have also tailored the application of certain statutory requirements to different groups of banks. The question of statutory thresholds is thus a fairly narrow one: Does a threshold specify a cut-off point that is appropriate for mandatory application of a particular regulatory requirement, taking into account whatever discretion is given to the implementing regulatory agencies? In answering this question, it is first worth noting the case for establishing such statutory thresholds. In the past, Congress has at times not simply given the banking agencies authority to engage in a particular form of prudential regulation, but has required that they do so. Capital regulation and prompt correction action are two examples. Not coincidentally, I think, congressional action followed banking crises that revealed possible shortcomings in the regulatory and supervisory structures that had existed preceding the crisis. In requiring certain kinds of prudential regulation, Congress was in effect protecting against memories of those problems fading and the consequent possibility of supervisory relaxation, which might allow for a recurrence of similar banking problems in the future. The creation of mandatory thresholds for certain enhanced prudential standards is an important advance in the traditional congressional role of specifying a set of mandatory regulations. This statutory structure recognizes the substantially divergent risks presented to the economy and the financial system by the potential stress or failure of banking organizations of different sizes and with different activities, while preserving considerable discretion for the banking agencies in implementing those regulations. Here again, statutory enactment of mandatory measures for banking organizations of a certain size or systemic importance serves as a form of safeguard against the erosion of prudential oversight that could occur were predominant reliance to be placed on the details of firm-specific supervision, which are sometimes hard for the public to discern. Removal or change of such thresholds, as with generally applicable prudential requirements, will thus require congressional action and an occasion for considered public debate on the merits of such change. Experience to date, however, suggests that there are some statutory thresholds that might bear reexamination. One pertains to the applicability of some Dodd-Frank Act provisions to community banks. For example, the Volcker rule and the incentive compensation requirements of section 956 of the Dodd-Frank Act are directed at concerns generally present only with larger institutions, but the Volcker rule by its terms applies to all banking organizations, and the incentive compensation provisions apply by their terms to all banking organizations with $1 billion or more in assets. The banking agencies have done their best to tailor the application of these rules to smaller banks and, indeed, to make clear the limited extent to which they should affect those banks. However, some compliance effort on these rules is still needed at community banks. Raising the asset threshold for these two requirements to $10 billion would eliminate this compliance burden, the cost of which is probably not worth whatever incremental prudential benefits might be gained at these small banks. Even in the relatively unusual circumstance in which a practice at a smaller bank might raise safety and soundness concerns, the supervisory process would remain available to rectify any problems. The second threshold that is worth discussing is the $50 billion level established by section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act. As noted earlier, the import of this threshold is to require enhanced prudential standards and supervisory stress testing for banking organizations whose assets exceed that amount. As also noted, the Federal Reserve has tailored those standards in accordance with the increasing stringency requirement of section 165, so that they are more flexible for institutions closer to the $50 billion threshold and most demanding for the eight firms of global systemic importance. It has been somewhat more difficult to customize supervisory stress testing. While some elements of the test, such as the market shock and single-counterparty default scenarios, are applied only to larger firms, the basic requirements for the aggregation and reporting of data conforming to our supervisory model and for firms to run our scenarios through their own models do entail substantial expenditures of out-of-pocket and human resources. This can be a considerable challenge for a $60 billion or $70 billion bank. On the other side of the ledger, while we do derive some supervisory benefits from inclusion of these banks toward the lower end of the range in the supervisory stress tests, those benefits are relatively modest, and we believe we could probably realize them through other supervisory means. These are the factors that lay behind my suggestion last year that it might be worth thinking about the level of this threshold, which I understand to be a purpose of today's hearing. That said, I want to emphasize a few points. First, consideration of potential increases in the threshold for mandatory prudential measures should not remove the discretion of the banking agencies to require additional measures--including such things as more capital or liquidity--for specific firms or groups of firms in appropriate circumstances. That is, while it is sensible to limit mandatory measures for classes of firms where most banks in that class are unlikely to present a particular kind of risk, it would be very ill-advised to preclude supervisors from requiring such measures of firms where that risk may become more of a concern. Second, any consideration of raising the threshold to take account of the factors I mentioned earlier should not extend to removal of the application of enhanced standards and other rules to the largest banking organizations. As senators and regulators have discussed many times before in this committee, the tasks of combatting the reality and the perception of too big to fail, and of vulnerabilities in broader financial markets, are crucial and ongoing. ConclusionThe innovation in the Dodd-Frank Act that requires tiered regulation is central to our shared goals of protecting financial stability and ensuring the availability of credit. Smaller banks do not pose risks to financial stability, though they can suffer collateral damage when stress builds throughout the financial system. And, while enhanced prudential standards are important to ensure that larger banks can continue to provide credit even in periods of stress, some of those same enhancements could actually inhibit credit extension by rendering the reasonable business models of middle-sized and smaller banks unprofitable. The Federal Reserve will continue to use statutory authorities to calibrate our regulation and supervision to the risks posed by the different classes of banks, avoiding a one-size-fits-all approach. We and, I believe, many others are committed to the dual goals of protecting systemic stability and fostering the efficient intermediation of credit by the overwhelming majority of American banks that do not pose systemic or far-reaching risks. Thank you. I would be pleased to take any questions you may have. 1. For more information on the LISCC, seehttp://federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Debt and Financial Stability--Regulatory Challenges" conference, the Bundesbank and the German Ministry of Finance, Frankfurt, Germany It is a pleasure to be here. My subject is the important role the nonbank financial sector plays in the United States financial system. As you know, the euro area financial system differs from the U.S. system in terms of the relative size and the role played by banks as compared with nonbank financial institutions. According to a recent report by the International Monetary Fund, banks in the euro area accounted for roughly 75 percent of total lending by banks and nonbanks that are part of the shadow banking system, whereas in the United States, banks accounted for just under half this measure of total lending in 2013.1The relatively large role played by nonbank financial institutions in the United States brings with it both economic benefits and risks to financial stability--risks that could be seen clearly during the Global Financial Crisis. The nonbank sector in the United States was not always so large. The U.S. financial system has changed significantly in recent decades, with nonbanks as a whole gaining share and also becoming more interlinked with banks. This evolution has produced material benefits: increased market liquidity, greater diversity of funding sources, and--it is often claimed--a more efficient allocation of risk among investors. However, the evolution has also increased threats to the stability of the overall financial system, as demonstrated by the recent financial crisis. To promote financial stability, our tools for monitoring, regulation, and crisis management have had to evolve in recent years, and they will need to continue to evolve in the years to come. Today I will describe how nonbank intermediation in the United States has changed, what regulations are in place, and what reforms are under way to address the risks to financial stability associated with the growth of the nonbank sector. The lessons we have learned about the U.S. nonbank financial sector may be of interest to regulators in other countries who are promoting or reacting to the changing composition of financing--away from banks and toward nonbanks and market-based intermediation. The Role of Nonbank Financial Intermediation in the U.S. Financial SystemI apologize for starting by reminding us of material we all know. First, the provision of credit to nonfinancial businesses and households is critical to a well-functioning economy. Indeed, Ben Bernanke's research on the Great Depression came to the conclusion that it was the collapse of credit growth, rather than the slow growth of the money supply, that was primarily responsible for the financial crisis of the 1930s. Second, the basic business model of a bank is straightforward: Banks take deposits from their customers and invest the proceeds in the economy via loans to businesses, households, and governments. Therefore, a bank's balance sheet typically has shorter-term, highly liquid deposits on the liability side and longer-term, illiquid loans on the asset side. This maturity transformation makes banks vulnerable to runs. In recognition of this vulnerability, bank deposits became insured and the lender of last resort function was extended to dealing with bank runs. Third, nonbank financial institutions also act as intermediaries. Their importance as lenders has increased dramatically over the past 35 years. Data from the Financial Accounts of the United States indicate that in 1980, banks accounted for about 60 percent of total credit market assets held by the domestic financial sector, while nonbanks held about 40 percent.2,3Certain nonbank financial institutions have long been important credit providers; for example, in 1980, life insurance companies were vital to corporate bond and commercial real estate markets, accounting for about one-third of the debt outstanding in those two markets combined. While insurance companies remained important, other types of nonbank financial institutions, such as GSEs (government-sponsored enterprises, primarily Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) and mutual funds, rose in prominence over the next few decades, so that total credit market lending by nonbanks greatly outpaced lending by banks over the 1980s and into the 1990s. By the late 1990s, nonbanks held around two-thirds of total credit market assets held by banks and nonbanks. Their share has stayed relatively stable since then. The nonbank financial system includes a diverse group of entities such as insurance companies, finance companies, government-sponsored enterprises, hedge funds, security brokers and dealers, issuers of asset-backed securities, mutual funds, and money market funds. They provide credit through markets--for example, by purchasing commercial paper and bonds--or by extending loans directly to businesses and to households. These financial institutions evolved alongside banks, and their activities are in many respects intertwined with those of banks. Indeed, for every activity conducted by banks--with the exception of taking government-insured deposits--a nonbank financial institution likely conducts a similar activity. In many cases, nonbanks engage in maturity and liquidity transformation and are levered, so they have vulnerabilities similar to those of banks, but lack the benefit of access to a lender of last resort. While banks may be more central to the payment system, nonbanks are also involved. Moreover, banks and nonbanks are interconnected in many ways--for example, through derivatives, lines of credit, and other services provided by banks to nonbanks--and many markets depend on banks that act as dealers or that provide other services. In addition, many nonbanks are owned by bank holding companies, which may provide capital and liquidity guarantees to nonbank subsidiaries. Not surprisingly, the growth of the nonbank sector has tended to increase the complexity of the financial system. When banks provide loans directly to households and businesses, the chain of intermediation is relatively short and simple. With the growth of nonbank lending, intermediation chains have lengthened, often involving both banks and other nonbank financial institutions. For example, in the old days, a bank would originate a mortgage and hold it in its portfolio. Today, a bank might originate the same mortgage, but instead of holding that loan on its balance sheet, it could securitize it--in effect, sell it--and the resulting security might be purchased with the help of short-term funding provided by a money market mutual fund. And the process might not end there: Next that mortgage-backed security might be sold and repackaged into several new securities, and so on. In such examples, the number of institutions that might be involved in the provision of a single mortgage credit can easily go from one (the originating bank) to at least five or more. And such long chains can create additional points of vulnerability in the financial system. Nonbanks also increase the amount of maturity transformation conducted in the financial system without the stability-enhancing backstops offered to banks. Although some nonbanks are eligible to obtain advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank System, nonbanks are not backed by federal deposit insurance, nor do they have direct access to a lender of last resort to stem runs on their short-term liabilities. As a result, their funding can dry up rapidly should counterparties begin to believe the nonbank is in financial distress. The failure of nonbank financial institutions could directly reduce the availability of credit and could cause fire sales of assets leading to impaired market functioning. In addition, because many nonbanks are connected to banks, a shock to the nonbank sector could in turn threaten the stability of the overall banking system--as happened in the unfolding of the Global Financial Crisis. Nonbanks and the Start of the Global Financial CrisisBefore discussing the role of non-banks in the Global Financial Crisis, let me briefly mention a previous episode involving a non-bank--the failure of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM). The New York Fed, under the leadership of then President William McDonough, dealt successfully with the LTCM problem. However the episode was scary and a warning about problems that could arise in the nonbank financial system and spread wider. Now to the Global Financial Crisis: Although there were many dimensions to the financial crisis, the poor performance of subprime mortgages was one of the triggers. The fact that losses in what was a relatively small part of the mortgage market quickly spread through the rest of the financial system illustrates how the complex interconnections among banks and nonbanks can amplify shocks in significant and unanticipated ways. Some of the first cracks in the nonbank sector appeared in April 2007, when New Century Financial Corporation, at one point the second-biggest subprime mortgage lender, filed for bankruptcy after its creditors pulled back on fears about its losses.4A few months later, with subprime assets falling in value, money market investors refused to roll over the asset-backed commercial paper that had been funding many of these subprime assets. With this market shrinking dramatically, the banking sector was left on the hook to support entities that banks had sponsored or to which they had provided some form of credit or liquidity support. Around that same time, Bear Stearns, then one of the five largest investment banks, liquidated two of its hedge funds that invested in mortgage-based securities, including collateralized debt obligations, another link in the chain of transactions. In March 2008, some creditors stopped funding Bear Stearns, and forced asset sales put additional downward pressure on asset prices. By the dramatic month of September 2008, the chain of interconnections had helped spread the financial pain, and a broader range of firms were caught in the financial maelstrom. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac entered conservatorship. Lehman Brothers failed when its creditors ran from it as they had from Bear Stearns. American International Group, or AIG, had to be bailed out primarily because of its inability to post enough collateral to cover liabilities on credit protection it had sold on many entities (including Lehman) and because it lost funding in the securities lending market. The Reserve Primary fund, a money market mutual fund, "broke the buck" as a result of its holdings of Lehman securities. Banks were not immune to the financial market stress of this period, but they were far less involved in the unfolding of the crisis than were nonbanks--a phenomenon that highlighted the importance of the nonbank sector and the vulnerability of the financial system to its distress. When nonbanks pulled back, other parts of the system suffered. When nonbanks failed, other parts of the system failed. Regulatory Reforms Implemented in the Wake of the Financial CrisisA crisis as deep as the Global Financial Crisis was bound to produce widespread regulatory changes. It was clearly necessary to strengthen the banking system and to better analyze and understand the importance of the links between the banking sector and the nonbank financial sector. With respect to the nonbank financial sector, there was a clear need for greater transparency, less leverage, and more stable forms of liquidity transformation. One important change to the banking sector was the adoption of a macroprudential perspective to supervision and regulation.5Central bankers and bank supervisors in the United States now regulate and supervise large complex banks not only as standalone entities, but also with consideration of how their actions could affect other firms and activities in a highly connected financial system. Within the Federal Reserve, a tangible manifestation of this macroprudential approach is the LISCC--the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee--that was created specifically to coordinate the supervision of the largest banks and other systemically important institutions.6 Other changes to the banking system in the United States include tighter than Basel III capital and liquidity requirements, heightened prudential standards for the largest banking firms, and stress tests. Accounting standards and prudential regulations have also been changed to require banks to recognize their links to nonbank entities, such as direct connections or provision of back-up support. Heightened prudential standards require the largest and most interconnected banks to meet capital surcharges and stricter risk-management standards than other banks. Stress tests evaluate banks' ability to remain solvent and liquid when under severe macroeconomic stresses and have incentivized better risk-management and information systems within banks. A variety of reforms have helped address risks in the nonbank sector as well. I will touch briefly on three of those reforms. First, the United States has an unusually large number of independent financial sector regulatory bodies. There is accordingly an especially great need for efficient cooperation and coordination among the various regulators that collectively oversee the financial system. In response to this need, the Dodd Frank Act created the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) to help identify emerging risks and vulnerabilities to financial stability. The council's annual report on financial stability highlights risks and vulnerabilities for the entire financial system and reflects the council's own diverse nature: Only 3 of the 10 voting members of the council are banking sector supervisors, with the remainder supervising or having regulatory authority related to credit unions, broker-dealers, asset managers, and derivative market participants. Among its decisions, the FSOC has designated four U.S. nonbank financial institutions as systemically important financial institutions, which makes them subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve Board.7In addition, the Dodd Frank Act mandated the establishment of the Office of Financial Research in order to help promote financial stability through the measurement and analysis of risks, the conduct of essential research, and the collection and standardization of financial data. A second nonbank reform has been the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC) adoption of new rules for money market mutual funds. Specifically, the SEC will require prime money market funds sold to institutional investors to publish a floating net asset value and to restrict withdrawals through a system of gates and fees. These rules, while as yet untested, are designed to reduce the likelihood of runs on prime money market funds. The third nonbank reform I want to highlight relates to securitization, which I mentioned earlier as one way in which parts of the financial system can become interconnected. An important rule, finalized late last year, will require the securitizers of some assets to retain at least 5 percent of the credit risk of the assets that collateralize the securities.8With "skin in the game," the incentive to cut corners in extending loans is reduced, and the entire chain created when assets are securitized should be stronger. Transparency has also been enhanced with stronger disclosure requirements for securitizations. At this stage of the recovery, there are signs of reduced nonbank financial sector vulnerabilities. Leverage is quite low in parts of the sector and appears moderate overall. Leverage at hedge funds, while difficult to measure, is an exception and appears in aggregate to have trended upward in recent years. Market-level information on short-term wholesale funding--such as commercial paper and repurchase agreements--indicate subdued activity after its level fell dramatically during the crisis. While issuance of securitizations has been picking up, its levels remains moderate. The available data paint a picture of a nonbank sector that has generally reduced its vulnerability to the types of shocks that we saw during the crisis. However, the nonbank sector is evolving in response to new regulations, changes in investor preferences, and a multitude of other factors that are always influencing the financial system. For example, open-end mutual funds now hold a greater share of debt, and more derivatives are being cleared through central counterparties. These developments may ultimately prove to be stability enhancing, but as the system evolves, we must remain attentive to the possibility of changes that may be destabilizing. More Needs to Be DoneTo say that the nonbank sector today appears less vulnerable than it did during the Global Financial Crisis, is not to say that authorities in the United States have tamed the nonbank sector. Indeed, while progress has been substantial, areas for continued work remain, and I will briefly highlight three of them. Let me start with short-term wholesale funding markets. While there have been some improvements in the plumbing of money markets, many nonbank financial firms, including hedge funds and broker-dealers, continue to rely on secured short-term funding to finance their activities, many of which involve longer-term and illiquid assets. This maturity transformation remains a key vulnerability. Further, many of the firms that rely on this maturity transformation are highly levered and thus more vulnerable to threats to their solvency. The proposed international framework being developed by the Financial Stability Board for margins on securities financing transactions may be an important tool for limiting the pro-cyclicality and sharp deleveraging that can occur in these markets. Second, and more generally, we need to be alert to changes and trends in the financial system that may pose risks to financial stability, particularly those stemming from areas of the nonbank sector that are not subject to prudential supervision. For example, the asset management industry has both grown and evolved in recent years. Mutual funds and exchange-traded funds that track the returns of indexes of relatively illiquid assets have mushroomed in size. Examples include funds tracking the return on leveraged loans, credit default swaps, and other less liquid assets. These funds offer daily or even intraday liquidity to investors while holding assets that are hard to sell immediately, thus making the funds vulnerable to liquidity risk. Recently, the FSOC issued a notice seeking comment on the products and activities of the asset management industry. Third, there are also areas of the nonbank financial system into which we have only a limited view. While the data we have on hedge funds has improved, we still need to get a complete picture of the scope and size of hedge fund activities. Data coverage of the vast derivatives market could also be improved. The paucity of information in some areas limits the ability of supervisors and regulators to work effectively toward the stability of financial institutions and the financial system. For example, outside of the banking system, we have only limited information on leverage and maturity transformation rather than precise estimates for all types of nonbank entities. ConclusionTo conclude, the U.S. financial system has changed a great deal over the past several decades. One of the most important changes has been the rapid growth of the nonbank sector. Many reforms have been adopted for both banks and nonbank financial institutions. But regulation is a cat and mouse game. Regulators need to respond to existing regulatory gaps and to keep pace with further changes. We hope we will succeed in doing so. But we know that we will never be able to identify in advance all the threats to stability that are out there, and that it is therefore all the more critical to maintain and strengthen the robustness of our financial institutions, and of the financial system as a whole. 1.Note that not all nonbank financial institutions are included in the International Monetary Fund definition of shadow banks. In particular, insurance companies and pension funds are excluded. See International Monetary Fund (2014),Global Financial Stability Report: Risk Taking, Liquidity, and Shadow Banking--Curbing Excess while Promoting Growth (PDF)(Washington: IMF, October) p. 67.Return to text 2.Credit market assets include commercial paper, Treasury securities, agency and GSE-backed securities, municipal securities, corporate and foreign bonds, consumer credit, mortgages, and other types of loans (issued by depository institutions) as well as other loans and advances. Banks and nonbanks held $37.9 trillion of credit market assets in 2014, with nonbanks holding $25.1 trillion and banks holding $12.8 trillion. For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), Statistical Release Z.1, "Financial Accounts of the United States" (March 12).Return to text 3.The domestic financial sector is defined here as domestic banks and nonbank financial institutions, excluding the monetary authority. Banks include U.S.-chartered depository institutions, foreign banking offices in the United States, banks in U.S.-affiliated areas, credit unions, and holding companies. Nonbanks include property and casualty insurance companies, life insurance companies, private pension funds, federal government retirement funds, state and local government retirement funds, money market mutual funds, mutual funds, closed-end funds, exchange-traded funds, government sponsored enterprises (GSE), agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pools, issuers of asset-backed securities, finance companies, real estate investment trusts, security brokers and dealers, and funding corporations.Return to text 4.New Century Financial Corporation was not the first failure linked to the subprime crisis, but it is one of the first large failures. For example, Ownit Mortgage Solutions, a California-based home lender partly owned by Merrill Lynch & Co., failed in December 2006.Return to text 5.There appear to be two meanings of the word "macroprudential." At first, it referred to a focus on systemic interactions within the financial system. It is in that sense that we are talking at this point. The second meaning is almost the opposite: It relates to regulatory but not monetary policy measures focused on some aspect of the financial system whose behavior is giving cause for concern.Return to text 6.The large firms whose supervision is coordinated by the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) are American International Group, Inc.; Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; Barclays PLC; Citigroup Inc.; Credit Suisse Group AG; Deutsche Bank AG; General Electric Capital Corporation; The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JP Morgan Chase & Co.; MetLife, Inc.; Morgan Stanley; Prudential Financial, Inc.; State Street Corporation; UBS AG; and Wells Fargo & Company. For more information, see theLISCC webpageon the Board's website.Return to text 7.The four nonbank institutions that have been designated by the FSOC are MetLife, Inc.; American International Group, Inc.; General Electric Capital Corporation, Inc.; and Prudential Financial, Inc. For more information and to access the FSOC annual report, see theFSOC's webpageon the U.S. Treasury's website.Return to text 8.In October 2014, six federal agencies--the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission--approved a final rule requiring sponsors of securitization transactions to retain risk in those transactions. The final rule generally requires sponsors of asset-backed securities (ABS) to retain not less than five percent of the credit risk of the assets collateralizing the ABS issuance. As required by the Dodd-Frank Act, the final rule defines a "qualified residential mortgage" (QRM) and exempts securitizations of QRMs from the risk retention requirement. The final rule aligns the QRM definition with that of a qualified mortgage as defined by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The final rule also does not require any retention for securitizations of commercial loans, commercial mortgages, or automobile loans that meet specific standards for high quality underwriting. For more information, see thepress releaseon the Board's website.Return to text