Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal banking agencies will hold an outreach meeting on Monday, May 4, 2015, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston as part of their regulatory review under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA). The meeting is the third in a series of outreach sessions that the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation are holding throughout the country. The agencies also said they have decided to expand the scope of the EGRPRA review to cover more recent regulations. At the Boston outreach meeting and in other venues, the agencies will take comment on all regulations that have been issued in final form up to the publication date of the last EGRPRA notice, which is expected by year end. The meeting at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, located at 600 Atlantic Avenue, will begin at 9:00 A.M. The agenda features panel presentations by industry participants and consumer and community groups. It also provides an opportunity for interested persons to present their views on any of the 12 categories of regulations listed in a June 2014Federal Registernotice that started the EGRPRA public comment process. Federal Reserve Board Governor Daniel K. Tarullo, Comptroller of the Currency Thomas J. Curry, and FDIC Chairman Martin J. Gruenberg are scheduled to attend. Massachusetts Commissioner of Banks David J. Cotney also will attend. Other state banking regulators are invited to participate through the State Liaison Committee of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). EGRPRA requires the agencies, along with the FFIEC, to conduct a review at least every 10 years to identify outdated or otherwise unnecessary regulations. In a June 2014Federal Registernotice, the agencies solicited comments on three categories of regulations. In February 2015, they requested comment on an additional three categories. The agencies will request comment on the remaining six categories later this year. The June 2014 and February 2015Federal Registernotices are available athttp://egrpra.ffiec.gov. The agencies held their first outreach meeting on December 2, 2014, in Los Angeles, California and their second outreach meeting in Dallas, Texas on February 4, 2015. Additional meetings are currently scheduled on August 4, 2015 in Kansas City, Missouri (focusing on rural banking issues); on October 19, 2015 in Chicago, Illinois; and on December 2, 2015 in Washington, D.C. As with the other outreach sessions, the Boston outreach meeting may be viewed live online. Details on the Boston meeting, including registration information, the webcast link, and the agenda, are available on the EGRPRA Web site:http://egrpra.ffiec.gov/outreach/outreach-index.html.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemConsumer Financial Protection BureauFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Housing Finance AgencyNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Six federal financial regulatory agencies today issued a final rule that implements minimum requirements for state registration and supervision of appraisal management companies (AMCs). An AMC is an entity that provides appraisal management services to lenders or underwriters or other principals in the secondary mortgage markets. These appraisal management services include contracting with licensed and certified appraisers to perform appraisal assignments. The final rule implements amendments to Title XI of the Financial Institution Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 made by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010. Under the rule, states may elect to register and supervise AMCs. The AMC minimum requirements in the final rule apply to states that elect to register and supervise AMCs, as AMCs are defined in the rule. The final rule does not compel a state to establish an AMC registration and supervision program, and no penalty is imposed on a state that does not establish a regulatory structure for AMCs. However, in states that have not established a regulatory structure after 36 months from the effective date of this final rule, any non-federally regulated AMC is barred by section 1124 of Title XI from providing appraisal management services for federally related transactions. A state may adopt a regulatory structure for AMCs after this 36-month period, which would lift this restriction. Under the final rule, participating states must apply certain minimum requirements in the registration and supervision of appraisal management companies. An AMC that is a subsidiary of an insured depository institution and is regulated by a federal financial institution regulatory agency (a federally regulated AMC) must meet the same minimum requirements as state-regulated AMCs except for the requirement to register with a state. This final rule will become effective 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. The compliance date for federally regulated AMCs is no later than 12 months from the effective date of this rule. A participating state will specify the compliance deadline for state-regulated AMCs. The final rule is being issued jointly by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and the National Credit Union Administration. The draftFederal Registernotice is attached. Publication of the final rule in theFederal Registeris expected shortly. Federal RegisterNotice:PDF|HTML Board Votes
Governor Lael Brainard At the "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy" Ninth Biennial Federal Reserve System Community Development Research Conference, Washington, D.C. I am pleased to join you for the ninth biennial Federal Reserve System Community Development Research Conference. This conference has established itself as an important venue for sharing research and exchanging ideas on how best to support the advancement of low- and moderate-income communities. The many economic decisions an individual makes early in his or her working life--their first job, how much and what kind of an educational investment to make, how to finance that investment, whether to strike out on their own, and whether to rent or buy a home--can have a lasting effect on their subsequent financial security and the economic foundation they provide for their children. There are times, however, when larger forces materially interrupt or impede the individual efforts of young people to build a better economic life. The Great Depression left an indelible imprint on the generation that came of age in that era, influencing their subsequent job trajectories and attitudes toward risk and investment. The question we face today is whether the Great Recession may similarly leave a lasting mark on the many Americans who came of age in its shadow. It is important to understand the headwinds encountered by the Great Recession generation as they navigated a daunting job market, and the lessons they have taken from the crisis, particularly with respect to investments in education and housing. And it is important to identify what actions can be taken to improve economic outcomes for the Great Recession generation, as their experiences will powerfully influence not just growth today, but also the contours of opportunity faced by their children. Employment and Participation in the Labor ForceLet's start by considering what it was like to graduate from high school or college in June 2009. The overall unemployment rate stood at 9.5 percent, and employers slashed 500,000 jobs that month, the 18th month in a row of job cuts. For young people, job prospects were even bleaker. Nearly one-fourth of teenagers in the labor force were unemployed, and the unemployment rate for people between the ages of 20 and 24 stood at 15.2 percent. Young African Americans and Hispanics experienced higher rates of unemployment than their white peers. Even these painfully high unemployment rates--the highest since the early 1980s--understate the damage caused by the Great Recession to young people's work lives. The lack of job opportunities appears to have caused many young people to become so discouraged that they dropped out of the labor force altogether, exacerbating a downtrend and driving labor force participation among young people to historical lows. Even for those who remained in the labor force and have been fortunate to find work, compensation prospects have been poor. For example, inflation-adjusted full-time weekly earnings among 19- to 24-year-olds with only a high school diploma fell about 5 percent between 2008 and 2012.1 Of those who have found work, not only are many young people receiving low wages, but also many are working at jobs for which they are overqualified. A recent study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston found that employers responded to the slack labor market by increasing the educational requirements or the number of years of experience required for new hires, which likely froze out many from the labor pool and resulted in the underemployment of others.2In 2012, roughly 45 percent of college graduates between the ages of 22 and 27 were underemployed, up by one-third relative to 2001 and the highest underemployment rate since the early 1990s.3Moreover, a recent study by economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York found that the Great Recession is prolonging the time it takes for a college graduate to settle into a career.4 Recently, the labor market prospects for young people have started to improve, with the unemployment rate for 20- to 24-year-olds falling about one-third relative to its peak and inflation-adjusted earnings starting to rise. Nevertheless, even with this recent improvement, there is a risk that the high rates of unemployment, low labor force attachment, and stagnant wages experienced by those who have come of age in the years surrounding the Great Recession may have long-lasting consequences. A number of studies have found that graduating from college during a recession can have a lasting effect. If past studies hold true today, the employment rate of those graduating from college during the Great Recession may recover relatively soon, but their earnings may be reduced for up to a decade or longer as this cohort initially secures lower-quality jobs and then only gradually works its way back up to the normal earnings trajectory.5To the extent that these lost earnings translate into reductions in lifetime resources, they could affect life-cycle spending and investment decisions, topics that I will turn to next. Education and Student DebtEnrollment in colleges and graduate schools increased sharply during the Great Recession. With skyrocketing youth unemployment and compensation under pressure, the recession sharply reduced the opportunity costs of additional years of schooling.6For many, these additional educational investments are likely to be beneficial. Investing in additional education is a classic way of mitigating the negative effects of graduating in a recession, and empirical research suggests that the lifetime returns to completing a college degree are substantial on average.7 As with any investment, however, the returns on educational investments are not uniform, and some investments do not pay off. The risk of a low return is accentuated when the investment is financed through debt and based on the assumption that the educational investment will translate into higher wages that make the debt payments affordable. Indeed, student indebtedness rose sharply in the years surrounding the Great Recession.8The capacity of many families to pay for tuition was substantially reduced by the declines in income and wealth associated with the housing crisis and the deep recession. At the same time, public colleges and universities--long the most affordable option for students--saw some of the steepest rises in tuition as a result of state and local budget pressures due to the recession (and possibly reductions in quality in many cases).9Thirty-seven states have cut per-student funding for higher education more than 20 percent since the 2007-08 academic year, when the recession began. Since the outset of the recession, the annual published tuition at four-year public colleges increased 24 percent, after adjusting for inflation, during a period when real median incomes declined 8 percent.10 This confluence of higher enrollments, higher tuitions, reduced family resources, and uneven job prospects has caused outstanding student loan balances to more than double since the start of the Great Recession.11Moreover, this sharp rise in debt burdens is unevenly distributed across the population, with students from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds disproportionately likely to use debt to finance education. In 2012, 79 percent of bachelor's degree recipients whose parents made under $30,000 incurred educational debt, compared with 55 percent of those whose parents had income over $106,000.12Even adjusting for family income, it appears that, on average, minorities make greater use of student loan debt than their white counterparts.13 In most cases, the investments in education undertaken during the Great Recession will turn out to be positive over the longer term, even for individuals with loans to pay off. However, there are several factors that might substantially reduce the expected return of some of these educational investments. The first important determinant of whether an investment in education pays off is whether it leads to the successful completion of a degree. Recent data suggest that fewer than 60 percent of students who have started a bachelor's degree program graduate with their degree, and only 30 percent of those who have started an associate's degree or certificate program will finish their degree.14The Federal Reserve's 2013 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) indicated that students who had not completed a degree consider the cost of the education not to have been worth the investment by significantly larger margins than those who had.15 A second important determinant is the type of educational program, as there is wide variation in rates of return across different programs. For example, recent research has shown that for-profit colleges,on average,tend to provide a lower rate of return for educational investment than public or not-for-profit colleges and universities. Young adults who attended for-profit colleges are also more likely to default on their student loans, even after completing four or more years of education.16Unfortunately, the students who are the first in their family to attend college are more likely than others to attend for-profit colleges.17 Despite the apparent lower likely average return to education at for-profit schools, attendance at these schools has increased faster since the financial crisis than at other institutions. Attendance at for-profit schools increased over 50 percent between 2007 and 2012--far outpacing the 10 percent growth in enrollments seen over this period at not-for-profit and public institutions. This rapid growth, and the fact that for-profit colleges disproportionately attract first-generation college students as well as students relying on debt to fund their education, bears careful scrutiny.18 Overall, the added educational investments made by the Great Recession generation could be a positive legacy of the crisis over the long term. But for some, the returns may not turn out to be worth the cost. For this group, the burden associated with student debt may constrain their economic opportunities for years to come. Borrowers who struggle to repay student loans face special challenges because student loans cannot be discharged in bankruptcy, unlike other forms of household credit.19Fortunately, largely because of significant policy changes, beginning in the 2008-09 school year, the vast majority of student loans have been originated directly by the federal government and have flexible repayment and deferment options.20Nonetheless, high levels of student indebtedness appear to be one factor influencing the Great Recession generation's slow progression into homeownership. Household Formation and HomeownershipSharply lower household formation and homeownership rates are among the most striking legacies of the Great Recession, distinct from earlier recessions. The number of households formed each year dropped by more than half, from about 1.35 million in the early and middle 2000s to about 600,000 households per year after 2007. Moreover, the fraction of young adults who own homes also fell substantially: After peaking at 22 percent in 2005, the overall rate of homeownership among young people fell to 16 percent in 2014.21 The combination of high educational debt levels and poor job market prospects faced by young adults entering the workforce in the aftermath of the financial crisis are the most likely causes of these sharp declines.22Indeed, the share of adults under 30living with parents or other family members rose significantly in the wake of the financial crisis and has remained at a high level.23The SHED found that, among individuals who live with their extended family or with roommates, over half are doing so to save money, and nearly three-fourths would move out on their own if they could afford to do so. Federal Reserve research also indicates that debt is an important determinant of whether a young person lives with their parents, even after controlling for labor and housing market conditions.24That analysis also indicates that credit delinquency and lower credit scores increase the propensity for adult children to move home as well as the length of time that young people live with their parents. However, it is possible that, even after improving economic prospects help young people overcome these impediments and boost household formation rates, homeownership rates among the Great Recession generation could lag. Young people's attitudes toward homebuying may have changed as a result of witnessing their parents' experiences during the housing crisis. Instead of seeing homeownership as a reliably safe investment, many of today's young adults may now see some risk that houses could become financial albatrosses due to events beyond their control. If this is the case, the Great Recession cohort may be slower to buy a home than previous cohorts, even after meeting their pre-recession career and earnings expectations. Indeed, research suggests that dramatic economic events, such as the Great Depression, can have a significant effect on individuals' risk-taking over their lifetime.25 Moreover, there is some evidence that today's young people have a skeptical view of the wisdom of buying a home as a result of the housing crisis. The percentage of renters in the 18-to-34 age group who thought housing was a safe investment dropped significantly from 2003 to the first quarter of this year, from 85 percent to 59 percent, respectively.26Of course, it is premature to conclude that the financial crisis has permanently altered young people's attitudes toward housing investments, and several surveys indicate that young people continue to express a desire to become homeowners someday. Nonetheless, if the decline in homeownership among young people proves persistent, the implications for asset building for the future could be of concern, since homeownership remains an important avenue for accumulating wealth, particularly for those with limited means. Even after taking into account the risks associated with homeownership that were brought into sharp focus by the financial crisis, there is still a strong case that homeownership positively contributes to household balance sheets.27The benefit is largely due to the forced savings associated with homeownership--not just for the down payment, but also for the regular monthly paydown of principal. While renters could, in theory, save and invest money on a monthly basis to achieve a similar result, the evidence suggests most do not. Moreover, study after study has shown that homeownership positively contributes to the wealth accumulation of lower-income and minority households, albeit in smaller amounts than for higher-income and white households.28This finding is particularly important because housing also accounts for the majority of the assets held by these households. Lower-income and minority renters, on the other hand, have been found to accrue little or no wealth over time.29 The Great Recession Generation and Economic MobilityToday's young people are the fulcrum of the economic mobility agenda. Those who have come of age in the shadow of the Great Recession have experienced substantial risks and faced daunting challenges in establishing themselves independently in their work lives and their home lives. By studying these effects and the actions that can support the resilience of the Great Recession generation, we will strengthen not only today's recovery, but also the opportunities facing tomorrow's children. So it is particularly heartening that, despite the challenges of coming of age in the Great Recession, today's young adults--including minorities--remain optimistic about their future.30The challenge for practitioners and the research community is to deliver on this youthful optimism through policies and opportunities that promote strong and equitable economic growth. The Federal Open Market Committee has been playing an important role by pursuing policies aimed at achieving maximum employment in the context of price stability. Monetary policy has remained accommodative over an extended period, which has supported labor market recovery--with significant improvement in overall unemployment, increases in job openings, and recent declines in underemployment--while inflation has remained below its target. In addition, the Federal Reserve System, through its research and analysis of economic data, provides important insights on the dynamics of the labor market, investments in education, and the housing sector. The community development staff at the Board and the 12 Federal Reserve Banks--the organizers of this conference--complement traditional research with applied field research and outreach. Before wrapping up, I want to touch briefly on a handful of the System's many community development initiatives that focus on the post-crisis needs of young people. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland recently published an analysis of employment and education patterns for non-college-bound workers in the Fourth District's metropolitan area as part of ongoing efforts to improve high school graduation rates and facilitate workforce development in line with local labor market demand.31Cleveland's analysis emphasizes the importance of investing in primary and secondary education, as well as technical education beyond high school, to ensure high school graduates possess the strong analytical and soft skills and the guidance they need to access technical and service jobs that can provide an on-ramp to the middle class. The Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and San Francisco are developing an online course, Life after High School, to help students navigate their first major financial decision--choosing the path to pursue after high school. The course encourages students to explore a number of educational paths and job options and provides them with information on how investing in education can contribute to their future well-being. The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, for its part, has focused attention on strengthening the financial capability of community college students. It has recently publishedPromoting Pathways to Financial Stability, a handbook designed for community college personnel and others interested in helping students learn to manage their financial lives.32 As the economic recovery continues to strengthen, it is important that we monitor the progress of young workers and their experience in the job market, their educational outcomes, their management of student debt, and their progress toward forming independent households and owning homes. Understanding the interaction of various economic pressures on young workers is the first step. The ultimate goal is to develop evidence-based policies and opportunities to support the generation that has come of age in the shadow of the Great Recession as they gain a foothold on the ladder to a better economic future. I am grateful to Stephanie Aaronson, Andrew Figura, Jeff Larrimore, Andrew Paciorek, Christopher Smith, Theresa Stark, and PJ Tabit for their assistance in preparing this text. 1.The data, which consist of median usual weekly earnings for employed full-time wage and salary workers who are 16 to 24 years old, are from the Current Population Survey (a joint effort between the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics) and are adjusted by the Federal Reserve Board's staff to constant 2009 dollars using the personal consumption expenditures index.Return to text 2.See Alicia Sasser Modestino, Daniel Shoag, and Joshua Ballance (2015), "Upskilling: Do Employers Demand Greater Skill When Skilled Workers Are Plentiful?" Working Paper Series 14-17 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, January).Return to text 3.See Jaison R. Abel, Richard Deitz, and Yaqin Su (2014), "Are Recent College Graduates Finding Good Jobs?"Current Issues in Economics and Finance,Federal Reserve Bank of New York, vol. 20 (1).Return to text 4.See Abel, Deitz, and Su, "Are Recent College Graduates Finding Good Jobs?" in note 3.Return to text 5.See Lisa B. Kahn (2010), "The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in a Bad Economy,"Labour Economics, vol. 17 (April), pp. 303-16; Philip Oreopoulos, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz (2012), "The Short- and Long-Term Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession,"American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol. 4 (January), pp. 1-29.Return to text 6.Those graduating into a recession are slightly more likely to obtain an advanced degree. See Joseph G. Altonji, Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer (2014), "Cashier or Consultant? Entry Labor Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success," NBER Working Paper Series 20531 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September).Return to text 7.See Jaison R. Abel and Richard Deitz (2014), "The Value of a College Degree,"Liberty Street Economics, blog of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September 2.Return to text 8.For more information on changes to household balance sheets during the Great Recession, see Jesse Bricker, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Kevin B. Moore, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A. Windle (2014), "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2010 to 2013: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 100 (September).Return to text 9.See Michael Mitchell, Vincent Palacios, and Michael Leachman (2014),States Are Still Funding Higher Education below Pre-Recession Levels(Washington: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities).Return to text 10.The change in public tuition is for tuition and fees, excluding room and board, and is from the National Center for Education Statistics website athttp://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_330.10.asp?current=yes. Published tuition rates do not reflect what students actually pay after financial aid and other assistance. The trend in real median income comes from Carmen DeNavas-Walt and Bernadette D. Proctor (2014),Income and Poverty in the United States: 2013 (PDF)(Washington: United States Census Bureau).Return to text 11.The total amount of outstanding student debt, $1.2 trillion in 2014, is a reflection of both the high cost and the substantial rise in the number of students borrowing to go to school--some 41.5 million, compared with 22 million in 2004.Return to text 12.See Sandy Baum, Diane Cardenas Elliott, and Jennifer Ma (2014),Trends in Student Aid 2014(New York: College Board).Return to text 13.For example, among families earning between $60,000 and $99,999, 76 percent of African American bachelor's degree recipients graduate with student loan debt, compared with 66 percent of Hispanic graduates and 64 percent of white graduates. See Sandy Baum and Patricia Steele (2010), "Who Borrows Most? Bachelor's Degree Recipients with High Levels of Student Debt (PDF)," Trends in Higher Education Series (New York: College Board).Return to text 14.Bachelor's degree graduation rates are within six-year graduation rates for the 2007 entering cohort. Associate's degree and certificate completion rates are for within 150 percent of normal completion time for the 2007 entering cohort. See table 326.10 and table 326.20 in the "Digest of Education Statistics" section of the National Center for Education Statistics website athttps://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2014menu_tables.asp.Return to text 15.See table 11 in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014),Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2013(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, July).Return to text 16.See Stephanie Riegg Cellini and Latika Chaudhary (2012), "The Labor Market Returns to a For-Profit College Education," NBER Working Paper Series 18343 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August); David J. Deming, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz (2012), "The For-Profit Postsecondary School Sector: Nimble Critters or Agile Predators?"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 26 (Winter), pp. 139-64; and Kevin Lang and Russell Weinstein (2012), "Evaluating Student Outcomes at For-Profit Colleges," NBER Working Paper Series 18201 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June).Return to text 17.See Riegg Cellini and Chaudhary, "The Labor Market Returns"; Deming, Goldin, and Katz, "The For-Profit Postsecondary School Sector"; and Lang and Weinstein, "Evaluating Student Outcomes," all in note16.Return to text 18.See Lang and Weinstein, "Evaluating Student Outcomes," in note 16.Return to text 19.11 U.S. Code § 523(a)(8) prevents education debt from being discharged in bankruptcy unless the debtor proves that paying the debt would "impose an undue hardship on the debtor and the debtor's dependents." For the complete 11 U.S. Code § 523(a)(8), see the U.S. Government Publishing Office website atwww.gpo.gov/fdsys/granule/USCODE-2011-title11/USCODE-2011-title11-chap5-subchapII-sec523.Return to text 20.The Great Recession also affected the way students borrowed to pay for college as private lenders tightened underwriting standards. Private lenders originated more than $20 billion in student loans during the 2007-08 academic year. However, that figure fell to about $9.4 billion in the following year and reached just $5.6 billion in the 2010-11 academic year. During that same period, total federal loans originated increased from $49 billion to $76 billion. Federal student loan programs also changed significantly during this time. In 2010, the Congress eliminated the Federal Family Education Loan Program, which provided a federal guarantee for student loans originated by private lenders, leading to a sharp increase in the number of students borrowing directly from the U.S. Department of Education through the Federal Direct Loan Program. In 2012, the Obama Administration created the Pay As You Earn program, which caps loan payments at 10 percent of discretionary income for eligible borrowers. The following year, the Congress changed the method for determining Direct Loan interest rates--switching from a rate set by statute to a rate pegged to the 10-year Treasury note plus a markup.Return to text 21.For those young adults who have formed a household, the rate of homeownership increased by about 6 percentage points from 1995 to 2005, peaking at 37 percent in 2005, and has subsequently fallen sharply to below 30 percent today. The data consist of Board staff calculations using the Census Bureau's household vacancy survey.Return to text 22.See William R. Emmons and Bryan J. Noeth (2014), "Despite Aggressive Deleveraging, Generation X Remains ‘Generation Debt',"In the Balance: Perspectives on Household Balance Sheets,Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Issue 9 (August); J. Michael Collins, John Karl Scholz, and Ananth Seshadri (2013), "The Assets and Liabilities of Cohorts: The Antecedents of Retirement Security," University of Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper Series 2013-296 (Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan, October).Return to text 23.In 1980, 36 percent of adults who were age 30 and younger lived with older family members. That fraction gradually trended up through the early 2000s, then increased sharply to more than 45 percent by 2012 and has not appreciably declined since then. The data consist of Board staff calculations using the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the Current Population Survey.Return to text 24.See Lisa J. Dettling and Joanne W. Hsu (2014), "Returning to the Nest: Debt and Parental Co-Residence among Young Adults (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-80 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text 25.See Ulrike Malmendier and Stefan Nagel (2009), "Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect Risk-Taking?" NBER Working Paper Series 14813 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).Return to text 26.The data are from results of the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey, which were provided directly to the Federal Reserve. The relevant survey question asked respondents, "Do you think homeownership is a safe investment (with a lot of potential or very little potential) or a risky investment (with very little potential or a lot of potential)?"Return to text 27.See Christopher E. Herbert, Daniel T. McCue, and Rocio Sanchez-Moyano (2013), "Is Homeownership Still an Effective Means of Building Wealth for Low-Income and Minority Households? (Was it Ever?) (PDF)," paper presented at "Homeownership Built to Last: Lessons from the Housing Crisis on Sustaining Homeownership for Low-Income and Minority Families," a symposium held at the Harvard Business School, Boston, April 1-2.Return to text 28.See Christopher E. Herbert and Eric Belsky (2006),The Homeownership Experience of Low-Income and Minority Families: A Review and Synthesis of the Literature(Washington: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, February).Return to text 29.See Herbert and Belsky,The Homeownership Experience of Low-Income and Minority Families,in note 28.Return to text 30.See Paul Taylor, Kim Parker, Rakesh Kochhar, Richard Fry, Cary Funk, Eileen Patten, and Seth Motel (2012),Young, Underemployed and Optimistic: Coming of Age, Slowly, in a Tough Economy(Washington: Pew Research Center, February 9).Return to text 31.See Lisa Nelson and Francisca Richter (2014), "The Prospects of Non-College-Bound Workers in the Fourth District,"A Look Behind the Numbers(Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, February10).Return to text 32.See Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (2015),Promoting Pathways to Financial Stability: A Resource Handbook on Building Financial Capabilities of Community College Students(Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcementaction listed below: Orrstown Financial Services, Inc. and Orrstown Bank, both of Shippensburg, PennsylvaniaWritten Agreement issued March 22, 2012Terminated April 1, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Chemical Financial Corporation, Midland, to merge with Lake Michigan Financial Corporation, Holland, and thereby indirectly acquire its wholly owned subsidiaries, The Bank of Holland, Holland, and The Bank of Northern Michigan, Petoskey, all of Michigan. The Board also approved the applications, under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act, by Chemical Bank, Midland, Michigan, to merge with The Bank of Holland and The Bank of Northern Michigan and to establish and operate branches at the locations of the main offices and branches of The Bank of Holland and The Bank of Northern Michigan. Attached is the Board's order relating to these actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that it is acceptingStatements of Interestfrom individuals who wish to be considered for membership on the Community Advisory Council (CAC). The formation of the CAC was announced in January. The council will advise the Board on issues affecting consumers and communities and will complement two of the Board's other advisory councils--the Federal Advisory Council and the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council--whose members represent depository institutions. The Board plans to fill the 15 seats on the CAC with a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer and community development organizations and interests, including affordable housing, community and economic development, small business, and asset and wealth building. CAC members will meet semiannually with members of the Board of Governors in Washington to provide a range of perspectives on the economic circumstances and financial services needs of consumers and communities, with a particular focus on the concerns of low- and moderate-income consumers and communities. The Board expects to announce the appointment of CAC members in the fall of 2015. Additional information about the selection process, including instructions for submitting a Statement of Interest, can be found in the attachedFederal RegisterNotice. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued a final rule to expand the applicability of its Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and also apply it to certain savings and loan holding companies. The policy statement facilitates the transfer of ownership of small community banks and savings associations by allowing their holding companies to operate with higher levels of debt than would normally be permitted. While holding companies that qualify for the policy statement are excluded from consolidated capital requirements, their depository institution subsidiaries continue to be subject to minimum capital requirements. The final rule raises the asset threshold of the policy statement from $500 million to $1 billion in total consolidated assets. It also expands the application of the policy statement to savings and loan holding companies. All firms must still meet certain qualitative requirements, including those pertaining to nonbanking activities, off-balance sheet activities, and publicly-registered debt and equity. The final rule implements a law passed by the congress in December 2014 and is effective 30 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcementaction listed below: Southeastern Financial, Inc., Tuscaloosa, AlabamaSupervisory Agreement issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated November 9, 2010Terminated April 27, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcementactions listed below: First Independence Corporation, Independence, KansasSupervisory Agreement issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated August 13, 2010Terminated April 24, 2015 FirsTier II Bancorp, Cheyenne, WyomingWritten Agreement issued May 12, 2010Terminated February 27, 2015 Dickinson Financial Corporation II and Dickinson Financial Corporation, both of Kansas City, MissouriWritten Agreement issued June 29, 2010Terminated April 24, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcementactions listed below: Flathead Holding Company of Bigfork, Bigfork, MontanaWritten Agreement issued December 14, 2012Terminated April 20, 2015 PNBK Sponsor LLC, PNBK Investment Partners LLC, PNBK Holdings LLC, andPatriot National Bancorp, Inc., all of Stamford, ConnecticutWritten Agreement issued August 3, 2012Terminated April 7, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released additional information on the operating structure of the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) supervisory program. The attached memorandum supplements previously released information regarding the LISCC and provides additional details on the program's organizational structure, including the functions of its subcommittees. The LISCC program was established in 2010 to oversee and supervise the largest, most systemically important financial institutions. The program uses a centralized process that incorporates a broad range of internal Federal Reserve System perspectives and expertise and facilitates consistent supervision among the firms. The LISCC is comprised of senior officers at the Board and Reserve Banks, and includes bank supervisors, market analysts, research economists, and payment system experts. The program evaluates both the safety and soundness of individual large financial institutions and the risks posed by those institutions to the broader financial system. SR Letter 15-7 For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released its Semiannual Report on Banking Applications Activity, which provides aggregate information on proposals filed by banking organizations and reviewed by the Federal Reserve. The report includes information on the number of proposals that have been approved, denied, and withdrawn, as well as the average length of time taken to process proposals. Additionally, it discusses the common reasons that applicants have withdrawn their proposals from consideration. The report is released twice per year for the periods ending June 30 and December 31 of each year and can be found atwww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/semiannual-reports-banking-applications-activity.htm. The latest report covers the period from July 1, 2014 to December 31, 2014. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Semiannual Report on Banking Applications Activity:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday requested public comment on proposed amendments to Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) making technical changes to the calculation of interest payments on certain balances maintained by depository institutions at Federal Reserve Banks. The proposed amendments are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. Currently, if the rate of interest paid on excess balances (the IOER rate) were to be changed in the middle of a two‑week reserve maintenance period, the change would not be fully reflected in the interest payments to depository institutions until the beginning of a new maintenance period. The Board proposes to amend Regulation D so that interest payments to depository institutions with excess balances are based on the IOER rate in effect each day and the level of balances held each day, rather than the average IOER rate and average level of excess balances over the maintenance period. The proposed change is intended to enhance the effectiveness of changes in the IOER rate in moving the federal funds rate into the target range established by the Federal Open Market Committee when changes in those rates do not coincide with the beginning of a maintenance period. Comments on the proposal are requested within 30 days of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDFComments:Submit|View Board Votes
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March suggests that economic growth slowed during the winter months, in part reflecting transitory factors. The pace of job gains moderated, and the unemployment rate remained steady. A range of labor market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources was little changed. Growth in household spending declined; households' real incomes rose strongly, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices, and consumer sentiment remains high. Business fixed investment softened, the recovery in the housing sector remained slow, and exports declined. Inflation continued to run below the Committee's longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. Although growth in output and employment slowed during the first quarter, the Committee continues to expect that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this target range, the Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Charles L. Evans; Stanley Fischer; Jeffrey M. Lacker; Dennis P. Lockhart; Jerome H. Powell; Daniel K. Tarullo; and John C. Williams.
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. IntroductionChairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member Clay, and other members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on the important topic of community financial institutions and regulatory relief for these institutions. Community banks are a critical component of our financial system and economy. They reduce the number of underbanked citizens by providing banking services that may otherwise go unmet, particularly in rural areas. They also are especially effective at meeting the credit needs of their surrounding communities. Because of their firsthand knowledge of the local economic landscape, they are better prepared to look beyond traditional credit factors to consider unique borrower characteristics when making credit decisions. Having begun my career more than 30 years ago as a community bank examiner at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and eventually becoming the officer in charge of bank supervision at the Reserve Bank, I have seen firsthand how critical it is that we balance effective supervision and regulation to ensure that community banks operate in a safe and sound manner, while not subjecting these institutions to unnecessary regulatory requirements that could constrain their capacity to lend to the communities they serve. In my testimony, I will discuss measures taken by the Federal Reserve to calibrate regulations, policies, and supervisory activities to the risks at community banking organizations.1 Condition of Community BanksThe Federal Reserve supervises approximately 860 state-chartered community banks that have chosen to be members of the Federal Reserve System (referred to as state member banks). In addition, the Federal Reserve supervises approximately 4,400 top-tier bank holding companies and approximately 300 top-tier savings and loan holding companies, most of which operate small community thrifts. The overall condition of community banks has improved significantly in the time since the recent financial crisis. The number of banks on the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's (FDIC) "Problem List" fell from a peak of 888 at the end of the first quarter of 2011, to 291 at year-end 2014.2Despite that significant decline, the number of problem banks compares unfavorably with historical numbers of less than 100, on average, in the years prior to the crisis. Overall capital levels and asset quality at community banks have improved since the financial crisis.3At year-end 2014, the aggregate tier 1 risk-based capital ratio for community banks was 14.5 percent, up from a low of 12.0 percent at year-end 2008, and the aggregate leverage ratio was 10.5 percent, up from a low of 9.2 percent at year-end 2009. Noncurrent loans represented 1.4 percent of total loans at year-end 2014, down significantly from 4.1 percent at year-end 2009, while net charge-offs as a percent of total loans were down to 0.3 percent at year-end 2014 from a high of 1.6 percent at year-end 2009. Moreover, community banks saw an uptick in lending in 2014, with annual loan growth of 6.5 percent at year-end 2014. This is in stark contrast to the period from 2009 through 2011, when total loans declined each year. Banks' earnings have benefited in the past couple of years from reductions in provision expenses for loan and lease losses. Yet, community bank earnings continue to experience considerable pressure from historically low net interest margins, and many community banks report concerns about their prospects for continued growth and profitability. The Federal Reserve's Approach to Supervising and Regulating Community BanksThe Federal Reserve uses a risk-focused approach to supervision, with activities directed toward identifying the areas of greatest risk to banking organizations or consumers and assessing the ability of the organizations' management processes to identify, measure, monitor, and control those risks. Under our risk-focused supervision framework, bank examination and holding company inspection procedures are tailored to each banking organization's asset size, complexity, risk profile, and condition. The supervisory program for all institutions, regardless of size and complexity, entails both off-site and on-site work, including development of supervisory plans, review of financial data, transaction testing, documentation of examination results, assignment of supervisory ratings, and communication of examination findings to the bank and its board of directors. There are distinct differences between the supervision program of a large, complex banking organization and a small, non-complex bank. For one, a large banking organization generally has a dedicated supervisory team, supported by risk specialists, whereas a small bank is generally visited by examiners only every 12 to 18 months. Furthermore, if a bank is engaging in nontraditional or higher-risk activities, our supervision program typically requires greater scrutiny and a higher level of review of specific transactions and risk areas. Conversely, if a well-managed bank's activities are lower risk, we adjust our expectations for examiners to a lower level of review. In this way, we alleviate examination burden on community banks with histories of sound performance and modest risk profiles. Consistent with the Federal Reserve's risk-focused approach to supervision and when permitted by law, the Federal Reserve scales supervisory rules and guidance in a way that applies the most stringent requirements to the largest, most complex banking organizations that pose the greatest risk to the financial system. We work within the constraints of the law to draft rules and guidance so as not to subject community banks to requirements that are not commensurate with their risks and that would be unduly burdensome for these institutions to implement. We recognize that the cost of compliance can be disproportionally greater on smaller institutions versus larger institutions, as community banks have fewer staff available to help comply with additional regulations. Therefore, we carefully consider the need to establish new requirements to safeguard the safety and soundness of the financial system against the burden on banks to implement new requirements. Many recently established rules have been tailored to apply the strictest requirements to only the largest, most complex banking organizations. One such example is the capital rule, issued in 2013, where many of the requirements do not apply to community banks.4These requirements include the countercyclical capital buffer, supplementary leverage ratio, trading book reforms, capital requirements for credit valuation adjustments, and disclosure requirements. Community banks also are not subject to additional enhanced standards that large banking organizations face related to capital plans, stress testing, liquidity and risk management requirements, and the systemically important financial institution surcharge. The Federal Reserve has made a concerted effort to communicate clearly to both community bankers and examiners about new requirements that are applicable to community banks. We provide a statement at the top of each Supervision and Regulation letter and each Consumer Affairs letter that clearly indicates which banking entity types are subject to the guidance. These letters are the primary means by which the Federal Reserve issues supervisory and consumer compliance guidance to bankers and examiners, and this additional clarity allows community bankers to focus efforts only on the supervisory policies that are applicable to their banks. Also, to assist community banks in understanding how new complex rules could possibly affect their business operations, the federal banking agencies have issued supplemental guides that focus on rule requirements that are most applicable to community banks. For example, the federal banking agencies issued supplemental guides for the 2013 capital rule, as well as the Volcker rule issued in December 2013.5 Coordination with the Other Banking AgenciesIn order to help ensure that its supervision program is not unduly burdensome, the Federal Reserve also works closely with its colleagues at the other federal banking agencies and the state banking agencies to ensure that our supervisory approaches and methodologies are consistent and complementary. The agencies also work cooperatively to coordinate the examination of institutions subject to the supervision of more than one agency. For instance, on the resolution of a problem bank or thrift, the FDIC, as the insurer of depository institutions, has backup examination authority and coordinates with the primary federal bank regulator (either the Federal Reserve for state member banks or the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) for national banks and federal thrifts) and as applicable with the state banking department on its participation on an examination. The Federal Reserve and the FDIC also coordinate the examination of state banks with the responsible state banking department. As the supervisor for holding companies, the Federal Reserve coordinates its examination activities with the OCC and the FDIC when the holding company and the bank or thrift subsidiary share risk-management functions. The Dodd-Frank Act requires that the Federal Reserve and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) coordinate aspects of their consumer compliance supervision of insured depository institutions and their affiliates, including scheduling of examinations, providing reciprocal opportunities to comment upon reports of examination prior to issuance, and reciprocally providing final reports of examination after issuance. In May 2012, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies entered into a Memorandum of Understanding on Supervisory Coordination (MOU) with the CFPB.6The MOU establishes arrangements for coordination and information sharing among the parties. The Dodd-Frank Act also requires the CFPB to consult with the appropriate federal banking agencies before proposing rules and during the comment process. Through the work of the various Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council's (FFIEC) task forces and subcommittees, staffs of the agencies meet to discuss the implementation of supervisory guidance and to develop common examination approaches and regulatory reports.7For example, the FFIEC member agencies are coordinating various work streams on cybersecurity to improve collaboration with law enforcement and intelligence agencies and to communicate the importance of cybersecurity awareness and best practices among the financial industry and regulators. Also, to foster consistency in the examination of state community banks, the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and the FFIEC State Liaison Committee have adopted common examination procedures (referred to as the Examination Documentation (ED) modules) and have an ongoing, interagency process for the review and updating of the ED modules to reflect current regulatory and policy mandates. Moreover, all of the FFIEC member agencies collaborate on the development of common consumer compliance examination procedures to support consistent supervision related to consumer protection statutes and regulations. Through the FFIEC, the agencies are considering ways to reduce burden associated with quarterly filing of the Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income (commonly called the Call Report), including collecting less data from banks. As part of this effort, agency staff are planning on-site visits to several community banks to better understand aspects of their Call Report preparation processes that could be sources of reporting burden. This would include having the banks show where manual intervention is necessary to report particular Call Report items. Also, agency staff have enhanced training on upcoming reporting changes, such as recently holding teleconferences to provide guidance on changes to regulatory capital reporting requirements. Federal Reserve Efforts to Provide Regulatory Relief to Community BanksThe Federal Reserve has several internal efforts underway aimed at providing regulatory relief for community banks. For instance, the Federal Reserve periodically reviews its existing supervisory guidance to assess whether the guidance is still relevant and effective. We recently completed a policy review of the supervision programs for community and regional banking organizations to make sure the programs and related supervisory guidance are appropriately aligned with current banking practices and risks.8The project entailed an assessment of all existing supervisory guidance that applies to community and regional banks to determine whether the guidance is still appropriate. As a result of this review, we are likely to eliminate some guidance that is no longer relevant and to update other guidance for appropriateness to current supervisory and banking industry practices and relevance to the risks to these institutions. Additionally, we are continually working to calibrate examination expectations so that they are commensurate with the risks at these institutions. For example, the Federal Reserve has an initiative currently underway to use Call Report data and forward-looking risk analytics to identify high-risk community and regional banks, which would allow us to focus our supervisory response on the areas of highest risk and reduce the regulatory burden on low-risk community and regional banks. Along these lines, the Federal Reserve adopted a new consumer compliance examination framework for community banks in January 2014.9While we have traditionally applied a risk-focused approach to consumer compliance examinations, the new program more explicitly bases examination intensity on the individual community bank's risk profile, weighed against the effectiveness of the bank's compliance controls. This should increase the efficiency of our supervision and reduce regulatory burden on many community banks. In addition, we revised our consumer compliance examination frequency policy to lengthen the time frame between on-site consumer compliance and Community Reinvestment Act examinations for many community banks with less than $1 billion in total consolidated assets. We have also been investigating ways that would allow for more supervisory activities to be conducted off-site, which can improve efficiency and reduce burden on community banks. For example, we can conduct some aspects of the loan review process off-site for banks that maintain electronic loan records and have invested in technologies that would allow us to do so. While off-site loan review has benefits for both bankers and examiners, some bankers have expressed concerns that increasing off-site supervisory activities could potentially reduce the ability of banks to have face-to-face discussions with examiners regarding asset quality or risk-management issues. In that regard, we will continue to work with community banks that may prefer their loan reviews to be conducted on-site. In short, the Federal Reserve is trying to strike an appropriate balance of off-site and on-site supervisory activities to ensure that resources are used more efficiently while maintaining high-quality supervision of community banks. The Federal Reserve has invested significant resources in developing various technological tools for examiners to improve the efficiency of both off-site and on-site supervisory activities, while ensuring the quality of supervision is not compromised. For instance, the Federal Reserve has automated various parts of the community bank examination process, including a set of tools used among all Reserve Banks to assist in the pre-examination planning and scoping. This automation can save examiners and bank management time, as a bank can submit requested pre-examination information electronically rather than mailing paper copies to the Federal Reserve Bank. These tools also assist examiners in the off-site monitoring of community banks, enabling examiners to determine whether a particular community bank's financial condition has deteriorated and warrants supervisory attention between on-site examinations. As we develop supervisory policies and examination practices, we are mindful of community bankers' concerns that new requirements for large banking organizations could become viewed as "best practices" that trickle down to community banks in a way that is inappropriate. To address this concern, the Federal Reserve is enhancing communications with and training for examinations staff about expectations for community banks versus large banking organizations to ensure that expectations are calibrated appropriately. Specifically, we are modernizing our longstanding examiner commissioning training program for community bank examiners, and a key part of this effort is ensuring that examiners are trained on the different supervisory programs and requirements for community banks and large banking organizations. In addition, when new supervisory policies are issued, we typically arrange a teleconference to explain the new policy to examiners, including whether and to what extent the policy is applicable to community banks. By effectively training our examination staff and providing channels to keep them informed of newly issued policies in a timely manner, examiners are better equipped to understand the supervisory goals of regulations and guidance for community banks and to provide appropriate guidance to community banks. Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and Resulting Changes in Regulatory Reporting RequirementsMore recently, the Federal Reserve Board has taken regulatory action to reduce the burden on community banking organizations with the issuance of a final rule that expands the applicability of its Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and also applies the statement to certain savings and loan holding companies.10The policy statement facilitates the transfer of ownership of small community banks and savings associations by allowing their holding companies to operate with higher levels of debt than would normally be permitted. While holding companies that qualify for the policy statement are excluded from consolidated capital requirements, their depository institution subsidiaries continue to be subject to minimum capital requirements. The final rule raises the asset threshold of the policy statement from $500 million to $1 billion in total consolidated assets. It also expands the application of the policy statement to savings and loan holding companies. All firms must still meet certain qualitative requirements, including those pertaining to nonbanking activities, off-balance sheet activities, and publicly registered debt and equity. The scope of the previous policy statement has been expanded to cover approximately 440 additional bank holding companies and 280 savings and loan holding companies. Going forward, this means that 89 percent of all bank holding companies and 81 percent of all savings and loan holding companies will be covered under the policy statement. This expansion follows a revision to the Dodd-Frank Act recently passed by Congress. In an action related to the expansion of the policy statement's scope, the Board took steps to relieve regulatory reporting burden for bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies that have less than $1 billion in total consolidated assets and meet the qualitative requirements of the policy statement. Specifically, the Board eliminated quarterly and more complex consolidated financial reporting requirements (FR Y-9C) for approximately 470 of these institutions, and instead required parent-only financial statements (FR Y-9SP) semiannually.11The Board also eliminated all regulatory capital data items that were to be reported on the FR Y-9SP for approximately 240 savings and loan holding companies with less than $500 million in total consolidated assets. The Board made these changes effective on March 31, 2015, and immediately notified the affected institutions, so they would not continue to invest in system changes to report revised regulatory capital data for only a short period of time. Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 ReviewIn addition to the Federal Reserve efforts mentioned earlier, the federal banking agencies and the FFIEC have launched a review to identify banking regulations that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome, as required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA).12The major categories of regulations covered in the review include applications and reporting; powers and activities; international operations; banking operations; capital; the Community Reinvestment Act; consumer protection; directors, officers, and employees; money laundering; rules of procedure; safety and soundness; and securities. This review will cover all agency rules in these categories, including rules recently adopted or proposed in the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act.13The agencies are soliciting comments on their regulations through notices in theFederal Register. As part of the EGRPRA review process, the agencies are holding several outreach meetings with bankers, consumer groups, and other interested parties to engage individuals in a public discussion about the agencies' regulations. The agencies have conducted two outreach meetings to date in Los Angeles and Dallas, respectively. Additional outreach meetings are scheduled for the coming months, including Boston on May 4, 2015; Kansas City on August 4, 2015; Chicago on October 19, 2015; and Washington, D.C., on December 2, 2015. The Kansas City outreach meeting will focus more specifically on issues affecting rural institutions.14 Several themes have arisen so far from discussions at the outreach meetings. A recurring theme has been the question of whether the agencies could reevaluate the various thresholds and limits imposed in regulations that may constrain community banks and their lending activities. For example, community bankers in rural areas have noted that it can be difficult to find an appraiser with knowledge about the local market at a reasonable fee. Bankers have asked the agencies to consider increasing the dollar threshold in the appraisal regulations for transactions below which an appraisal would not be required, which could allow them to use a less-formal valuation of collateral for a larger number of loans. Bankers have also asked whether the agencies could review the statutorily mandated safety-and-soundness examination frequency for banks, which varies based on a bank's asset size and condition, as a way to ease burden from frequent on-site examinations. Other bankers have commented that some longstanding interagency guidance may now be outdated and warrant a fresh look and revision. Some of the relief that bankers have asked for and suggestions developed through the EGRPRA process may require legislative action. We will work with the other federal banking agencies as appropriate to consider and assess the impact of potential changes identified through the EGRPRA review process. Gathering the Views of Community BankersOutside of the EGRPRA review process, the Federal Reserve uses multiple channels to gather the views of community bankers on economic and banking topics, including regulatory burden. For instance, when a proposed rule or policy is issued to the public for comment, we gather information from banking organizations that assists us in assessing implementation complexity or cost, especially for the smallest institutions. The feedback received has been instrumental in helping us scale rules and policies to appropriately reflect the risks at these institutions without subjecting them to unnecessary burden. This was evident in the final capital rule that was issued in July 2013. The final rule reflected several changes to respond to comments and reduce the regulatory burden on community banks. Also, in 2010, the Federal Reserve Board formed the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) to provide input to the Board of Governors on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues of interest to community depository institutions.15CDIAC members are selected from representatives of banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils is selected to serve on the national CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., to discuss topics of interest to community depository institutions. In order to better understand and respond to concerns raised by these institutions through the various channels, the Federal Reserve Board has established a community and regional bank subcommittee of its Committee on Bank Supervision.16The governors on this subcommittee help the Board as a whole to weigh the costs associated with regulation against the safety-and-soundness benefits of new supervisory policies for smaller institutions. The subcommittee also meets with Federal Reserve staff to hear about key supervisory initiatives at community banks and ongoing research in the community banking area. Additionally, members of the Board of Governors routinely meet with representatives from banks of all sizes to discuss banking conditions and the regulatory landscape. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is committed to taking a balanced supervisory approach that fosters safe and sound community banks and fair treatment of consumers, and encourages the flow of credit to consumers and businesses. To achieve that goal, we will continue to work to make sure that regulations, policies, and supervisory activities are appropriately tailored to the level of risks at these institutions. In doing so, we will solicit and assess the views of bankers on supervisory issues and regulatory burden through the EGRPRA process and other communication channels. Thank you for inviting me to share the Federal Reserve's views on regulatory relief for community financial institutions. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have. 1.For supervisory purposes, the Federal Reserve uses the term "community banking organization" to describe a state member bank and/or holding company with $10 billion or less in total consolidated assets.Return to text 2.See FDIC,Quarterly Banking Profile (PDF), Fourth Quarter 2014.Return to text 3.Figures are aggregate statistics based on quarterlyConsolidated Reports of Condition and Income(commonly called the Call Report) data filed by all insured commercial banks with assets of $10 billion or less.Return to text 4.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Approves Final Rule to Help Ensure Banks Maintain Strong Capital Positions," press release, July 2, 2013.Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, and OCC, "New Capital Rule: Community Bank Guide (PDF)," July, 9, 2013; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, and OCC, "The Volcker Rule: Community Bank Applicability (PDF)," December 10, 2013.Return to text 6.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, CFPB, FDIC, National Credit Union Administration (NCUA), and OCC, "Agencies Sign Memorandum of Understanding on Supervisory Coordination," press release, June 4, 2012.Return to text 7.Members of the FFIEC include the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the FDIC, the NCUA, the OCC, the CFPB, and the State Liaison Committee (SLC). The SLC includes representatives from the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, the American Council of State Savings Supervisors, and the National Association of State Credit Union Supervisors.Return to text 8.For supervisory purposes, the Federal Reserve uses the term "regional banking organization" to describe a state member bank and/or holding company with more than $10 billion, but less than $50 billion in total consolidated assets.Return to text 9.See the Board's Consumer Affairs (CA) Letter 13-19 (November 18, 2013), "Community Bank Risk-Focused Consumer Compliance Supervision Program" and CA Letter 13-20 (November 18, 2013), "Consumer Compliance and Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Examination Frequency Policy."Return to text 10.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Rule to Expand Applicability of Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and Apply It to Certain Savings and Loan Holding Companies," press release, April 9, 2015.Return to text 11.The FR Y-9C consists of 65 pages of data items to be reported, whereas the FR Y-9SP consists of only 8 pages of data items.Return to text 12.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, and OCC, "Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies Seek Comment on Interagency Effort to Reduce Regulatory Burden," press release, June 4, 2014.Return to text 13.The review encompasses consumer regulations that were not transferred to the CFPB but remained with the banking agencies. For more information about the broader scope of the review, see: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, and OCC, "Agencies Announce Additional EGRPRA Outreach Meetings," press release, April 6, 2015.Return to text 14.See the FFIEC's EGRPRA website athttp://egrpra.ffiec.gov/for more information.Return to text 15.http://federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htm.Return to text 16.http://federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from February 9 through March 16, 2015. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on March 17-18, 2015. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 17-18, 2015:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy," a community development research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. It is my pleasure to welcome you to the Federal Reserve System's community development research conference, which this year focuses on economic mobility. I would like to commend the organizers for their foresight in choosing a topic that has risen to the top of the global agenda. According to a recent Pew Research Center survey, the gap between rich and poor now ranks as a major concern in the minds of citizens around the world. In advanced economies still feeling the effects of the Great Recession, people worry that children will grow up to be worse off financially than their parents were. In the United States, roughly 80 percent of Americans across the ideological spectrum see inequality as a moderately big or very big problem.1 Economic inequality has long been of interest within the Federal Reserve System. In 2007, Chairman Bernanke delivered a speech on the causes of rising inequality that raised questions about the implications of this disturbing trend for economic opportunity‑-the topic that will be explored at this conference today and tomorrow.2Chairman Bernanke's speech called for more research to understand the causes and the effects of widening inequality in the United States. Last October, I drew on the Fed's Survey of Consumer Finances--a rich source of data for researchers in this field--to explore some factors that may influence economic mobility, such as access to quality education and ownership of a family business, and I discussed how those factors may have changed over time.3But I noted the difficulty of reaching definitive conclusions and, like Chairman Bernanke, expressed my hope that more research would be dedicated to finding answers to these important questions. I hope that the work that has been gathered and will be presented and discussed at this conference--as well as the research it may inspire--will further this worthy goal. In carrying out its responsibilities, the Federal Reserve serves the public in a number of different ways, and I believe an important contribution comes via the Fed's role as a research institution. Separate from the work that directly supports the Fed's decisions on monetary policy and financial oversight, Fed economists and other researchers in Washington and at each of the 12 Reserve Banks are engaged in a broad array of independent academic research aimed at adding to the general knowledge and understanding of the economy. Each year, Fed staff members publish hundreds of papers and others forms of research, sometimes in collaboration with scholars from universities and other institutions, all of it available for use by the research community and on view to the public. Conferences play an integral role in promoting the Federal Reserve's research mission as well. This biennial community development research conference, organized by community development officials from across the Federal Reserve System, serves to encourage high-quality research and also helps bridge the gap between community development research, policy, and practice. In my brief remarks, I would like to mention a few aspects of economic mobility that I think are particularly important and worthy of further research, with the hope of stimulating the conversation that will take place here over the next couple of days. This conference will explore economic mobility as it is influenced by or affects families, communities, and the economy, so let me touch on each of those three facets. We know that families are the locus of both opportunities and barriers to economic mobility. There are important research questions to be tackled here. What individual or family characteristics may predict who will achieve upward mobility? How much does someone's initial circumstances in life influence how far that person can get or how hard he or she needs to work to get there? Researchers and policymakers need a better understanding of how much mobility individuals may experience over the course of their lives and at what age people's outcomes may become more difficult to change. Families are the source of many of the resources and experiences that influence economic mobility, and more research can help us understand to what extent and in which ways differences in the economic circumstances of families affect the upward mobility and economic security of offspring. Research may be able to provide evidence on which public policies are most helpful in building an economy in which people are poised to get ahead. Conversely, it would also be beneficial to understand whether any policies may hold people back or discourage upward mobility. There is some debate on how the level of economic mobility in the United States may have changed in recent decades and whether it is easier or more difficult for people to get ahead today than it was in previous generations. Shortly, you will hear from a panel of distinguished experts with a range of views on this topic. Looking at the very recent past, we should also be asking whether and how this may have changed coming out of the Great Recession. Later, my Federal Reserve Board colleague, Governor Brainard, will speak on a topic of significant interest to me and I expect to many others--how young adults are faring in the economy and what the short- and long-term implications may have been for entering the job market at a time of significantly constrained opportunities. This is another example of how exogenous factors--those over which individuals have little or no control--may play an important role in determining how easily someone is able to improve his or her circumstances. Communities also affect economic mobility, and here, too, more research is needed to understand how and to what extent these effects occur. Economists do not fully understand how locational differences affect economic mobility or the complex relationship between economic mobility and geographic mobility. There are community characteristics--for instance, the composition and level of local employment, schools, transportation, physical infrastructure, and community facilities--that may affect the economic mobility of the residents of that community. And there is also a community development analogue to economic mobility: Further research may help us better understand why some communities succeed or fail in generating jobs, developing successful small businesses, attracting infrastructure investment, and so on. How do some places advance economically and create circumstances in which residents, in turn, are more likely to thrive? Finally, there are important research questions to be answered about the relationship between economic mobility and the economy as a whole. It seems obvious that greater economic opportunity and mobility promotes a healthier economy. Entrepreneurship, innovation, and hard work--surely key contributors to individual mobility--are central to a strong economy as well. But research could help us better understand how much mobility at the individual level matters for overall growth in productivity and economic output. To what extent is income mobility influenced by domestic or global economic forces, and to what extent can we promote mobility through domestic policy choices? These are among the questions that will be discussed and debated at this conference. You have a terrific lineup of speakers, and I think it is going to be a fascinating and informative two days. Thank you again to the many people at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve Board, and from across the System who have put this conference together. And thanks to all of you for coming here to be a part of it. 1.See Pew Research Center (2014), "Emerging and Developing Economies Much More Optimistic than Rich Countries about the Future (PDF)" (Washington: PRC, October).Return to text 2.See Ben S. Bernanke (2007), "The Level and Distribution of Economic Well-Being," speech delivered at the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, Neb., February 6.Return to text 3.See Janet L. Yellen (2014), "Perspectives on Inequality and Opportunity from the Survey of Consumer Finances," speech delivered at the Conference on Economic Opportunity and Inequality, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Mass., October 17.Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York Watch live Thanks for the opportunity to speak to you today. In these brief remarks, I will discuss the progress of the economy and the path forward for monetary policy.1The current expansion is almost six years old and is now one of the longest since World War II. While the pace of improvement has at times been frustratingly slow, by some measures the recovery is now well advanced. By other measures, there is still room for improvement. Assessing the scope for further improvement will be important in judging the appropriate path for monetary policy. After its most recent meeting in March, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) modified its forward guidance to say that an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate when the Committee has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. Such an increase could come as soon as the June FOMC meeting. The timing of liftoff and the pace of subsequent rate increases will depend on incoming data and on realized and expected progress toward our congressionally mandated goals of stable prices and maximum employment. Monetary policy works with long and variable lags, so rate increases need to begin well before we reach those goals. Let us turn to the two main economic conditions for liftoff that the Committee articulated. We have already seen a great deal of progress in the labor market, and I expect that progress to continue. Despite slowing in March, job creation has been particularly strong over the past two years. The unemployment rate has declined from 10 percent in October 2009 to 5.5 percent in March 2015, a level that is not far above many estimates of its natural rate. But the unemployment rate probably understates the amount of slack still remaining in the labor market. The labor force participation rate continues to be unusually low, suggesting that potential workers may be waiting on the sidelines for further improvements in job opportunities and wages. The number working part time who want full-time jobs also remains elevated. The low level of wage increases also suggests additional slack. The Committee said that it will want to be reasonably confident that inflation will move back to 2 percent over the medium term. On a 12-month basis, headline inflation in February, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures price index, stood at 0.3 percent; meanwhile, core inflation, which excludes volatile energy and food components, was 1.4 percent. These low current readings are partly a consequence of two transient shocks--the dramatic decline in oil prices and the effect of the appreciation of the dollar on import prices. Before those shocks, both headline inflation and core inflation were running at about 1.5 percent. When the effects of these shocks pass, I expect that inflation will return roughly to those earlier levels and then rise gradually to our 2 percent objective over the medium term as labor and product markets tighten further. Despite the current low inflation readings, survey-based measures of inflation expectations in the United States have been stable. However, market-based readings on inflation compensation have declined significantly since mid-2014. I view this decline as more likely reflecting movements in risk premiums and other transitory factors, rather than shifts in longer-term inflation expectations. Still, it will be important to keep an eye on the performance of inflation breakevens. I expect that economic conditions will support the first rate increase later this year. I do not expect that such an increase or the associated market reaction will materially restrain the progress of the economy. From a macroeconomic perspective, the precise timing of liftoff is less important than the path of subsequent additional rate increases. My view is that, if the economy continues on its expected path, it will be appropriate for a time to increase rates fairly gradually. Of course, if the economy improves faster or inflation increases more than expected, it will be appropriate to raise rates faster. And if economic performance disappoints or inflation remains lower than expected, it will be appropriate to delay liftoff or raise rates more slowly thereafter. There are several reasons why it may be appropriate to raise rates somewhat gradually, including the proximity of the zero lower bound for interest rates and continuing economic headwinds in the wake of the crisis.2I would like to explore a rationale that has received somewhat less attention, which is the unusually high level of uncertainty today about capacity measures such as the natural rate of unemployment.3Uncertainty about the precise level of these indicators becomes more important for policy as the expansion continues and the economy approaches its potential, defined as the level of output that is consistent with stable prices. All else equal, a decision to return interest rates to more-normal levels implies that the economy is nearing its capacity. The financial crisis did significant damage to the productive capacity of our economy, and the damage was of a character, extent, and duration that cannot be fully known today. Given this uncertainty, it is even more difficult than usual to assess how much slack remains. It seems plausible that at least part of this supply-side damage could be reversed if the economy enjoys a period of sustained growth.4To encourage that outcome, as monetary policymakers consider removing accommodation, we should look for a little more proof than usual that labor markets are tightening or other supply-side constraints are binding. Of course, if the effects of the crisis prove difficult to reverse and, as a result, inflation pressures do emerge, the Federal Reserve will use its tools to contain them. Let us take a brief look at the implications of severe financial crises for economies generally. Studies document that severe financial crises around the world have typically left behind large and sustained reductions in the level of output.5The recent crisis is no exception, andfigure 1shows such an effect for the U.S., U.K., euro-area and Canadian economies since 2008. The underlying pattern is an interesting one. Economists and policymakers have tended at first to view a decline in output as a cyclical shock to demand and to realize only gradually over time that a crisis has done substantial and lasting damage to the productive capacity of the economy.6As a result, estimates of the gap between actual and potential output often narrow over time, partly through higher actual output but also through lower estimates of potential. For example,figure 2shows that the Congressional Budget Office has made a series of downward revisions to its estimates of potential output in recent years.7 This supply-side damage has typically appeared both in the labor market and in the capital stock.8Long spells of unemployment cause skills to atrophy and make it more difficult for workers to find new jobs, raising the natural rate of unemployment for those who do remain in the labor force and causing others to throw in the towel and drop out. Extended periods of weak demand appear to cause companies to invest less in plant and technology, which slows the growth of the productivity of the workforce. The number of new business formations declines sharply, perhaps because of reduced credit availability, which may depress hiring, productivity, business innovation, and hence trend output.9Corporate spending on research and development has also been strongly procyclical, which may have similar effects.10 Turning to the recent U.S. experience, many economists now estimate that substantially more than half of the shortfall in gross domestic product relative to its pre-crisis trend represents a reduction of potential output and not just a shortfall in demand.11U.S. labor force damage likely accounts for some part of the shortfall.12The greater part appears to have resulted from lower trend labor productivity due to reduced capital investment and "multifactor productivity," which is often thought of as capturing the effects of technological innovation.13The employment rebound suggests that strong measures--such as those the Fed took during and after the crisis--can prevent even sharp job losses from becoming permanent. But the productivity slowdown suggests that monetary policy cannot, by itself, avert all of the damage. This consideration raises the question I mentioned a moment ago. Should we think of this supply-side damage as permanent or temporary? In many previous episodes around the world, post-crisis reductions in output have proved permanent. Nonetheless, it seems plausible that at least part of the damage can be reversed. As business confidence improves, employers may be more willing to take a chance on someone with an extended spell of unemployment. A stronger job market and rising wages may encourage more potential workers to join the labor force.14Over a longer period, stronger demand can produce higher capital investment, driving higher productivity. A long expansion could also produce higher productivity as companies strive to get more out of every dollar of capital and hour of work and as the strong economy encourages entrepreneurship and innovation. To give us the best chance to recover lost ground, we need policies that support labor force participation, business and household confidence, hiring and investment, and productivity growth--policies, I hasten to add, that are, for the most part, outside the remit of the Federal Reserve. Monetary policy also has a role to play by continuing to support the expansion as long as inflation expectations remain stable and realized inflation stays close to our 2 percent objective. Indeed, in the current circumstances, accommodative policy may not only help restore some of our economy's potential, but should also help return inflation to our 2 percent objective more expeditiously. There is no risk-free path for monetary policy. The biggest risk of tightening too early or too fast is that the economy may weaken more than expected, forcing the central bank to reverse course. The record of central banks lifting off from the zero lower bound suggests caution in this regard. A second risk is that we could prematurely truncate the process of healing damage from the crisis, thereby ensuring that the admittedly severe cyclical effects become permanent. Overly accommodative monetary policy also poses risks. First, the economy could overheat, and rising inflation could require the Committee to raise rates faster, which--if overdone--could produce a damaging recession. For now, I would be more concerned with a second risk, which is that more-accommodative policy could lead to frothy financial conditions and eventually undermine financial stability. While I do not see a troubling buildup of these risks today, tighter monetary policy might eventually be necessary if such risks do appear. ConclusionTo wrap up, with the support of extraordinary monetary accommodation, our economy has made substantial progress. As the FOMC moves to return monetary policy to a more normal footing, it makes sense to me to move fairly gradually as long as the incoming data evolve about as expected. Doing so would, among other benefits, give our economy the best chance to make up lost ground. 1.The views I express here today are mine alone and not necessarily those of any other member of the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.See Janet Yellen (2015), "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.Return to text 3.The natural rate of unemployment can be thought of as the unemployment rate at which the labor market is at its long-run equilibrium and inflation is stable. We cannot directly observe the natural rate but must infer it based on the performance of wages, prices, and labor market indicators. Most FOMC participants estimate that the longer-run normal rate is currently in the range of 5.0 to 5.2 percent. Confidence intervals around statistical estimates of the natural rate are routinely estimated to be quite wide. For example, Staiger, Stock, and Watson estimate a 95 percent confidence range around the natural rate to extend nearly 1-1/2 percentage points on either side of the point estimate. See Douglas Staiger, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1997), "How Precise Are Estimates of the Natural Rate of Unemployment?" in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).Return to text 4.See, for example, Laurence M. Ball (2014), "Long-Term Damage from the Great Recession in OECD Countries," NBER Working Paper Series 20185 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May); and Robert E. Hall (2014), "Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial Crisis," NBER Working Paper Series 20183 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May).Return to text 5.See Robert F. Martin, Teyanna Munyan, and Beth Anne Wilson (2014), "Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves?" IFDP Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 12); Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009),This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly(Princeton: Princeton University Press); Valerie Cerra and Sweta Chaman Saxena (2008), "Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery,"American Economic Review, vol. 98 (March), pp. 439-57; and Davide Furceri and Annabelle Mourougane (2009), "The Effect of Financial Crises on Potential Output: New Empirical Evidence from OECD Countries," OECD Economics Department Working Papers 699 (Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, May). For a different view, see Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer (2015), "New Evidence on the Impact of Financial Crises in Advanced Countries," NBER Working Paper Series 21021 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).Return to text 6.For example, Martin, Munyan, and Wilson show that estimates of potential output generated by common filtering techniques tend to revise down following recessions as actual output grows slower than its pre-recession trend; see Martin, Munyan, and Wilson, "Potential Output and Recessions," in note 5. In other words, looking backward with many years of hindsight at the evolution of output following a financial crisis, the negative effect on potential output is clearer than it is when estimating the level of potential output in real time immediately following the crises. As an example of this type of exercise, see Furceri and Mourougane, "Effect of Financial Crises on Potential Output," in note 5.Return to text 7.See Congressional Budget Office (2014),Revisions to CBO's Projection of Potential Output since 2007(PDF)(Washington: CBO, February).Return to text 8.See Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2013), "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-77 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November); and Hall, "Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy," in note 4.Return to text 9.For evidence regarding the link between fewer start-ups and lower job growth, see Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014), "The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3-24. For an estimate of how the latest recession affected aggregate trend productivity growth in the United States, see Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox, "Aggregate Supply in the United States," in note 8.Return to text 10.See Gadi Barlevy (2005), "Why Don't Recessions Encourage More R&D Spending? (PDF)" Chicago Fed Letter 220 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, November); and Diego Comin and Mark Gertler (2006), "Medium-Term Business Cycles,"American Economic Review, vol. 93 (June), pp.523-51.Return to text 11.See Congressional Budget Office,Revisions to CBO's Projection of Potential Output,in note 7; Hall, "Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy," in note 4; Ball, "Long-Term Damage from the Great Recession," in note 4; and Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox, "Aggregate Supply in the United States," in note 8.Return to text 12.There is considerable debate about how much of the decline in the employment-to-population ratio and labor force participation has been due to the recession, how much of that decline is reversible, and, relatedly, how much of the decline would have occurred regardless in the absence of a recession. For the argument that much of the decrease in labor force participation would likely have occurred even in the absence of the recession, see Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 197-275; for the argument that most of the decline is related to the severity of the recession and is likely reversible, see Christopher J. Erceg and Andrew T. Levin (2013), "Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession," IMF Working Paper 13/245 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, July).Return to text 13.See Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox (2013), "Aggregate Supply in the United States," in note 8.Return to text 14.In fact, as the recovery has progressed, the labor force participation rate and other broad indicators have moved back toward their longer-run trends.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Independent Community Bankers of America 2015 Washington Policy Summit , Washington, D.C. On numerous occasions over the last year, I have discussed the importance of differentiating prudential regulation and supervision based on the varying nature of the risks posed by different groups of banks.1This differentiation needs to be explicit both in the analytic foundations of our prudential system and in the application of that system to banking organizations. At an analytic level, we need to be clear that prudential aims vary with the risks posed by diverse groups of banks. To take an obvious example, the risks to the entire financial system that would arise from the failure of a very large, universal bank call for different prudential objectives from those suitable for a $200 million community bank. At the level of application, we need to tailor prudential regulations and supervisory practices with an eye both to those varying objectives and to the characteristics of differing groups of banks. This morning I would like to revisit, and develop a bit more, the concept of regulatory and supervisory "tiering" as it pertains to community banks. First, I will lay some analytic foundations by identifying what I believe to be the most salient characteristics of community banks for determining suitable regulatory objectives and prudential policies. Second, I will turn to the implementation of those objectives by explaining how we have tried in practice to shape supervisory policies appropriately. Third, I will touch on the implications of those objectives for some regulatory issues, including capital requirements. Prudential Objectives for Community Bank OversightAt the outset, let me note that in speaking of "community banks," I am generally using the term as defined in the Federal Reserve's supervisory portfolio. That is, it refers to banks with $10 billion or less in total assets. But it is worth making two observations about this definition. First is the fact that the vast majority of community banks have less than $1 billion in assets. Second is the fact that, for purposes of establishing regulatory objectives, a bank with $12 billion in assets might not be readily distinguishable from one with $8 billion in assets. Of course, lines will always have to be drawn in applying regulations and establishing supervisory practices. But it is useful to keep these facts in mind in thinking about prudential tiering. The two most important characteristics of community banks for purposes of establishing regulatory objectives and supervisory practices are their size and their business model. My reference to size is obviously a bit tautological, but size is worth emphasizing precisely because of what it says about the risks community banks donotpose. The possible failure of a community bank self-evidently poses no risks to the financial system. And while individual community banks in smaller communities provide sources of credit that would be hard to replace, their limited size means their failures would not result in credit contraction in significant swaths of the country. The business model of nearly all community banks is grounded in the most traditional form of commercial banking--lending to businesses and households with funds predominantly obtained from deposit accounts. And, as this audience well knows, lending by community banks is built substantially on relationship banking. While community banks over the years have found it increasingly difficult to compete with larger banks in the types of lending that can be efficiently scaled through larger volumes and standardized credit models, they maintain a competitive advantage relative to larger banks through knowledge of their local communities and their individual borrowers. As a result, community banks play a unique role in their local economies, particularly with regard to lending to small- and medium-sized businesses. The relationships these institutions have with their customers oftentimes mean they can look beyond traditional credit factors to consider unique borrower characteristics when making credit decisions and to reduce information failures about borrowers' willingness and capacity to repay loans. Numerous studies have documented these advantages and their value to economic development. One recent study found that loans extended by rural community banks to small businesses default less frequently than similar loans granted by their urban counterparts, and that the performance advantage is greater when the bank and the borrower are located in the same county.2 The traditional intermediation provided by community banks, along with the relatively small scale on which each community bank provides these services, suggests that the principal relevant prudential aim should be the equally traditional one of protecting the deposit insurance fund. A second aim should be to help protect the availability of credit in geographic areas or to particular classes of borrowers unlikely to be served by larger banks. It is important to note that this second aim implies not only that we want community banks to be operated in a safe and sound manner, but that we want them to be able to operate successfully. Just as rural customers would be denied credit if their bank fails, they would also be denied credit if their bank's costs make it an unviable business proposition. Supervision of Community BanksLet me turn now to describing how our supervisory policies reflect these regulatory objectives. First, of course, the Federal Reserve has long organized supervision into four portfolios of banking organizations, based principally--though not exclusively--on asset size. Since the financial crisis and the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), supervisory policies for the largest firms have become increasingly more data-driven, horizontal, and centrally coordinated. The enhanced prudential standards applicable to the largest firms, such as supervisory stress tests and quantitative liquidity regulation, have increased the differences in supervisory practice among our four portfolios. We do not regard the supervision of community banks (or, for that matter, smaller regional banks) as a diluted version of large bank supervision, but as an entirely separate undertaking. We believe there is a distinct "state-of-the-art" approach to each of the four portfolios, including community banks. Second, supervision within the community bank portfolio has not been centralized in the way that large firm supervision has been. On the contrary, with 837 state member community banks and several thousand community bank holding companies, it would make little sense to do so. While we strive for a well-considered overall supervisory program for our community bank portfolio, we will continue to rely on the examiners in the 12 Federal Reserve Banks to carry out that program in accordance with local conditions and based on the varying situations of community banks. I believe this intention reflects the preference of most community bankers, who worry that more centralization of supervisory practice would lead to delays in getting answers to questions and decisions on applications. At the same time, members of the Board do, from time to time, hear complaints from community bankers that supervisory practice may not always be consistent across Reserve Banks. To some degree, of course, this is an inevitable byproduct of an approach that leans toward bottom-up supervision. Nonetheless, our staff at the Board will continue to assess practices across all the Reserve Bank districts to promote overall consistency without micromanaging the supervision of individual banks. And I want to emphasize that, if community bankers believe that significant variation in certain practices or policies is having an unfair or deleterious effect on one or more of their banks, they should feel more than comfortable raising these concerns with Board staff. We do not regard such observations as criticism of our examiners, but instead as opportunities to test, and possibly adjust, our policies to promote overall consistency. A third way in which our community bank supervision differs from that of other banks is the particular effort made to limit the length of examinations and the amount of time bank personnel must spend on them. Community banks have much smaller balance sheets over which to amortize the resources they spend on regulatory and supervisory requirements. Of late, we have increased off-site supervisory activities, which can reduce the burden on community bank personnel. For example, we can conduct some aspects of the loan review process off site for banks that maintain electronic loan records. While off-site loan review has burden-reducing benefits for both bankers and examiners, some bankers have expressed concern that increasing off-site supervisory activities could potentially reduce the ability of banks to have face-to-face discussions with examiners regarding asset quality or risk-management issues. Accordingly, we remain flexible and will continue to work with community banks that may prefer their loan reviews to be conducted on site. More generally, the Federal Reserve has invested substantial resources in developing technological tools for examiners to improve the efficiency of both off-site and on-site supervisory activities. These measures should lead to greater consistency and more efficient, effective, and risk-focused examinations by better enabling staff to tailor the scope of examinations to the activities and risks of individual banks. The automation of various parts of the community bank examination process can also save examiners and bankers time, as a bank can submit requested pre-examination information electronically rather than mailing paper copies to a Reserve Bank. Through these efforts, the Federal Reserve aims to strike an appropriate balance between off-site and on-site supervisory activities to ensure that community banks are subject to supervision that is both high-quality and resource-efficient. Fourth, our supervisory oversight of community banks is itself grounded in the traditional relationship banking model of funding local lending with customer deposits. There are risks in this model, of course, since geographic and portfolio concentration can make community banks vulnerable to local economic downturns, as we have witnessed during and after the Great Recession. Even though the number of banks on the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's "Problem List" has fallen from a peak of 888 at the end of the first quarter of 2011 to 291 at the end of 2014, this number is still nearly three times the historical average. But these risks are understood by supervisors and bankers. Traditional regulatory and supervisory methods are well suited to deal with them. Indeed, it is noteworthy that most community banks adhering to this model continued to thrive even during the worst years of the financial crisis.3 In contrast, community banks that moved beyond their traditional business model and entered unfamiliar or more complex lines or markets experienced difficulties. For example, small banks that turned to a more transactional model and funded construction loans, often outside of their local markets, with borrowings rather than core deposits were more likely to fail. This experience helps explain why our supervisory intensity will often increase for banks, including community banks, that embark upon unfamiliar activities. A similar pattern obtains in the Federal Reserve's supervision of consumer compliance in community banks. It is axiomatic that all financial consumers deserve the same protection, whether they are doing business with a very large bank, a regional bank, or a community bank. But community banks do not have large systems with hundreds or thousands of employees in contact with consumers on a daily basis. So, while the substantive goals of consumer protection remain the same across banks, the way in which we check compliance at community banks takes account, again, of their size, less complex structure, and business model. These characteristics of community banks informed the revisions to our risk-focused consumer compliance supervision framework, which was implemented in January 2014.4 Under the revised program, examination intensity is explicitly based on an individual community bank's risk profile, including its consumer compliance culture and how effectively it identifies and manages consumer compliance risk. Examiners do more comprehensive risk assessments before they arrive on site, permitting them to focus on areas of higher risk at individual banks. The program also calls for examiners to spend less time on low-risk compliance issues at community banks. Of course, in cases where a firm's risk profile is high or where it changes materially as a result of the addition of more complex or higher-risk strategies, more frequent contact may be appropriate. Early feedback from bankers and examiners regarding the program has been largely positive. For example, bankers have noted that examiners seem to better understand their institutions, that the exam work undertaken better reflects the individual institutions being examined, and that the time spent by examiners at the banks has decreased. We will be conducting a review of the program this summer to determine if adjustments are needed. Our examiners have observed increased consumer compliance risk where community banks move into products that are less congruent with bank-customer relationships in the traditional community bank business model, such as prepaid cards or credit card add-on products. Similarly, risks can arise where a bank relies upon third-party providers for core banking services or products that the bank does not have the resources or expertise to undertake in-house. Of course, when properly chosen and managed, the use of third-party providers is not only acceptable, but desirable for important services such as cybersecurity. But reliance upon third parties to broaden a bank's scope of operations can pose supervisory concerns when the bank itself does not have adequate capacity to vet and monitor these vendors.5For example, a bank that relies upon a third party to provide a loan processing system or to conduct compliance audits may face increased risks because the bank no longer has direct control over these activities. Simplifying the Regulatory Regime for Community BanksIn the wake of the financial crisis, the overall aim of the Dodd-Frank Act was to strengthen the regulation of banks and certain other parts of the financial system. A key regulatory innovation in Dodd-Frank was regulatory tiering--the creation of different classes of banking organizations, based dominantly though not exclusively on asset size, to which different regulations were to apply. Underlying this tiering was the principle that progressively more stringent regulation should apply to the different classes of banks based on their relative importance to the financial system, and thus the harm that could be expected to the system if they failed. As with supervision, an important consideration in regulatory tiering is to weigh the compliance cost of a particular rule against the safety and soundness benefits to be gained by that rule with respect to specific groups of banks. Of particular significance in performing this assessment for community banks is, as I mentioned earlier, the fact that their smaller scale means that they have a more limited base of activities across which to amortize certain fixed compliance costs. There are two complementary ways to implement a tiered approach to prudential regulation. One is to apply specific regulations only to those classes of banking organizations whose activities and scale require those measures. The other is to tailor the application of generally applicable measures based on the size or other salient characteristics of banking organizations. When regulatory agencies adopt regulations under their general prudential authority, they usually have a choice as between these approaches. When the agencies are implementing statutory mandates, their discretion to exclude or tailor may be constrained in some respects. In implementing the Dodd-Frank Act and in modifying our regulations under general prudential authorities, we have tried to include appropriate tiering in accordance with the considerations I mentioned a few moments ago. But over the last few years there emerged a fairly widespread view that some fine tuning of regulatory tiering was warranted. Let me now offer a few of my own thoughts on this point. First, I want to mention how pleased we were that last December Congress amended the statutory provision that had prevented us from raising the threshold for application of our Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement. I will not repeat here the purpose and history of this statement, which I described in advocating this change last fall.6I will note that earlier this month, the Board issued a final rule implementing the statutory change.7The rule expands the scope of application of the statement from bank holding companies with less than $500 million in total consolidated assets to those with less than $1 billion, and adds savings and loan holding companies. As a result, our statement now covers nearly 90 percent of bank holding companies. We had already taken steps to relieve the regulatory reporting burden for the impacted firms--specifically, by eliminating quarterly and more complex consolidated financial reporting requirements for all of these institutions and eliminating certain regulatory reporting requirements entirely for savings and loan holding companies with less than $500 million in assets.8 Second, I want to reiterate my view that a few Dodd-Frank Act provisions might usefully be amended to exclude community banks entirely from their coverage. As I have said before, the concerns addressed by provisions such as the Volcker rule and the incentive compensation requirements of section 956 are substantially greater at larger institutions. In the unusual case in which a small bank is engaged in proprietary trading that could pose a risk to the deposit insurance fund or has in place a compensation system that incentivizes excessive risk, the supervisory process would remain available to address these risks. I recognize that statutory revisions of this sort would not be a major reduction in compliance burden. But they would reflect the fact that, absent a change in this regard, community banks must expend scarce compliance resources to conform to the requirements of such regulations. There is, in my view, no need to make particularized prudential requirements of this sort applicable on a mandatory basis to thousands of community banks. Indeed, the Volcker rule and the Dodd-Frank Act incentive compensation provisions present almost prototypical cases in which minimal potential safety and soundness benefits are outweighed by the compliance costs faced by those thousands of banks. It would be preferable to relieve both supervisors and community banks from examining compliance with these kinds of requirements in order to concentrate resources on the real issues presently faced by these institutions, such as cybersecurity and interest rate risks. Third, I want to address concerns that community bankers have expressed regarding the revised standardized capital requirements issued in 2013. In particular, we have heard that the framework's separate risk weight for high-volatility commercial real estate (HVCRE) loans is burdensome in part because it requires firms to classify which loans within their corporate loan portfolios are HVCRE using a complex definition that includes calculation of each such exposure's loan-to-value ratio. I should first say that, unlike proprietary trading or distorted compensation packages, HVCRE lendinghasposed real and substantial risks for community banks in recent years. These kinds of loans performed much worse in the recession than other commercial real estate loans and, in fact, were a significant factor behind many of the roughly 500 bank failures during this period. So, we do need to take account of HVCRE risks, given that commercial real estate lending accounts for a significant percentage of the assets of many community banks. But we can look for ways to simplify the specific capital requirements while ensuring that appropriate capital buffers exist. For example, it might be possible to determine applicable capital requirements by reference to the proportion of a bank's real estate loans that are HVCRE, as defined more simply, rather than requiring more elaborate loan-by-loan calculations. More generally, it is worthwhile for the bank regulatory agencies to consider possibilities for a broader simplification of capital requirements for smaller community banks. As important as it was to make the Basel I risk-based requirements more risk sensitive, it is also important to recognize that the greater detail of the new rules requires a degree of categorization, recordkeeping, and reporting that may be particularly costly, in relative terms, for smaller community banks. So we should explore whether we can achieve the safety and soundness purposes of capital regulation in a simplified way. In doing so, of course, we must be mindful of the Collins Amendment, which requires that minimum leverage and risk-based capital requirements be established for all insured depository institutions and bank holding companies, and that the minimum applicable requirements not be less than "generally applicable" requirements.9Still, there are some possibilities that may be consistent with the Collins Amendment. For example, one idea I have heard is to allow smaller community banks to opt into a simpler set of risk-weighted capital requirements in exchange for a higher minimum required ratio than under the more risk-sensitive, but more complicated, standardized risk-weighted requirements finalized in 2013. I believe the concept of a "simpler" set of requirements is meant to describe something much closer to Basel I in terms of the detail and number of risk categories. Because so many smaller community banks maintain capital levels well above minimum regulatory levels anyway, the tradeoff of higher requirements for a simpler approach may be promising This is only one idea, and there may be other approaches that could simplify smaller community bank capital requirements in a manner consistent with the Collins Amendment. I look forward to discussions within the banking agencies, with the industry, and with other interested parties on possibilities for developing a sensible and feasible approach. ConclusionHaving just become chair of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, I hope to make the required decennial review under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) a productive one. A productive exercise in this context will, among other things, be one that results in changes in the regulations and supervisory practices of the banking agencies so as to yield significant reduction in compliance costs for community banks. It should not be a merely bureaucratic exercise in formal fulfillment of a statutory requirement. There are numerous issues beyond those I've mentioned already that almost surely can be profitably addressed, including reporting requirements and examination practices. The chances of this outcome occurring will be maximized if regulators work to put ourselves in the place of community banks in order to understand in concrete ways the impact of particular regulatory and supervisory practices upon them and if, reciprocally, bankers understand the responsibility of regulators to protect the safety and soundness of banks and, thus, the deposit insurance fund. So, for example, although it is always useful to hear why regulated entities think a particular practice is unduly burdensome, it is even more useful to hear concrete suggestions for how that practice might be modified so as to reduce compliance burden while still achieving the ultimate regulatory objective. Thank you very much. 1.See, e.g., Daniel K. Tarullo (2015), "Application of Enhanced Prudential Standards to Bank Holding Companies," testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, March 19; Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "A Tiered Approach to Regulation and Supervision of Community Banks," speech delivered at the Community Bankers Symposium, Chicago, November 14; and Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Rethinking the Aims of Prudential Regulation," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Bank Structure Conference, Chicago, May 8.Return to text 2.See Robert DeYoung, Dennis Glennon, Peter Nigro, and Kenneth Spong (2012), "Small Business Lending and Social Capital: Are Rural Relationships Different? (PDF)" University of Kansas Center for Banking Excellence Research Paper #2012-1, June.Return to text 3.See, e.g., R. Alton Gilbert, Andrew P. Meyer, and James W. Fuchs (2013), "The Future of Community Banks: Lessons from Banks That Thrived During the Recent Financial Crisis (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. LouisReview, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 115-143; and Dean F. Amel and Robin A. Prager (2014), "Community Bank Performance: How Important are Managers? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-26 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 18). For a study finding relationship lending benefits in an international context, see Franco Fiordelisi, Stefano Monferra, and Gabriele Sampagnaro (2014), "Relationship Lending and Credit Quality,"Journal of Financial Services Research, vol. 46, pp. 295-315.Return to text 4.See Consumer Affairs Letter CA 13-19 (November 18, 2013), "Community Bank Risk-Focused Consumer Compliance Supervision Program".Return to text 5.Seewww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/srletters/sr1319.htm.Return to text 6.See Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "A Tiered Approach to Regulation and Supervision of Community Banks," speech delivered at the Community Bankers Symposium, Chicago, November 14.Return to text 7.80Fed. Reg.20153 (April 15, 2015).Return to text 8.80Fed. Reg.5666 (February 3, 2015).Return to text 9.Section 171 of the Dodd-Frank Act, popularly known as the Collins Amendment, requires that the federal banking agencies establish minimum consolidated capital requirements for all banking organizations that are not less than "generally applicable" risk-based capital requirements.Return to text
Mark E. Van Der Weide, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Mark E. Van Der Weide submitted identical remarks to the Subcommittee on Housing and Insurance, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on April 29, 2015. Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify on behalf of the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve welcomes the opportunity to participate in today's hearing, and I am pleased to be joined by my colleagues from the Federal Insurance Office (FIO) of the U.S. Treasury, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), and the independent insurance member of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). While we each have our own unique authority and mission to carry out, we remain committed to working collaboratively on a wide range of international and domestic insurance supervisory and regulatory issues. The Federal Reserve's Role in the Supervision of Certain Insurance Holding CompaniesWith the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act), the Federal Reserve assumed expanded responsibility as the consolidated supervisor of a significant number of insurance holding companies. As a result of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve is responsible for the consolidated supervision of insurance holding companies that own an insured bank or thrift, as well as insurance holding companies designated for Federal Reserve supervision by the FSOC. The insurance holding companies for which the Federal Reserve is the consolidated supervisor hold approximately one-third of U.S. insurance industry assets and vary greatly in size and in the types of products they offer. After the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve moved quickly to develop a supervisory framework that is appropriate for insurance holding companies that own depository institutions and promptly assigned supervisory teams to handle day-to-day supervision of those insurance holding companies. We also acted promptly to commence supervision of the three insurance holding companies designated by the FSOC for Federal Reserve supervision. While building our supervisory regime for these firms, we have reached out to our colleagues in the state insurance departments. Our supervisory teams for insurance holding companies are a combination of experienced Federal Reserve staff as well as newly hired staff with insurance expertise. The Federal Reserve is investing significant time and effort into enhancing our understanding of the insurance industry and firms we supervise, and we are committed to tailoring our supervisory framework to the specific business lines, risk profiles, and systemic footprints of the insurance holding companies we oversee. Our supervisory efforts to date have focused on strengthening firms' risk identification, measurement, and management; internal controls; and corporate governance. Our principal supervisory objectives for insurance holding companies are protecting the safety and soundness of the consolidated firms and their subsidiary depository institutions while mitigating any risks to financial stability.1We conduct our consolidated supervision efforts in a manner that is complementary to, and coordinated with, state insurance regulators, who continue their established oversight of insurance legal entities. We do not regulate the manner in which insurance is provided by these companies or the types of insurance that they provide. Those important aspects of the actual business of providing insurance are the province of the relevant state insurance supervisors. The Federal Reserve's Development of Domestic Capital Standards for Insurance Holding CompaniesCongress recently enacted the Insurance Capital Standards Clarification Act of 2014 (S. 2270), which amended the provision of the Dodd-Frank Act that had required the minimum capital standards for banks be applied to any insurance holding company that controls an insured depository institution or is designated for Federal Reserve supervision by the FSOC. With this amendment to the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve may now focus on constructing a domestic regulatory capital framework for our supervised insurance holding companies that is well tailored to the business of insurance. To that end, the Federal Reserve has been engaging extensively with insurance supervisors and regulated entities to increase our understanding of the regulatory capital regime that already applies to insurance companies under state laws and to solicit feedback on various approaches to the development of an appropriate consolidated group-wide capital regime for insurance holding companies that would be consistent with federal requirements. We are exercising great care as we approach this challenging mandate. We are committed to following formal rule making processes to develop our insurance capital framework, which will allow for an open public comment period on a concrete proposal. We will continue to engage with interested parties as we move forward. The Federal Reserve's Participation in the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS)Some of the insurance holding companies subject to Federal Reserve supervision are internationally active firms that compete with other global insurers to provide insurance products to businesses and consumers around the world. Our supervisory activities for these firms include collaborating with our regulatory counterparts internationally as well as domestically. As part of this role, in November 2013, the Federal Reserve joined our state insurance supervisory colleagues from the NAIC and the FIO as members of the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). Accordingly, the Federal Reserve has been and will continue to be engaged in the development of global standards for regulating and supervising internationally active insurers. Global standard setting is not new to the Federal Reserve, as we have for decades participated in standard setting for global banks through our membership in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. As a general proposition, we believe in the utility of having effective global standards for regulation and supervision of internationally active financial firms. When implemented consistently across jurisdictions, such standards help provide a level playing field for global financial institutions. Further, consistent global financial regulatory standards can help limit regulatory arbitrage and jurisdiction shopping and can promote financial stability. We recognize, of course, that international regulatory standards cannot be imposed on U.S. firms by an international body; rather, these standards apply in the United States only if adopted by the appropriate U.S. regulators in accordance with applicable rulemaking procedures conducted here. Since joining the IAIS in late 2013, the Federal Reserve has been an active participant in several key committees, working groups, and work streams. We currently hold a seat on the Financial Stability Committee and the Technical Committee of the IAIS. Throughout our first year and a half as a member of the organization, and consistent with our statutory mandate, the Federal Reserve has been particularly focused on the financial stability and consolidated supervision work of the IAIS. In these tasks, we have worked closely with our U.S. partners, including in particular the NAIC and its member supervisors. IAIS Strategic PrioritiesAt the heart of the strategic priorities of the IAIS is the development of its Common Framework for the Supervision of Internationally Active Insurance Groups (ComFrame). Among other things, ComFrame includes the development of a global consolidated capital standard for large, complex international insurance companies. A group capital requirement for insurers with significant international operations is a new concept for U.S. insurance companies. State law includes capital requirements for insurance legal entities but does not include a group-wide or consolidated capital requirement for insurance groups. For the largest and most active global insurers, the Federal Reserve supports group-wide consolidated capital standards that are well tailored to insurance risks. We also strongly believe such standards must be deliberately developed through transparent processes and must be properly calibrated. A second key focus of the IAIS involves the identification of global systemically important insurers (G-SIIs) and the design of an enhanced regulatory and supervisory framework for G-SIIs. In 2013, the Financial Stability Board, in consultation with the IAIS and using a methodology developed by the IAIS, designated a set of nine global insurance firms (including three U.S.-based insurers) as G-SIIs. In addition to developing enhanced supervision standards and resolution planning requirements for G-SIIs, the IAIS continues to refine its G-SII designation methodology and to work diligently to design loss absorbency requirements for G-SIIs. Last year, the IAIS released the Basic Capital Requirement (BCR) for G-SIIs. It is the first international consolidated capital standard developed for the insurance industry. The IAIS developed the BCR to help provide a level playing field for the capital adequacy of global insurance firms with the largest systemic footprints. The IAIS intends to supplement the BCR with a Higher Loss Absorbency (HLA) capital standard for G-SIIs. The IAIS expects to release a consultation draft on HLA in June with an accompanying request for public comment. In time, the IAIS expects that the BCR will be replaced by the more detailed and comprehensive Insurance Capital Standard (ICS), which is currently under development. Although the ICS likely will apply to a broader range of internationally active insurance groups, the IAIS expects that the ICS ultimately will also serve as the basis upon which HLA capital requirements for G-SIIs are applied by the relevant national jurisdictions. IAIS began work on the ICS in 2013, issued an initial consultative proposal on the ICS late last year, and will continue work on the ICS for at least the next few years. This work includes the active participation of many volunteer insurance companies, including U.S. insurance companies, through field testing of various approaches and options, as well as the participation of state insurance supervisors and others. It is important to note that any standards adopted by the IAIS are not binding on the Federal Reserve, the FIO, state insurance regulators, or any U.S. insurance company. During the development of global standards for insurance firms by the IAIS, the Federal Reserve will work to ensure that the standards do not conflict with U.S. law and are appropriate for U.S. insurance markets and U.S. insurers. Moreover, the Federal Reserve would only adopt IAIS regulatory standards after following the well-established rulemaking protocols under U.S. law, which include a transparent process for proposal issuance, solicitation of public comments, and rule finalization. Cooperation and Coordination among U.S. Supervisors, Regulators, and the IndustryThe Federal Reserve, along with the FIO and the NAIC, continues to actively engage with U.S. insurance companies on the development of global regulatory standards for insurance firms. For instance, the Federal Reserve, the FIO, and the NAIC have hosted four separate meetings with U.S. participants on the BCR and ICS since August of last year. These meetings were distinct and independent of two international sessions hosted by the IAIS. Moreover, in the coming months, the Federal Reserve, the FIO, and the NAIC are planning additional sessions with U.S. insurance firms, consumer groups, trade associations, and other interested parties. The Federal Reserve is committed to continuing this active level of dialogue and engagement and to continuing our work with the FIO and state and international insurance regulators to develop a set of standards for global insurance firms that is consistent across countries and appropriate for internationally active U.S. insurers. Nothing in the IAIS work plan, including the group capital requirement, seeks to lessen the critical role of individual insurance legal entity supervision conducted by the U.S. states and foreign countries. Rather, group-wide consolidated supervision and consolidated capital requirements supplement this legal-entity approach with a perspective that considers the risks across the entire firm, including risks that emanate from non-insurance subsidiaries and entities within the group. The Federal Reserve is a consolidated holding company supervisor that focuses on identifying and evaluating risks, capital and liquidity adequacy, governance, and controls across its supervised organizations. U.S. insurers with a global footprint or global aspirations stand to benefit considerably from a level global regulatory framework that is strong but pragmatic. Reasonably consistent global insurance standards for internationally active insurers and international cooperation among global regulators provide the means to that end. The Federal Reserve has acted on the international insurance stage in an engaged partnership with our colleagues from the FIO, the state insurance commissioners, and the NAIC. Our multiparty dialogue, while respectful of each of our individual authorities, strives to develop a central "Team USA" position on the most critical matters of global insurance regulatory policy. Mr. Chairman, thank you for inviting me here today. I look forward to an active dialogue on these issues with you and other members of the committee. 1.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2014), "Incorporation of Federal Reserve Policies into the Savings and Loan Holding Company Supervision Program," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 14-9 (November 7).Return to text