Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal banking agencies today issued a statement to reinforce prudent risk-management practices related to commercial real estate (CRE) lending. The agencies have observed substantial growth in many CRE asset and lending markets, increased competitive pressures, rising CRE concentrations in banks, and an easing of CRE underwriting standards. Financial institutions should maintain underwriting discipline and exercise prudent risk-management practices to identify, measure, monitor, and manage the risks arising from CRE lending. Financial institutions should have risk-management practices and maintain capital commensurate with the level and nature of their CRE concentration risk. The statement reinforces existing guidance for CRE risk management and contains a table that lists interagency regulations and guidance related to CRE lending activities. Statement on Prudent Risk Management for Commercial Real Estate Lending (PDF)
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examination procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small institution asset-size thresholds are not subject to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks and savings associations. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 0.42 percent decrease in the CPI-W for the period ending in November 2015, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2016. The agencies will publish the adjustments in the Federal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) today published a consultative paper, "Revisions to the Standardized Approach for credit risk," which is the committee's second consultative paper on the topic. These proposed revisions would apply primarily to large, internationally active banking organizations and not to community banking organizations. The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency will consider the proposals identified in the consultative paper with the goal of developing a stronger and more transparent risk-based capital framework for the largest institutions. Any change to the U.S. risk-based capital rules as a result of proposals in this or subsequent papers released by the BCBS would be considered in a manner consistent with the U.S. notice and comment process. Interested parties are encouraged to review the consultative paper and provide comments directly to the BCBS Secretariat.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal banking agencies approved a notice requesting comment on the fourth and final set of regulatory categories as part of their review to identify outdated or unnecessary regulations applied to insured depository institutions. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA) requires the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Federal Reserve Board to review their regulations at least every 10 years. The agencies also are required to categorize and publish the regulations for comment, and submit a report to Congress that summarizes any significant issues raised by the comments and the relative merits of such issues. The agencies have divided their regulations into 12 categories and have requested comments for nine categories. The fourth and final notice seeks comment on regulations in three additional categories: rules of procedure; safety and soundness; and securities. Comments will be accepted within 90 days after publication of the notice in theFederal Register, expected shortly. In addition, as previously announced by the agencies, the scope of the EGRPRA review has been expanded to cover newly issued regulations that were not included in prior EGRPRA categories or rules that will be issued by year-end. Accordingly, comments also are being requested on those final rules. Any final rules issued between the publication of the finalFederal Registernotice and the end of the year will be posted on the EGRPRA website. Comments on regulations in any of the 12 categories will also be accepted by the agencies during this final comment period. Related Links: Comments:Submit|View
Pace University won the 12th annual national College Fed Challenge on Wednesday, a competition that encourages students to learn about the U.S. economy, monetary policymaking, and the role of the Federal Reserve System. The team, from New York, N.Y., represented the New York Federal Reserve District and included Katherine Craig, Daniella Gambino, Omar Habib, Melissa Navas, and Yuliya Palianok. The finals were held in the Board Room at the Board of Governors as the capstone to five district competitions held around the country. The other national finalists were second place: The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, with honorable mentions for, Bentley University, Northwestern University, and Princeton University. College Fed Challenge is a team competition for undergraduate students. Teams analyze economic and financial conditions and formulate a monetary policy recommendation, modeling the Federal Open Market Committee. "Preparation for Fed Challenge expands students' knowledge of the U.S. economy, monetary policy, and the work of the Federal Reserve," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Janet L. Yellen. "The competition is also intended to foster interest in economics and finance as fields for advanced study and careers." Teams competing in the College Fed Challenge finals gave 15-minute presentations and answered questions for a panel of judges. Teams were evaluated on economic analysis, responses to judges' questions, teamwork, and presentation. The judges were Ellen Meade, senior adviser in the Division of Monetary Affairs at the Federal Reserve Board; Paolo Pesenti, senior vice president and monetary policy adviser to the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; and John Weinberg, senior vice president and special adviser to the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. The teams competed in their local Reserve Bank Districts, and the top teams moved on to the finals in Washington, D.C. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
On December 3, 2015, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on December 3, 2015, and will mature on December 10, 2015. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the December 15-16 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the December 15-16 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the designation of the chairs and deputy chairs of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks for 2016. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as chair and a second as deputy chair. Following are the names of the chairs and deputy chairs designated by the Board for 2016: BostonJohn F. Fish, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Suffolk Construction Company, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts, named Chair. Gary L. Gottlieb, M.D., Chief Executive Officer, Partners In Health, Boston, Massachusetts, named Deputy Chair. New YorkEmily K. Rafferty, President Emerita, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York, renamed Chair. Sara Horowitz, Executive Director, Freelancers Union, Brooklyn, New York, renamed Deputy Chair. PhiladelphiaMichael J. Angelakis, Senior Advisor – Executive Management Committee, Comcast Corporation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, named Chair. Brian McNeill, President and Chief Executive Officer, TouchPoint, Inc., Concordville, Pennsylvania, named Deputy Chair. ClevelandChristopher M. Connor, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, The Sherwin-Williams Company, Cleveland, Ohio, renamed Chair. John P. Surma, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer (Retired), United States Steel Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chair. RichmondRussell C. Lindner, Executive Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, The Forge Company, Washington, D.C., renamed Chair. Margaret G. Lewis, President, HCA Capital Division (Retired), Richmond, Virginia, renamed Deputy Chair. AtlantaThomas A. Fanning, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Southern Company, Atlanta, Georgia, renamed Chair. Michael J. Jackson, Chairman, Chief Executive Officer, and President, AutoNation, Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida,renamed Deputy Chair. ChicagoGreg Brown, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Motorola Solutions, Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois, renamed Chair. Anne R. Pramaggiore, President and Chief Executive Officer, ComEd, Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chair. St. LouisRakesh Sachdev, President and Chief Executive Officer, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chair. Kathleen M. Mazzarella, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Graybar Electric Company, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chair. MinneapolisMayKao Y. Hang, President and Chief Executive Officer, Amherst H. Wilder Foundation, St. Paul, Minnesota, named Chair. Kendall J. Powell, Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer, General Mills, Minneapolis, Minnesota, named Deputy Chair. Kansas CitySteve Maestas, Chief Executive Officer, Maestas Development Group, Albuquerque, New Mexico, renamed Chair. Rose M. Washington, Executive Director, Tulsa Economic Development Corporation, Tulsa, Oklahoma, renamed Deputy Chair. DallasRenu Khator, Chancellor/President, University of Houston System/University of Houston, Houston, Texas, renamed Chair. Matthew K. Rose, Executive Chairman, BNSF Railway Company, Fort Worth, Texas, renamed Deputy Chair. San FranciscoRoy A. Vallee, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer (Retired), Avnet, Inc., Phoenix, Arizona, renamed Chair. Alexander R. Mehran, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Sunset Development Company, San Ramon, California, renamed Deputy Chair.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, to acquire National Penn Bancshares, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire its wholly owned subsidiary, National Penn Bank, both of Allentown, Pennsylvania. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application filed by Chemical Bank, Midland, Michigan, to establish a mobile branch in several counties in Michigan. Those counties include: Alcona, Allegan, Alpena, Antrim, Arenac, Bay, Barry, Benzie, Berrien, Branch, Calhoun, Cass, Cheboygan, Charlevoix, Clare, Crawford, Emmet, Gladwin, Grand Traverse, Gratiot, Hillsdale, Huron, Ionia, Iosco, Isabella, Kalamazoo, Kalkaska, Kent, Lake, Leelanau, Manistee, Mason, Mecosta, Midland, Missaukee, Montcalm, Montmorency, Newaygo, Ogemaw, Osceola, Oscoda, Otsego, Ottawa, Presque Isle, Roscommon, Saginaw, Sanilac, Tuscola, Van Buren, and Wexford. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application by Taiwan Business Bank, Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application by Taiwan Business Bank, Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application by Taiwan Business Bank, Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday assessed a civil money penalty and issued a consent order to cease and desist against Higher One, Inc. of New Haven, Connecticut (Higher One). The order addresses deceptive practices by Higher One that misled students who obtained financial aid disbursements from institutions of higher education through Higher One. The practices employed by Higher One were misleading under section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act) and included: The consent Order requires Higher One to: "Deceptive marketing practices with respect to student loans will not be tolerated," said Federal Reserve Governor Lael Brainard. "This action ensures that students who were misled into paying fees to access their financial aid funds will receive restitution for those fees." Under the Restitution Plan ordered by the Board, students who opened a OneAccount with Higher One at Cole Taylor Bank of Chicago, Illinois or Customers Bank of Phoenixville, Pennsylvania, between May 4, 2012, the date the deceptive marketing practices involving the OneAccount began, through December 19, 2013, the date Higher One took corrective measures, will be reimbursed for the fees related to the deceptive practices. Consumers are not required to take any action to receive restitution. If the consumers have an open OneAccount, they will receive a credit to their account. For closed accounts, a check will be sent to the affected consumers. From May 2012 through August 2013, Higher One offered the OneAccount through Cole Taylor Bank. In June 2014, the Board took an enforcement action against Cole Taylor Bank, including a civil money penalty. An action is being pursued against Customers Bank, the state member bank that has held OneAccounts since August 2013. The Federal Reserve Board is taking this action in coordination with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which is separately addressing Higher One's deceptive practices related to OneAccounts offered through a state nonmember bank. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that the public comment period has been extended through January 31, 2016, for the application by KeyCorp, Cleveland, Ohio, to acquire First Niagara Financial Group, Inc., and thereby acquire control of its subsidiary bank, First Niagara Bank, National Association, both of Buffalo, New York, pursuant to section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended. The comment period is being extended to allow interested persons more time to review and provide comments concerning the proposal. Comments regarding this application must be received at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (Attention: Ms. Nadine Wallman, Vice President, 1455 East Sixth Street, Cleveland, Ohio 44101; or[email protected]) or the Office of the Secretary of the Board (20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, D.C. 20551) on or before January 31, 2016. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Mid State Banks Inc., Hawkinsville, GeorgiaWritten Agreement issued June 2, 2010Terminated December 9, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that it has not objected to the resubmitted capital plan from the Bank of America Corporation. The Board in March required Bank of America to resubmit its capital plan to address certain deficiencies in its capital planning processes, following the review of the firm's capital plan in the Board's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). Those deficiencies included weaknesses in aspects of the firm's loss and revenue modeling practices and its internal controls. Bank of America has made progress in remediating the identified deficiencies in its capital planning processes. In communicating its decision to Bank of America, the Federal Reserve indicated that the firm must continue to make steady, demonstrable progress prior to the 2016 CCAR cycle toward establishing and maintaining sound risk-management and capital-planning processes that are commensurate with the size and complexity of its operations and systemic importance. CCAR evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest U.S.-based bank holding companies, including the firms' planned capital actions such as dividend payments and share buybacks and issuances. Strong capital levels act as a cushion to absorb losses and help ensure that banking organizations have the ability to lend to households and businesses even in times of stress.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Bank from 3/4 percent to 1 percent, effective December 17, 2015.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved action on Thursday by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Bank from 3/4 percent to 1 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Calumet County Bank (PDF), Brillion, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated December 17, 2015 For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Habib Bank Limited (PDF), Karachi, Pakistan and Habib Bank Limited New York Branch, New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated December 11, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued a final rule providing information about how to apply the Board's revised capital framework issued in June 2013 to depository institution holding companies that are not organized as traditional stock corporations. Institutional investors with controlling interests in depository institutions and depository institution holding companies may structure their investments through non-stock entities, such as limited liability corporations and partnerships. To show how the capital instruments issued by these non-traditionally structured firms could meet the capital requirements under the Board's revised capital framework, the final rule issued today provides examples to clarify how instruments issued by these firms may qualify as regulatory capital. The final rule is generally similar to the proposed rule, issued in December 2014. To provide sufficient time for firms to review and revise their capital structures, the final rule extends the applicable compliance date with the Board's revised capital framework to July 1, 2016. The final rule also notes that the Board expects to propose regulatory capital rules in the future for savings and loan holding companies that are personal or family trusts and are not business trusts, and to clarify the treatment of employee stock ownership plans that are depository institution holding companies. The final rule provides temporary exclusions for these types of firms from the revised capital framework. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Columbus Junction State Bank, Columbus Junction, IowaWritten Agreement issued May 22, 2014Terminated November 1, 2015* Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. * The termination date for this enforcement action has been corrected as of December 11, 2015. It previously noted an incorrect date of termination.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday released guidance to its examiners and banking institutions that consolidates the capital planning expectations for all large financial institutions and clarifies differences in those expectations based on firm size and complexity. The guidance is designed to tailor the Federal Reserve's expectations for large financial institutions. For the largest and most complex firms, the guidance clarifies expectations that have been previously communicated to firms, including through past Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) exercises and related supervisory reviews. These firms are bank holding companies and intermediate holding companies of foreign banks subject to the Board's Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee framework, or firms with $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets or $10 billion or more in foreign exposures. For firms with more than $50 billion, but less than $250 billion in total consolidated assets, as well as less than $10 billion in foreign exposures, the guidance clarifies the supervisory expectations to be applied for the firms' capital planning processes. In general, the guidance is tailored to reflect the lower systemic risk profile and less complex operations of these firms, as compared to the largest and most complex firms. Bank holding companies with more than $50 billion in total consolidated assets are subject to the Board's CCAR, which evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest U.S.-based bank holding companies, including the firms' planned capital actions such as dividend payments and share buybacks and issuances. Strong capital levels absorb losses and help ensure that banking organizations have the ability to lend to households and businesses even in times of financial and economic stress. The guidance is effective for the 2016 CCAR cycle. SR 15-18:Federal Reserve Supervisory Assessment of Capital Planning and Positions for LISCC Firms and Large and Complex Firms SR 15-19:Federal Reserve Supervisory Assessment of Capital Planning and Positions for Large and Noncomplex Firms
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced it is seeking public comment on a proposed policy statement detailing the framework the Board would follow in setting the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB). The buffer is a macroprudential tool that can be used to increase the resilience of the financial system by raising capital requirements on internationally active banking organizations when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses in the future. The CCyB would then be available to help banking organizations absorb shocks associated with declining credit conditions. Implementation of the buffer could also help moderate fluctuations in the supply of credit. The proposed policy statement provides background on the range of financial-system vulnerabilities and other factors the Board could take into account as it evaluates settings for the buffer, including but not limited to, leverage in the nonfinancial sector, leverage in the financial sector, maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector, and asset valuation pressures. The Board also would monitor many financial and economic indicators and consider using different models to evaluate risks to financial stability. For example, the Board could consider indicators of the risk-taking, performance, and the financial condition of large banks, and combinations of the private nonfinancial credit-to-GDP (Gross Domestic Product) ratio with price trends in residential and commercial real estate. Because economic and financial risks are constantly evolving, the range of indicators and models that the Board would consider could change over time. The CCyB applies to banking organizations that are subject to the advanced approaches capital rules, generally those with more than $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign exposures, and to any depository institution subsidiary of such banking organizations. The CCyB is calculated based on private-sector credit exposures located in the United States. Once fully phased in, the buffer could range from 0 percent of risk-weighted assets in times of moderate financial-system vulnerabilities to a maximum of 2.5 percent when vulnerabilities are significantly elevated. Banks that fail to meet the buffer would face restrictions on capital distributions and the payment of discretionary bonuses. In addition to releasing the framework for comment, the Board also voted to affirm the CCyB amount at the current level of 0 percent. The Board consulted with staff of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in making this determination and in developing the policy statement. Should the Board decide to modify the CCyB amount in the future, banking organizations would have 12 months before the increase became effective, unless the Board establishes an earlier effective date. Today's actions are part of prudent planning by the Board and provide more guidance for a macroprudential tool that will be phased in beginning in 2016. Comments on the proposed policy statement are invited until February 19, 2016. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace. Household spending and business fixed investment have been increasing at solid rates in recent months, and the housing sector has improved further; however, net exports have been soft. A range of recent labor market indicators, including ongoing job gains and declining unemployment, shows further improvement and confirms that underutilization of labor resources has diminished appreciably since early this year. Inflation has continued to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; some survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have edged down. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will continue to expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators will continue to strengthen. Overall, taking into account domestic and international developments, the Committee sees the risks to the outlook for both economic activity and the labor market as balanced. Inflation is expected to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. The Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely. The Committee judges that there has been considerable improvement in labor market conditions this year, and it is reasonably confident that inflation will rise, over the medium term, to its 2 percent objective. Given the economic outlook, and recognizing the time it takes for policy actions to affect future economic outcomes, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1/4 to 1/2 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative after this increase, thereby supporting further improvement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Charles L. Evans; Stanley Fischer; Jeffrey M. Lacker; Dennis P. Lockhart; Jerome H. Powell; Daniel K. Tarullo; and John C. Williams.
On December 3, 2015, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves (currently 25 basis points) plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $5,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. ET to 12:30 p.m. ET, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's November 19, 2015,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Financial Stability: Policy Analysis and Data Needs" 2015 Financial Stability Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research, Washington, D.C. Watch live I would like to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research (OFR) for inviting me to address this conference.1 I have two goals this afternoon. First, I will briefly share my overall assessment of the current state of the vulnerabilities of the financial system. Second, I will outline areas where regulators and researchers can work to fill in gaps in our understanding or in the data available to monitor conditions, especially conditions outside the banking sector. With regard to current conditions, like most who follow financial sector developments, I see financial vulnerabilities in the United States as greatly reduced from a decade ago, on the eve of the beginning of the global financial crisis. But despite this relatively positive overall assessment, the financial system is dynamic and will evolve over time, and the tightening in regulation of the banking sector may push activity to other areas--and things happen. In particular, while current shadow banking activities are much reduced relative to their level in 2007-08, some developments remain hard to track, and interconnections across the financial system are hard to measure. Several steps have been taken to reduce shadow banking risks, including restrictions on the support banks can provide to shadow banking activities and reforms designed to lower the incentives of investors to run on money market mutual funds. But more needs to be done. For example, efforts to limit leverage used to finance securities positions, such as the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) recently finalized standard on minimum and potentially countercyclical haircuts on securities financing transactions, represent a further step in the right direction. As the financial system evolves, we will want, as my colleague Daniel Tarullo emphasized a few weeks ago, "to pursue a policy of case-by-case assessment that permits healthy forms of nonbank intermediation while protecting the financial system."2Doing so will require further development of the economic models that we use to understand interconnections across our complex financial system, along with better data. The Current State of the Financial SystemFactors promoting greater structural resilienceReturning to the current state of vulnerabilities, it is well known that a range of structural improvements mandated by the Congress and undertaken by the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies have strengthened financial stability over the past five years. Important changes in regulation and supervision include (1) requirements for more and higher-quality capital and other loss-absorbing capacity at banks; (2) new requirements for liquidity buffers at banks; (3) more stringent capital and liquidity requirements at the largest, most systemically important firms; (4) stress-testing of the largest banks; (5) the shift of the clearing of some derivatives to central counterparties (CCPs); (6) new margin requirements for uncleared derivatives transactions; (7) the designation of systemically important nonbank financial institutions by the Financial Stability Oversight Council; and (8) enhanced sharing of information among regulators and monitoring of risks to financial stability, in which the OFR has played a leading role.3This is an impressive list.4 Cyclical developmentsTurning to developments in the cyclical behavior of the financial system, at least five factors contribute to financial fragility: (1) high debt burdens at households and firms; (2) elevated leverage and maturity transformation within the financial sector; (3) complexity and interconnectedness in intermediation chains; (4) low risk premiums on assets, especially assets funded with debt; and (5) complacency on the part of investors, supervisors and decisionmakers in the private sector of the financial system. At the Federal Reserve, staff members present their assessment of vulnerabilities to the financial sector in terms of these risk factors and further organize these risk factors along institutional lines--distinguishing among developments within the banking sector and the nonbank sector, with a special focus on nonbank institutions that engage in maturity transformation or deploy notable degrees of leverage.5 Using this framework, I see overall financial vulnerabilities as moderate--that is, considerably lower than a decade ago. Asset valuations and debt burdens in key markets do not appear outsized. Perhaps most important, house prices, while substantially above their recent lows, do not appear broadly elevated relative to rents or disposable income, in contrast to conditions a decade ago. Moreover, household-sector debt growth has been modest and driven mainly by prime borrowers, although rapid growth in auto and student lending across the credit spectrum may create repayment challenges for some households. However, signs of valuation pressures are emerging in commercial real estate markets, where prices have been rising at a solid clip and lending standards have deteriorated, although debt growth has not yet accelerated notably. In the corporate debt markets, valuation pressures had been high for a while, before risk spreads widened and issuance slowed over the past year. The high issuance of corporate debt in recent years is evident in the near-record-high debt-to-asset ratios at speculative-grade and unrated corporations, making this sector vulnerable to adverse shocks. In addition, increased defaults could lead to sharper-than-expected price declines if concerns that liquidity in corporate bond markets is not as robust as in the past--a topic to which I will return in a few minutes--turn out to be justified. In the financial sector, regulatory capital ratios remain at historically high levels, and liquidity buffers appear sizable in the banking sector. Capital ratios continue to trend upward for both life and property and casualty insurers. A Closer Look at Shadow BankingStill, our view of developments at nonbank firms that have traditionally relied on high leverage and short-term wholesale funding and were at the center of the financial crisis--the shadow banking sector--remains incomplete.6 One source of information about leverage at nonbanks is the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS), which the Federal Reserve initiated after the crisis. The SCOOS provides information about the availability and terms of credit in securities financing and over-the-counter derivatives markets--for example, on credit granted by dealers to counterparties such as hedge funds or insurers to finance investments in securities like commercial mortgage-backed securities or corporate bonds. In recent years, the SCOOS has suggested relatively stable use of leverage across hedge funds and other counterparties--but this qualitative assessment provides only a high level, and very partial, view.7 An important risk factor during the mid-2000s was the growth in securitization and the creation of so-called high quality collateral. Currently, the volume of securitization is far below mid-2000s levels, with much of the decline reflecting the collapse in private residential mortgage-backed securities. Further, the low level of activity probably understates the improvement in risk, as pre-crisis securitization was highly reliant on short-term wholesale funding through vehicles such as asset-backed commercial paper programs to finance the highest-rated tranches. More generally, wholesale short-term liabilities have declined across the board. For example, the gross volume of repos (repurchase agreements) fell from its peak of nearly $5 trillion in early 2008 to about $3 trillion by early 2009, while total assets of money market mutual funds contracted from approximately $3.75 trillion at the end of 2008 to about $2.5 trillion in recent years.8The decline in the volume of repos is part of a more general pullback from risk among broker-dealers and their clients, and dealer balance sheets are much smaller, on balance, than pre-crisis. Some, perhaps even the lion's share, of the retreat in securitization, money market mutual fund shares, and repos is probably due to investors' memory of the financial crisis. Institutions and individuals burned by runs and losses from fire sale conditions have, at least for the time being, adopted a more prudent stance. But structural changes have also played a role. The largest broker-dealers are now part of bank holding companies and are therefore subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve, which includes regular stress-testing and tighter capital and liquidity requirements. The new liquidity rules for large banks and the capital surcharge for systemically important banks discourage reliance on short-term wholesale funding. And the ability of banks to provide support to structured investment vehicles has been substantially curtailed through both restrictions on the accounting treatment of formerly off-balance-sheet exposures and more stringent capital requirements, including the supplementary leverage ratio applying to on-balance-sheet assets and off-balance-sheet exposures. Indeed, some have asked whether the reduction in broker-dealer activities has gone too far, citing heightened concerns over a possible shortage of bond market liquidity as one example of potentially negative consequences. Most measures of market liquidity in Treasury and corporate bond markets have not shown signs of a deterioration in market functioning in recent years. There are certainly concerns that bond market liquidity may not be as robust as in the past, which could lead to sharper-than-anticipated price movements--of which the bond market events in mid-October 2014 are often cited as an example. However, a review of the evidence does not point clearly to a significant role for the reduction in broker-dealer balance sheets or regulatory changes as being responsible for any shifts in liquidity.9Other structural factors, such as the long-term trends toward higher participation of high-frequency trading firms in Treasury markets and greater disclosure of corporate bond trades, have been important. In my view, the reduction in leverage and maturity transformation associated with better regulations leaves the financial system much more resilient--even if such regulations have modestly affected market liquidity. What We Know and What We Do NotDespite my assessment of current vulnerabilities, conditions can change quickly. And important blind spots in our view of the financial system remain, in part owing to data gaps.When it comes to financial stability, what you do not know really can hurt you--and there remains a good bit we do not know.10 This lack of data can impede the design of regulation. There is a long history of data collection focused on banks, and supervisory data have contributed to our quantitative approach to regulation and supervision. For example, when we examine the likely implications of the failure of an institution's largest counterparty, we learn a great deal about the health of that institution and gain greater insight into its connections, through that counterparty, to other institutions. But data on a range of activities--including securities lending, bilateral repos, and derivatives trading--that create funding and leverage risks remain inadequate and hence could prove destabilizing if sufficiently large or widespread. We gain some insight into these markets through our supervisory relationships with the largest bank holding companies, but the activities of important nonbank market participants, such as asset managers, and the interconnections across institutions remain more opaque. Efforts are under way to deal with these gaps: The Legal Entity Identifier initiative is working to allow regulators and private counterparties to trace activities by institution; the OFR, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Federal Reserve are cooperating with the industry to collect data on bilateral repos; and the FSB has finalized standards for collection of data on securities financing transactions.11Regulators in the United States and abroad have begun to require the reporting of detailed derivatives transaction data to trade repositories. Unfortunately, as a recent report shows, inadequate data standards and limitations on authorities' access to trade repository data have prevented the benefits of derivatives trade data reporting from being fully realized.12 An illustration of the possible interaction between better data and better policies is the potential role of margins in securities financing transactions. The more stringent regulation of the banking sector may push short-term financing activities to less regulated entities. To limit such regulatory arbitrage, the Federal Reserve will be developing regulations that would establish minimum margins for securities financing transactions on a marketwide basis. The margins would apply to all market participants, thereby mitigating the risks associated with regulation along institutional lines. Improved data collection, such as mentioned earlier, would allow a better view of changes in conditions and potentially contribute to the deployment of countercyclical margins, thereby further decreasing the chances of a dynamic that culminates in adverse fire sales. Data Are Not Enough: We Need Theory, TooWhile the steps to improve data taken so far will help, gaps will remain, especially with regard to unregulated or weakly regulated entities. These gaps impede both market participants' ability to discipline the risks taken by institutions and supervisors' ability to take prompt action. Nonetheless, I would also like to emphasize to this group of researchers that better data, by themselves, are only the start of the journey to better understanding. An important area in need of development is economic modeling on interconnectedness, particularly on the interaction of shadow banking, banks, and the broader financial system.13It is instructive to consider the distress at Lehman Brothers and American International Group, Inc. (AIG), in the late summer and fall of 2008 and of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in the late summer and fall of 1998. In each case, banking supervisors and market participants appear not to have appreciated--at least until very late--the degree to which these institutions were intertwined with large banks and other financial institutions; in each case, the concerns over the direct connections of these institutions were compounded by uncertainty regarding their positions, the positions of other institutions, and the potential fire sale dynamics that could occur under forced liquidation of their assets. Most obviously, in each case the institution was not a bank, and understanding the implications of their distress required understanding the possibly different implications of their business models from those of banks, their interconnections with banks, and their interconnections with the broader financial system. Of course, many conditions across these episodes were very different, as were their end results in the falls of 1998 and 2008. Because of those differences, distress at LTCM was resolved by a private-sector solution with little discernible effect on the U.S. macroeconomy, while the fall of 2008 culminated in the Great Recession. But the commonalities across episodes illustrate similar data and conceptual gaps. Focusing on the conceptual gaps, the theoretical and empirical literature on interconnectedness sheds only partial light on the issues confronted in each of the highlighted episodes.14In addition to direct connections, common exposures and contagion are important sources of interconnectedness and fragility, as emphasized by Bagehot nearly 150 years ago.15On the empirical side, researchers have worked to construct networks of banks or broader sets of institutions based on direct connections or common holdings, but incomplete data and modeling challenges have typically implied a focus on only parts of institutions' balance sheets or on a subset of market participants.16On the theoretical side, a strand of literature notes that the connections among institutions in each of the previous frameworks may be too small to explain the types of systemic distress witnessed during the crisis, and instead emphasizes that complexity within firms and in interconnections heightens the risk of correlated runs.17This insight rings true: The complexity of Lehman's, AIG's, and even LTCM's balance sheets and interactions with other institutions almost surely contributed to market spillovers during their distress. But it is also true that little research has been undertaken that distinguishes between banks and nonbanks, or highlights how their interactions are driven by economic incentives. Such research could guide regulator efforts to collect data and set policies to limit possible instabilities associated with interconnectedness. At one level, this is not surprising: As we all know, models are abstractions; nonetheless, improving the conceptual toolkit with which we gauge interconnectedness along practical dimensions is clearly needed.18 SummaryMy current assessment of the risks to financial stability remains tentative and subject to change as we learn more or conditions shift. Policymakers and researchers need better models and data to understand the interconnections between the banking system and nonbank financial institutions. Indeed, one of the themes of this conference is data needs, and the focus on this issue is an important aspect of this conference. History has demonstrated that risks evolve in response to regulatory pressure and the animal spirits that emerge as memories fade, as well as to animal spirits. As a result, the infrastructure needed to learn the things we don't know needs to be put in place. An essential element of that infrastructure is learning the lessons of history – both the lessons of what happened, and the fact that supervisors and regulators will on occasion be surprised. Learning those lessons is not as simple a task as it may sound. But it is certainly a far more important task than it sounds. ReferencesAcemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2015). "Systemic Risk and Stability in Financial Networks,"American Economic Review,vol. 105 (February), pp. 564-608. Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2013). "Financial Stability Monitoring (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-21. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Allen, Franklin, Ana Babus, and Elena Carletti (2012). "Asset Commonality, Debt Maturity and Systemic Risk,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 104 (June), pp. 519-34. Bagehot, Walter ([1873] 1897).Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market.New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. Bao, Jack, Josh David, and Song Han (2015). "The Runnables," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 3. Bisias, Dimitrios, Mark Flood, Andrew W. Lo, and Stavros Valavanis (2012). "A Survey of Systemic Risk Analytics (PDF)," OFR Working Paper 0001. Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research, January. Caballero, Ricardo J., and Alp Simsek (2013). "Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity,"Journal of Finance,vol. 68 (December), pp. 2549-87. Duarte, Fernando, and Thomas Eisenbach (2015). "Fire-Sale Spillovers and Systemic Risk (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 645. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February. Financial Stability Board (2015a).Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2015 (PDF). Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. -------- (2015b).Thematic Review on OTC Derivatives Trade Reporting: Peer Review Report (PDF).Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. -------- (2015c).Transforming Shadow Banking into Resilient Market-based Finance:Standards and Processes for Global Securities Financing Data Collection and Aggregation (PDF). Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. Fischer, Stanley (2014). "Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We?" speech delivered at the Martin Feldstein Lecture, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. -------- (2015). "Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 2. Flood, Mark D., Victoria L. Lemieux, Margaret Varga, and B.L. William Wong (2015). "The Application of Visual Analytics to Financial Stability Monitoring (PDF)," OFR Working Paper 14-02c. Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research, July. Hale, Galina, Tümer Kapan, and Camelia Minoiu (2014). "Crisis Transmission in the Global Banking Network (PDF)," working paper, December Kara, Gazi, Mary Tian, and Margaret Yellen (2015). "Taxonomy of Studies on Interconnectedness," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 31. Miller, Thomas P. (2009). "What You Don't Know Can Hurt You,"American,May 27. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2015). "Thinking Critically about Nonbank Financial Intermediation," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, November 17. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2015).Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 (PDF).Washington: Treasury, Board of Governors, FRBNY, SEC, and CFTC, July. Yellen, Janet L. (2013). "Interconnectedness and Systemic Risk: Lessons from the Financial Crisis and Policy Implications," speech delivered at the American Economic Association/American Finance Association Joint Luncheon, San Diego, Calif., January 4. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Michael Kiley and Nellie Liang for their contributions to this speech.Return to text 2.See Tarullo (2015), which also provides a complementary review of the structural changes in shadow banking activities that I will highlight.Return to text 3.The OFR reports its monitoring efforts regularly, including in its annual reports (available on the OFR website athttp://financialresearch.gov/annual-reports). Research by OFR staff members on similar issues includes Flood and others (2015).Return to text 4.For a more comprehensive review of structural changes since the financial crisis, see my Feldstein lecture (Fischer, 2014).Return to text 5.For a discussion organizing vulnerabilities along these lines, see Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013).Return to text 6.I have previously discussed the lines between bank and nonbank activities (Fischer (2015)). The term "shadow banking" has been in use for some time, and I continue to use this term in this speech largely to ensure some connection to discussion in recent years. Recently, discussions of bank-like and other financial activities have begun to draw more clear distinctions regarding potential financial stability risks across activities; see Financial Stability Board (2015a) and the recent discussion in Tarullo (2015). Finally, money market mutual fund (MMMF) shares are not, technically, debt claims. However, the regulatory framework and historical precedent (in which MMMF shares had a fixed net asset value under normal conditions) appear to have led investors to treat such shares similarly to uninsured deposits.Return to text 7.The SCOOS is available on the Board'swebsite.Return to text 8.See Bao, David, and Han (2015).Return to text 9.For a discussion of developments in U.S. Treasury markets on October 15, 2014, see U.S. Treasury and others (2015).Return to text 10.The phrase "what you don't know can't hurt you" is well known. According to theOxford Dictionary of Proverbs,the oldest written version of this saying comes from 1576, inPetit Palace,by G. Pettie (as noted in Miller (2009)). (I am indebted to Michael Kiley for this reference.)Return to text 11.Information on the cooperative effort to collect data on bilateral repos is available on the OFRwebsite. For details on the FSB's standards for collecting data on securities financing transactions, see Financial Stability Board (2015c).Return to text 12.See Financial Stability Board (2015b).Return to text 13.Then Federal Reserve Board Vice Chair Yellen discussed these issues in January 2013 (Yellen, 2013), in a speech that includes a detailed discussion of possible interactions among financial institutions, along with very clear graphic representations of potential systemic interactions.Return to text 14.For a discussion of various empirical measures outside the network literature, see Bisias and others (2012); and Kara, Tian, and Yellen (2015).Return to text 15.Bagehot (1873 [1897]) has long been viewed as a classic reference describing panics in money markets and the proper response of the central bank to such panics.Return to text 16.Duarte and Eisenbach (2015) examine interconnections associated with fire sales and common exposures. Hale, Kapan, and Minoiu (2014) examine a bank network and discuss related approaches.Return to text 17.Caballero and Simsek (2013) discuss complexity and network stability. Research emphasizing direct connections and common holdings includes Allen, Babus, and Carletti (2012); and Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015).Return to text 18.In a sense, this section has discussed what soon after the collapse of Lehman Brothers began to be called "macroprudential supervision", by which at that stage was meant supervision that focused on the dynamics of the financial system that resulted from interactions among financial institutions, of which the worldwide impact of the Lehman failure was the outstanding example. Over the course of a few years, the term "macroprudential policies" began generally to be used as a description of sector-specific policy instruments that could be used to deal with potential instabilities in a particular sector, usually the housing sector.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Financial Stability: Policy Analysis and Data Needs" 2015 Financial Stability Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research, Washington, D.C. Watch live I would like to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research (OFR) for inviting me to address this conference.1 I have two goals this afternoon. First, I will briefly share my overall assessment of the current state of the vulnerabilities of the financial system. Second, I will outline areas where regulators and researchers can work to fill in gaps in our understanding or in the data available to monitor conditions, especially conditions outside the banking sector. With regard to current conditions, like most who follow financial sector developments, I see financial vulnerabilities in the United States as greatly reduced from a decade ago, on the eve of the beginning of the global financial crisis. But despite this relatively positive overall assessment, the financial system is dynamic and will evolve over time, and the tightening in regulation of the banking sector may push activity to other areas--and things happen. In particular, while current shadow banking activities are much reduced relative to their level in 2007-08, some developments remain hard to track, and interconnections across the financial system are hard to measure. Several steps have been taken to reduce shadow banking risks, including restrictions on the support banks can provide to shadow banking activities and reforms designed to lower the incentives of investors to run on money market mutual funds. But more needs to be done. For example, efforts to limit leverage used to finance securities positions, such as the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) recently finalized standard on minimum and potentially countercyclical haircuts on securities financing transactions, represent a further step in the right direction. As the financial system evolves, we will want, as my colleague Daniel Tarullo emphasized a few weeks ago, "to pursue a policy of case-by-case assessment that permits healthy forms of nonbank intermediation while protecting the financial system."2Doing so will require further development of the economic models that we use to understand interconnections across our complex financial system, along with better data. The Current State of the Financial SystemFactors promoting greater structural resilienceReturning to the current state of vulnerabilities, it is well known that a range of structural improvements mandated by the Congress and undertaken by the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies have strengthened financial stability over the past five years. Important changes in regulation and supervision include (1) requirements for more and higher-quality capital and other loss-absorbing capacity at banks; (2) new requirements for liquidity buffers at banks; (3) more stringent capital and liquidity requirements at the largest, most systemically important firms; (4) stress-testing of the largest banks; (5) the shift of the clearing of some derivatives to central counterparties (CCPs); (6) new margin requirements for uncleared derivatives transactions; (7) the designation of systemically important nonbank financial institutions by the Financial Stability Oversight Council; and (8) enhanced sharing of information among regulators and monitoring of risks to financial stability, in which the OFR has played a leading role.3This is an impressive list.4 Cyclical developmentsTurning to developments in the cyclical behavior of the financial system, at least five factors contribute to financial fragility: (1) high debt burdens at households and firms; (2) elevated leverage and maturity transformation within the financial sector; (3) complexity and interconnectedness in intermediation chains; (4) low risk premiums on assets, especially assets funded with debt; and (5) complacency on the part of investors, supervisors and decisionmakers in the private sector of the financial system. At the Federal Reserve, staff members present their assessment of vulnerabilities to the financial sector in terms of these risk factors and further organize these risk factors along institutional lines--distinguishing among developments within the banking sector and the nonbank sector, with a special focus on nonbank institutions that engage in maturity transformation or deploy notable degrees of leverage.5 Using this framework, I see overall financial vulnerabilities as moderate--that is, considerably lower than a decade ago. Asset valuations and debt burdens in key markets do not appear outsized. Perhaps most important, house prices, while substantially above their recent lows, do not appear broadly elevated relative to rents or disposable income, in contrast to conditions a decade ago. Moreover, household-sector debt growth has been modest and driven mainly by prime borrowers, although rapid growth in auto and student lending across the credit spectrum may create repayment challenges for some households. However, signs of valuation pressures are emerging in commercial real estate markets, where prices have been rising at a solid clip and lending standards have deteriorated, although debt growth has not yet accelerated notably. In the corporate debt markets, valuation pressures had been high for a while, before risk spreads widened and issuance slowed over the past year. The high issuance of corporate debt in recent years is evident in the near-record-high debt-to-asset ratios at speculative-grade and unrated corporations, making this sector vulnerable to adverse shocks. In addition, increased defaults could lead to sharper-than-expected price declines if concerns that liquidity in corporate bond markets is not as robust as in the past--a topic to which I will return in a few minutes--turn out to be justified. In the financial sector, regulatory capital ratios remain at historically high levels, and liquidity buffers appear sizable in the banking sector. Capital ratios continue to trend upward for both life and property and casualty insurers. A Closer Look at Shadow BankingStill, our view of developments at nonbank firms that have traditionally relied on high leverage and short-term wholesale funding and were at the center of the financial crisis--the shadow banking sector--remains incomplete.6 One source of information about leverage at nonbanks is the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS), which the Federal Reserve initiated after the crisis. The SCOOS provides information about the availability and terms of credit in securities financing and over-the-counter derivatives markets--for example, on credit granted by dealers to counterparties such as hedge funds or insurers to finance investments in securities like commercial mortgage-backed securities or corporate bonds. In recent years, the SCOOS has suggested relatively stable use of leverage across hedge funds and other counterparties--but this qualitative assessment provides only a high level, and very partial, view.7 An important risk factor during the mid-2000s was the growth in securitization and the creation of so-called high quality collateral. Currently, the volume of securitization is far below mid-2000s levels, with much of the decline reflecting the collapse in private residential mortgage-backed securities. Further, the low level of activity probably understates the improvement in risk, as pre-crisis securitization was highly reliant on short-term wholesale funding through vehicles such as asset-backed commercial paper programs to finance the highest-rated tranches. More generally, wholesale short-term liabilities have declined across the board. For example, the gross volume of repos (repurchase agreements) fell from its peak of nearly $5 trillion in early 2008 to about $3 trillion by early 2009, while total assets of money market mutual funds contracted from approximately $3.75 trillion at the end of 2008 to about $2.5 trillion in recent years.8The decline in the volume of repos is part of a more general pullback from risk among broker-dealers and their clients, and dealer balance sheets are much smaller, on balance, than pre-crisis. Some, perhaps even the lion's share, of the retreat in securitization, money market mutual fund shares, and repos is probably due to investors' memory of the financial crisis. Institutions and individuals burned by runs and losses from fire sale conditions have, at least for the time being, adopted a more prudent stance. But structural changes have also played a role. The largest broker-dealers are now part of bank holding companies and are therefore subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve, which includes regular stress-testing and tighter capital and liquidity requirements. The new liquidity rules for large banks and the capital surcharge for systemically important banks discourage reliance on short-term wholesale funding. And the ability of banks to provide support to structured investment vehicles has been substantially curtailed through both restrictions on the accounting treatment of formerly off-balance-sheet exposures and more stringent capital requirements, including the supplementary leverage ratio applying to on-balance-sheet assets and off-balance-sheet exposures. Indeed, some have asked whether the reduction in broker-dealer activities has gone too far, citing heightened concerns over a possible shortage of bond market liquidity as one example of potentially negative consequences. Most measures of market liquidity in Treasury and corporate bond markets have not shown signs of a deterioration in market functioning in recent years. There are certainly concerns that bond market liquidity may not be as robust as in the past, which could lead to sharper-than-anticipated price movements--of which the bond market events in mid-October 2014 are often cited as an example. However, a review of the evidence does not point clearly to a significant role for the reduction in broker-dealer balance sheets or regulatory changes as being responsible for any shifts in liquidity.9Other structural factors, such as the long-term trends toward higher participation of high-frequency trading firms in Treasury markets and greater disclosure of corporate bond trades, have been important. In my view, the reduction in leverage and maturity transformation associated with better regulations leaves the financial system much more resilient--even if such regulations have modestly affected market liquidity. What We Know and What We Do NotDespite my assessment of current vulnerabilities, conditions can change quickly. And important blind spots in our view of the financial system remain, in part owing to data gaps.When it comes to financial stability, what you do not know really can hurt you--and there remains a good bit we do not know.10 This lack of data can impede the design of regulation. There is a long history of data collection focused on banks, and supervisory data have contributed to our quantitative approach to regulation and supervision. For example, when we examine the likely implications of the failure of an institution's largest counterparty, we learn a great deal about the health of that institution and gain greater insight into its connections, through that counterparty, to other institutions. But data on a range of activities--including securities lending, bilateral repos, and derivatives trading--that create funding and leverage risks remain inadequate and hence could prove destabilizing if sufficiently large or widespread. We gain some insight into these markets through our supervisory relationships with the largest bank holding companies, but the activities of important nonbank market participants, such as asset managers, and the interconnections across institutions remain more opaque. Efforts are under way to deal with these gaps: The Legal Entity Identifier initiative is working to allow regulators and private counterparties to trace activities by institution; the OFR, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Federal Reserve are cooperating with the industry to collect data on bilateral repos; and the FSB has finalized standards for collection of data on securities financing transactions.11Regulators in the United States and abroad have begun to require the reporting of detailed derivatives transaction data to trade repositories. Unfortunately, as a recent report shows, inadequate data standards and limitations on authorities' access to trade repository data have prevented the benefits of derivatives trade data reporting from being fully realized.12 An illustration of the possible interaction between better data and better policies is the potential role of margins in securities financing transactions. The more stringent regulation of the banking sector may push short-term financing activities to less regulated entities. To limit such regulatory arbitrage, the Federal Reserve will be developing regulations that would establish minimum margins for securities financing transactions on a marketwide basis. The margins would apply to all market participants, thereby mitigating the risks associated with regulation along institutional lines. Improved data collection, such as mentioned earlier, would allow a better view of changes in conditions and potentially contribute to the deployment of countercyclical margins, thereby further decreasing the chances of a dynamic that culminates in adverse fire sales. Data Are Not Enough: We Need Theory, TooWhile the steps to improve data taken so far will help, gaps will remain, especially with regard to unregulated or weakly regulated entities. These gaps impede both market participants' ability to discipline the risks taken by institutions and supervisors' ability to take prompt action. Nonetheless, I would also like to emphasize to this group of researchers that better data, by themselves, are only the start of the journey to better understanding. An important area in need of development is economic modeling on interconnectedness, particularly on the interaction of shadow banking, banks, and the broader financial system.13It is instructive to consider the distress at Lehman Brothers and American International Group, Inc. (AIG), in the late summer and fall of 2008 and of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in the late summer and fall of 1998. In each case, banking supervisors and market participants appear not to have appreciated--at least until very late--the degree to which these institutions were intertwined with large banks and other financial institutions; in each case, the concerns over the direct connections of these institutions were compounded by uncertainty regarding their positions, the positions of other institutions, and the potential fire sale dynamics that could occur under forced liquidation of their assets. Most obviously, in each case the institution was not a bank, and understanding the implications of their distress required understanding the possibly different implications of their business models from those of banks, their interconnections with banks, and their interconnections with the broader financial system. Of course, many conditions across these episodes were very different, as were their end results in the falls of 1998 and 2008. Because of those differences, distress at LTCM was resolved by a private-sector solution with little discernible effect on the U.S. macroeconomy, while the fall of 2008 culminated in the Great Recession. But the commonalities across episodes illustrate similar data and conceptual gaps. Focusing on the conceptual gaps, the theoretical and empirical literature on interconnectedness sheds only partial light on the issues confronted in each of the highlighted episodes.14In addition to direct connections, common exposures and contagion are important sources of interconnectedness and fragility, as emphasized by Bagehot nearly 150 years ago.15On the empirical side, researchers have worked to construct networks of banks or broader sets of institutions based on direct connections or common holdings, but incomplete data and modeling challenges have typically implied a focus on only parts of institutions' balance sheets or on a subset of market participants.16On the theoretical side, a strand of literature notes that the connections among institutions in each of the previous frameworks may be too small to explain the types of systemic distress witnessed during the crisis, and instead emphasizes that complexity within firms and in interconnections heightens the risk of correlated runs.17This insight rings true: The complexity of Lehman's, AIG's, and even LTCM's balance sheets and interactions with other institutions almost surely contributed to market spillovers during their distress. But it is also true that little research has been undertaken that distinguishes between banks and nonbanks, or highlights how their interactions are driven by economic incentives. Such research could guide regulator efforts to collect data and set policies to limit possible instabilities associated with interconnectedness. At one level, this is not surprising: As we all know, models are abstractions; nonetheless, improving the conceptual toolkit with which we gauge interconnectedness along practical dimensions is clearly needed.18 SummaryMy current assessment of the risks to financial stability remains tentative and subject to change as we learn more or conditions shift. Policymakers and researchers need better models and data to understand the interconnections between the banking system and nonbank financial institutions. Indeed, one of the themes of this conference is data needs, and the focus on this issue is an important aspect of this conference. History has demonstrated that risks evolve in response to regulatory pressure and the animal spirits that emerge as memories fade, as well as to animal spirits. As a result, the infrastructure needed to learn the things we don't know needs to be put in place. An essential element of that infrastructure is learning the lessons of history – both the lessons of what happened, and the fact that supervisors and regulators will on occasion be surprised. Learning those lessons is not as simple a task as it may sound. But it is certainly a far more important task than it sounds. ReferencesAcemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2015). "Systemic Risk and Stability in Financial Networks,"American Economic Review,vol. 105 (February), pp. 564-608. Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2013). "Financial Stability Monitoring (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-21. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Allen, Franklin, Ana Babus, and Elena Carletti (2012). "Asset Commonality, Debt Maturity and Systemic Risk,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 104 (June), pp. 519-34. Bagehot, Walter ([1873] 1897).Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market.New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. Bao, Jack, Josh David, and Song Han (2015). "The Runnables," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 3. Bisias, Dimitrios, Mark Flood, Andrew W. Lo, and Stavros Valavanis (2012). "A Survey of Systemic Risk Analytics (PDF)," OFR Working Paper 0001. Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research, January. Caballero, Ricardo J., and Alp Simsek (2013). "Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity,"Journal of Finance,vol. 68 (December), pp. 2549-87. Duarte, Fernando, and Thomas Eisenbach (2015). "Fire-Sale Spillovers and Systemic Risk (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 645. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February. Financial Stability Board (2015a).Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2015 (PDF). Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. -------- (2015b).Thematic Review on OTC Derivatives Trade Reporting: Peer Review Report (PDF).Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. -------- (2015c).Transforming Shadow Banking into Resilient Market-based Finance:Standards and Processes for Global Securities Financing Data Collection and Aggregation (PDF). Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. Fischer, Stanley (2014). "Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We?" speech delivered at the Martin Feldstein Lecture, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. -------- (2015). "Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 2. Flood, Mark D., Victoria L. Lemieux, Margaret Varga, and B.L. William Wong (2015). "The Application of Visual Analytics to Financial Stability Monitoring (PDF)," OFR Working Paper 14-02c. Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research, July. Hale, Galina, Tümer Kapan, and Camelia Minoiu (2014). "Crisis Transmission in the Global Banking Network (PDF)," working paper, December Kara, Gazi, Mary Tian, and Margaret Yellen (2015). "Taxonomy of Studies on Interconnectedness," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 31. Miller, Thomas P. (2009). "What You Don't Know Can Hurt You,"American,May 27. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2015). "Thinking Critically about Nonbank Financial Intermediation," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, November 17. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2015).Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 (PDF).Washington: Treasury, Board of Governors, FRBNY, SEC, and CFTC, July. Yellen, Janet L. (2013). "Interconnectedness and Systemic Risk: Lessons from the Financial Crisis and Policy Implications," speech delivered at the American Economic Association/American Finance Association Joint Luncheon, San Diego, Calif., January 4. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Michael Kiley and Nellie Liang for their contributions to this speech.Return to text 2.See Tarullo (2015), which also provides a complementary review of the structural changes in shadow banking activities that I will highlight.Return to text 3.The OFR reports its monitoring efforts regularly, including in its annual reports (available on the OFR website athttp://financialresearch.gov/annual-reports). Research by OFR staff members on similar issues includes Flood and others (2015).Return to text 4.For a more comprehensive review of structural changes since the financial crisis, see my Feldstein lecture (Fischer, 2014).Return to text 5.For a discussion organizing vulnerabilities along these lines, see Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013).Return to text 6.I have previously discussed the lines between bank and nonbank activities (Fischer (2015)). The term "shadow banking" has been in use for some time, and I continue to use this term in this speech largely to ensure some connection to discussion in recent years. Recently, discussions of bank-like and other financial activities have begun to draw more clear distinctions regarding potential financial stability risks across activities; see Financial Stability Board (2015a) and the recent discussion in Tarullo (2015). Finally, money market mutual fund (MMMF) shares are not, technically, debt claims. However, the regulatory framework and historical precedent (in which MMMF shares had a fixed net asset value under normal conditions) appear to have led investors to treat such shares similarly to uninsured deposits.Return to text 7.The SCOOS is available on the Board'swebsite.Return to text 8.See Bao, David, and Han (2015).Return to text 9.For a discussion of developments in U.S. Treasury markets on October 15, 2014, see U.S. Treasury and others (2015).Return to text 10.The phrase "what you don't know can't hurt you" is well known. According to theOxford Dictionary of Proverbs,the oldest written version of this saying comes from 1576, inPetit Palace,by G. Pettie (as noted in Miller (2009)). (I am indebted to Michael Kiley for this reference.)Return to text 11.Information on the cooperative effort to collect data on bilateral repos is available on the OFRwebsite. For details on the FSB's standards for collecting data on securities financing transactions, see Financial Stability Board (2015c).Return to text 12.See Financial Stability Board (2015b).Return to text 13.Then Federal Reserve Board Vice Chair Yellen discussed these issues in January 2013 (Yellen, 2013), in a speech that includes a detailed discussion of possible interactions among financial institutions, along with very clear graphic representations of potential systemic interactions.Return to text 14.For a discussion of various empirical measures outside the network literature, see Bisias and others (2012); and Kara, Tian, and Yellen (2015).Return to text 15.Bagehot (1873 [1897]) has long been viewed as a classic reference describing panics in money markets and the proper response of the central bank to such panics.Return to text 16.Duarte and Eisenbach (2015) examine interconnections associated with fire sales and common exposures. Hale, Kapan, and Minoiu (2014) examine a bank network and discuss related approaches.Return to text 17.Caballero and Simsek (2013) discuss complexity and network stability. Research emphasizing direct connections and common holdings includes Allen, Babus, and Carletti (2012); and Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015).Return to text 18.In a sense, this section has discussed what soon after the collapse of Lehman Brothers began to be called "macroprudential supervision", by which at that stage was meant supervision that focused on the dynamics of the financial system that resulted from interactions among financial institutions, of which the worldwide impact of the Lehman failure was the outstanding example. Over the course of a few years, the term "macroprudential policies" began generally to be used as a description of sector-specific policy instruments that could be used to deal with potential instabilities in a particular sector, usually the housing sector.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Financial Stability: Policy Analysis and Data Needs" 2015 Financial Stability Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research, Washington, D.C. Watch live I would like to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research (OFR) for inviting me to address this conference.1 I have two goals this afternoon. First, I will briefly share my overall assessment of the current state of the vulnerabilities of the financial system. Second, I will outline areas where regulators and researchers can work to fill in gaps in our understanding or in the data available to monitor conditions, especially conditions outside the banking sector. With regard to current conditions, like most who follow financial sector developments, I see financial vulnerabilities in the United States as greatly reduced from a decade ago, on the eve of the beginning of the global financial crisis. But despite this relatively positive overall assessment, the financial system is dynamic and will evolve over time, and the tightening in regulation of the banking sector may push activity to other areas--and things happen. In particular, while current shadow banking activities are much reduced relative to their level in 2007-08, some developments remain hard to track, and interconnections across the financial system are hard to measure. Several steps have been taken to reduce shadow banking risks, including restrictions on the support banks can provide to shadow banking activities and reforms designed to lower the incentives of investors to run on money market mutual funds. But more needs to be done. For example, efforts to limit leverage used to finance securities positions, such as the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) recently finalized standard on minimum and potentially countercyclical haircuts on securities financing transactions, represent a further step in the right direction. As the financial system evolves, we will want, as my colleague Daniel Tarullo emphasized a few weeks ago, "to pursue a policy of case-by-case assessment that permits healthy forms of nonbank intermediation while protecting the financial system."2Doing so will require further development of the economic models that we use to understand interconnections across our complex financial system, along with better data. The Current State of the Financial SystemFactors promoting greater structural resilienceReturning to the current state of vulnerabilities, it is well known that a range of structural improvements mandated by the Congress and undertaken by the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies have strengthened financial stability over the past five years. Important changes in regulation and supervision include (1) requirements for more and higher-quality capital and other loss-absorbing capacity at banks; (2) new requirements for liquidity buffers at banks; (3) more stringent capital and liquidity requirements at the largest, most systemically important firms; (4) stress-testing of the largest banks; (5) the shift of the clearing of some derivatives to central counterparties (CCPs); (6) new margin requirements for uncleared derivatives transactions; (7) the designation of systemically important nonbank financial institutions by the Financial Stability Oversight Council; and (8) enhanced sharing of information among regulators and monitoring of risks to financial stability, in which the OFR has played a leading role.3This is an impressive list.4 Cyclical developmentsTurning to developments in the cyclical behavior of the financial system, at least five factors contribute to financial fragility: (1) high debt burdens at households and firms; (2) elevated leverage and maturity transformation within the financial sector; (3) complexity and interconnectedness in intermediation chains; (4) low risk premiums on assets, especially assets funded with debt; and (5) complacency on the part of investors, supervisors and decisionmakers in the private sector of the financial system. At the Federal Reserve, staff members present their assessment of vulnerabilities to the financial sector in terms of these risk factors and further organize these risk factors along institutional lines--distinguishing among developments within the banking sector and the nonbank sector, with a special focus on nonbank institutions that engage in maturity transformation or deploy notable degrees of leverage.5 Using this framework, I see overall financial vulnerabilities as moderate--that is, considerably lower than a decade ago. Asset valuations and debt burdens in key markets do not appear outsized. Perhaps most important, house prices, while substantially above their recent lows, do not appear broadly elevated relative to rents or disposable income, in contrast to conditions a decade ago. Moreover, household-sector debt growth has been modest and driven mainly by prime borrowers, although rapid growth in auto and student lending across the credit spectrum may create repayment challenges for some households. However, signs of valuation pressures are emerging in commercial real estate markets, where prices have been rising at a solid clip and lending standards have deteriorated, although debt growth has not yet accelerated notably. In the corporate debt markets, valuation pressures had been high for a while, before risk spreads widened and issuance slowed over the past year. The high issuance of corporate debt in recent years is evident in the near-record-high debt-to-asset ratios at speculative-grade and unrated corporations, making this sector vulnerable to adverse shocks. In addition, increased defaults could lead to sharper-than-expected price declines if concerns that liquidity in corporate bond markets is not as robust as in the past--a topic to which I will return in a few minutes--turn out to be justified. In the financial sector, regulatory capital ratios remain at historically high levels, and liquidity buffers appear sizable in the banking sector. Capital ratios continue to trend upward for both life and property and casualty insurers. A Closer Look at Shadow BankingStill, our view of developments at nonbank firms that have traditionally relied on high leverage and short-term wholesale funding and were at the center of the financial crisis--the shadow banking sector--remains incomplete.6 One source of information about leverage at nonbanks is the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS), which the Federal Reserve initiated after the crisis. The SCOOS provides information about the availability and terms of credit in securities financing and over-the-counter derivatives markets--for example, on credit granted by dealers to counterparties such as hedge funds or insurers to finance investments in securities like commercial mortgage-backed securities or corporate bonds. In recent years, the SCOOS has suggested relatively stable use of leverage across hedge funds and other counterparties--but this qualitative assessment provides only a high level, and very partial, view.7 An important risk factor during the mid-2000s was the growth in securitization and the creation of so-called high quality collateral. Currently, the volume of securitization is far below mid-2000s levels, with much of the decline reflecting the collapse in private residential mortgage-backed securities. Further, the low level of activity probably understates the improvement in risk, as pre-crisis securitization was highly reliant on short-term wholesale funding through vehicles such as asset-backed commercial paper programs to finance the highest-rated tranches. More generally, wholesale short-term liabilities have declined across the board. For example, the gross volume of repos (repurchase agreements) fell from its peak of nearly $5 trillion in early 2008 to about $3 trillion by early 2009, while total assets of money market mutual funds contracted from approximately $3.75 trillion at the end of 2008 to about $2.5 trillion in recent years.8The decline in the volume of repos is part of a more general pullback from risk among broker-dealers and their clients, and dealer balance sheets are much smaller, on balance, than pre-crisis. Some, perhaps even the lion's share, of the retreat in securitization, money market mutual fund shares, and repos is probably due to investors' memory of the financial crisis. Institutions and individuals burned by runs and losses from fire sale conditions have, at least for the time being, adopted a more prudent stance. But structural changes have also played a role. The largest broker-dealers are now part of bank holding companies and are therefore subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve, which includes regular stress-testing and tighter capital and liquidity requirements. The new liquidity rules for large banks and the capital surcharge for systemically important banks discourage reliance on short-term wholesale funding. And the ability of banks to provide support to structured investment vehicles has been substantially curtailed through both restrictions on the accounting treatment of formerly off-balance-sheet exposures and more stringent capital requirements, including the supplementary leverage ratio applying to on-balance-sheet assets and off-balance-sheet exposures. Indeed, some have asked whether the reduction in broker-dealer activities has gone too far, citing heightened concerns over a possible shortage of bond market liquidity as one example of potentially negative consequences. Most measures of market liquidity in Treasury and corporate bond markets have not shown signs of a deterioration in market functioning in recent years. There are certainly concerns that bond market liquidity may not be as robust as in the past, which could lead to sharper-than-anticipated price movements--of which the bond market events in mid-October 2014 are often cited as an example. However, a review of the evidence does not point clearly to a significant role for the reduction in broker-dealer balance sheets or regulatory changes as being responsible for any shifts in liquidity.9Other structural factors, such as the long-term trends toward higher participation of high-frequency trading firms in Treasury markets and greater disclosure of corporate bond trades, have been important. In my view, the reduction in leverage and maturity transformation associated with better regulations leaves the financial system much more resilient--even if such regulations have modestly affected market liquidity. What We Know and What We Do NotDespite my assessment of current vulnerabilities, conditions can change quickly. And important blind spots in our view of the financial system remain, in part owing to data gaps.When it comes to financial stability, what you do not know really can hurt you--and there remains a good bit we do not know.10 This lack of data can impede the design of regulation. There is a long history of data collection focused on banks, and supervisory data have contributed to our quantitative approach to regulation and supervision. For example, when we examine the likely implications of the failure of an institution's largest counterparty, we learn a great deal about the health of that institution and gain greater insight into its connections, through that counterparty, to other institutions. But data on a range of activities--including securities lending, bilateral repos, and derivatives trading--that create funding and leverage risks remain inadequate and hence could prove destabilizing if sufficiently large or widespread. We gain some insight into these markets through our supervisory relationships with the largest bank holding companies, but the activities of important nonbank market participants, such as asset managers, and the interconnections across institutions remain more opaque. Efforts are under way to deal with these gaps: The Legal Entity Identifier initiative is working to allow regulators and private counterparties to trace activities by institution; the OFR, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Federal Reserve are cooperating with the industry to collect data on bilateral repos; and the FSB has finalized standards for collection of data on securities financing transactions.11Regulators in the United States and abroad have begun to require the reporting of detailed derivatives transaction data to trade repositories. Unfortunately, as a recent report shows, inadequate data standards and limitations on authorities' access to trade repository data have prevented the benefits of derivatives trade data reporting from being fully realized.12 An illustration of the possible interaction between better data and better policies is the potential role of margins in securities financing transactions. The more stringent regulation of the banking sector may push short-term financing activities to less regulated entities. To limit such regulatory arbitrage, the Federal Reserve will be developing regulations that would establish minimum margins for securities financing transactions on a marketwide basis. The margins would apply to all market participants, thereby mitigating the risks associated with regulation along institutional lines. Improved data collection, such as mentioned earlier, would allow a better view of changes in conditions and potentially contribute to the deployment of countercyclical margins, thereby further decreasing the chances of a dynamic that culminates in adverse fire sales. Data Are Not Enough: We Need Theory, TooWhile the steps to improve data taken so far will help, gaps will remain, especially with regard to unregulated or weakly regulated entities. These gaps impede both market participants' ability to discipline the risks taken by institutions and supervisors' ability to take prompt action. Nonetheless, I would also like to emphasize to this group of researchers that better data, by themselves, are only the start of the journey to better understanding. An important area in need of development is economic modeling on interconnectedness, particularly on the interaction of shadow banking, banks, and the broader financial system.13It is instructive to consider the distress at Lehman Brothers and American International Group, Inc. (AIG), in the late summer and fall of 2008 and of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in the late summer and fall of 1998. In each case, banking supervisors and market participants appear not to have appreciated--at least until very late--the degree to which these institutions were intertwined with large banks and other financial institutions; in each case, the concerns over the direct connections of these institutions were compounded by uncertainty regarding their positions, the positions of other institutions, and the potential fire sale dynamics that could occur under forced liquidation of their assets. Most obviously, in each case the institution was not a bank, and understanding the implications of their distress required understanding the possibly different implications of their business models from those of banks, their interconnections with banks, and their interconnections with the broader financial system. Of course, many conditions across these episodes were very different, as were their end results in the falls of 1998 and 2008. Because of those differences, distress at LTCM was resolved by a private-sector solution with little discernible effect on the U.S. macroeconomy, while the fall of 2008 culminated in the Great Recession. But the commonalities across episodes illustrate similar data and conceptual gaps. Focusing on the conceptual gaps, the theoretical and empirical literature on interconnectedness sheds only partial light on the issues confronted in each of the highlighted episodes.14In addition to direct connections, common exposures and contagion are important sources of interconnectedness and fragility, as emphasized by Bagehot nearly 150 years ago.15On the empirical side, researchers have worked to construct networks of banks or broader sets of institutions based on direct connections or common holdings, but incomplete data and modeling challenges have typically implied a focus on only parts of institutions' balance sheets or on a subset of market participants.16On the theoretical side, a strand of literature notes that the connections among institutions in each of the previous frameworks may be too small to explain the types of systemic distress witnessed during the crisis, and instead emphasizes that complexity within firms and in interconnections heightens the risk of correlated runs.17This insight rings true: The complexity of Lehman's, AIG's, and even LTCM's balance sheets and interactions with other institutions almost surely contributed to market spillovers during their distress. But it is also true that little research has been undertaken that distinguishes between banks and nonbanks, or highlights how their interactions are driven by economic incentives. Such research could guide regulator efforts to collect data and set policies to limit possible instabilities associated with interconnectedness. At one level, this is not surprising: As we all know, models are abstractions; nonetheless, improving the conceptual toolkit with which we gauge interconnectedness along practical dimensions is clearly needed.18 SummaryMy current assessment of the risks to financial stability remains tentative and subject to change as we learn more or conditions shift. Policymakers and researchers need better models and data to understand the interconnections between the banking system and nonbank financial institutions. Indeed, one of the themes of this conference is data needs, and the focus on this issue is an important aspect of this conference. History has demonstrated that risks evolve in response to regulatory pressure and the animal spirits that emerge as memories fade, as well as to animal spirits. As a result, the infrastructure needed to learn the things we don't know needs to be put in place. An essential element of that infrastructure is learning the lessons of history – both the lessons of what happened, and the fact that supervisors and regulators will on occasion be surprised. Learning those lessons is not as simple a task as it may sound. But it is certainly a far more important task than it sounds. ReferencesAcemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2015). "Systemic Risk and Stability in Financial Networks,"American Economic Review,vol. 105 (February), pp. 564-608. Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2013). "Financial Stability Monitoring (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-21. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Allen, Franklin, Ana Babus, and Elena Carletti (2012). "Asset Commonality, Debt Maturity and Systemic Risk,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 104 (June), pp. 519-34. Bagehot, Walter ([1873] 1897).Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market.New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. Bao, Jack, Josh David, and Song Han (2015). "The Runnables," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 3. Bisias, Dimitrios, Mark Flood, Andrew W. Lo, and Stavros Valavanis (2012). "A Survey of Systemic Risk Analytics (PDF)," OFR Working Paper 0001. Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research, January. Caballero, Ricardo J., and Alp Simsek (2013). "Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity,"Journal of Finance,vol. 68 (December), pp. 2549-87. Duarte, Fernando, and Thomas Eisenbach (2015). "Fire-Sale Spillovers and Systemic Risk (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 645. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February. Financial Stability Board (2015a).Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2015 (PDF). Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. -------- (2015b).Thematic Review on OTC Derivatives Trade Reporting: Peer Review Report (PDF).Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. -------- (2015c).Transforming Shadow Banking into Resilient Market-based Finance:Standards and Processes for Global Securities Financing Data Collection and Aggregation (PDF). Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. Fischer, Stanley (2014). "Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We?" speech delivered at the Martin Feldstein Lecture, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. -------- (2015). "Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 2. Flood, Mark D., Victoria L. Lemieux, Margaret Varga, and B.L. William Wong (2015). "The Application of Visual Analytics to Financial Stability Monitoring (PDF)," OFR Working Paper 14-02c. Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research, July. Hale, Galina, Tümer Kapan, and Camelia Minoiu (2014). "Crisis Transmission in the Global Banking Network (PDF)," working paper, December Kara, Gazi, Mary Tian, and Margaret Yellen (2015). "Taxonomy of Studies on Interconnectedness," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 31. Miller, Thomas P. (2009). "What You Don't Know Can Hurt You,"American,May 27. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2015). "Thinking Critically about Nonbank Financial Intermediation," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, November 17. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2015).Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 (PDF).Washington: Treasury, Board of Governors, FRBNY, SEC, and CFTC, July. Yellen, Janet L. (2013). "Interconnectedness and Systemic Risk: Lessons from the Financial Crisis and Policy Implications," speech delivered at the American Economic Association/American Finance Association Joint Luncheon, San Diego, Calif., January 4. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Michael Kiley and Nellie Liang for their contributions to this speech.Return to text 2.See Tarullo (2015), which also provides a complementary review of the structural changes in shadow banking activities that I will highlight.Return to text 3.The OFR reports its monitoring efforts regularly, including in its annual reports (available on the OFR website athttp://financialresearch.gov/annual-reports). Research by OFR staff members on similar issues includes Flood and others (2015).Return to text 4.For a more comprehensive review of structural changes since the financial crisis, see my Feldstein lecture (Fischer, 2014).Return to text 5.For a discussion organizing vulnerabilities along these lines, see Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013).Return to text 6.I have previously discussed the lines between bank and nonbank activities (Fischer (2015)). The term "shadow banking" has been in use for some time, and I continue to use this term in this speech largely to ensure some connection to discussion in recent years. Recently, discussions of bank-like and other financial activities have begun to draw more clear distinctions regarding potential financial stability risks across activities; see Financial Stability Board (2015a) and the recent discussion in Tarullo (2015). Finally, money market mutual fund (MMMF) shares are not, technically, debt claims. However, the regulatory framework and historical precedent (in which MMMF shares had a fixed net asset value under normal conditions) appear to have led investors to treat such shares similarly to uninsured deposits.Return to text 7.The SCOOS is available on the Board'swebsite.Return to text 8.See Bao, David, and Han (2015).Return to text 9.For a discussion of developments in U.S. Treasury markets on October 15, 2014, see U.S. Treasury and others (2015).Return to text 10.The phrase "what you don't know can't hurt you" is well known. According to theOxford Dictionary of Proverbs,the oldest written version of this saying comes from 1576, inPetit Palace,by G. Pettie (as noted in Miller (2009)). (I am indebted to Michael Kiley for this reference.)Return to text 11.Information on the cooperative effort to collect data on bilateral repos is available on the OFRwebsite. For details on the FSB's standards for collecting data on securities financing transactions, see Financial Stability Board (2015c).Return to text 12.See Financial Stability Board (2015b).Return to text 13.Then Federal Reserve Board Vice Chair Yellen discussed these issues in January 2013 (Yellen, 2013), in a speech that includes a detailed discussion of possible interactions among financial institutions, along with very clear graphic representations of potential systemic interactions.Return to text 14.For a discussion of various empirical measures outside the network literature, see Bisias and others (2012); and Kara, Tian, and Yellen (2015).Return to text 15.Bagehot (1873 [1897]) has long been viewed as a classic reference describing panics in money markets and the proper response of the central bank to such panics.Return to text 16.Duarte and Eisenbach (2015) examine interconnections associated with fire sales and common exposures. Hale, Kapan, and Minoiu (2014) examine a bank network and discuss related approaches.Return to text 17.Caballero and Simsek (2013) discuss complexity and network stability. Research emphasizing direct connections and common holdings includes Allen, Babus, and Carletti (2012); and Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015).Return to text 18.In a sense, this section has discussed what soon after the collapse of Lehman Brothers began to be called "macroprudential supervision", by which at that stage was meant supervision that focused on the dynamics of the financial system that resulted from interactions among financial institutions, of which the worldwide impact of the Lehman failure was the outstanding example. Over the course of a few years, the term "macroprudential policies" began generally to be used as a description of sector-specific policy instruments that could be used to deal with potential instabilities in a particular sector, usually the housing sector.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California Let me begin by noting that my comments today will not address the timing of liftoff for the federal funds rate.1 Recent months have seen increased anticipation of the normalization of monetary policy in the United States. Many observers interpret normalization to mean a tightening cycle similar in pace to previous cycles, such as those from 1994 to 1995 and from 2004 to 2007, with the effect of returning interest rates to the level viewed as normal in the decades before the crisis. The Federal Reserve describes normalization as "steps to raise the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates to more normal levels."2But what do we mean by "more normal levels"? A broad deterioration in foreign growth prospects, together with greater risk sensitivity in the wake of the crisis and changes in the rate of potential output growth, may be contributing to a "new normal." The new normal is likely to be characterized by a lower level of interest rates than in the decades preceding the crisis, which counsels a cautious and gradual approach to adjusting monetary policy. The Benchmark Neutral RateThe appropriate pace and target for normalizing monetary policy depend centrally on understanding the neutral rate of interest. The nominal neutral interest rate is the level of the federal funds rate that is consistent with output growing close to its potential rate with full employment and stable inflation.3The appropriate benchmark for assessing the stance of monetary policy is the gap between the policy rate and the nominal neutral rate of interest: When the federal funds rate is below the nominal neutral rate, monetary policy is accommodative, and, when it is above the neutral rate, policy is contractionary. For this reason, many monetary policy rules, such as the well-known Taylor rule, incorporate an estimate of the neutral real interest rate as a critical parameter along with the target rate of inflation.4 Although the neutral rate is a critical benchmark for monetary policy, it changes over time in response to important changes in economic conditions, necessitating corresponding adjustments in monetary policy in order to restore the economy to full employment. For instance, when there are modest adverse shocks to demand that lead to modest reductions in the shorter-run neutral rate, monetary policy can provide enough support to keep the economy at full employment simply by reducing the policy rate commensurate with the decline in the nominal neutral rate. However, when the adverse shocks to demand are sufficiently severe to push the nominal neutral interest rate substantially below zero, as they were during the Great Recession, monetary policy confronts the zero-lower-bound constraint, at which point the federal funds rate cannot fall low enough to provide the necessary degree of accommodation without becoming negative. This was the case in the United States for several years following the crisis and remains true today in a number of advanced foreign economies. That is why monetary policymakers in the United States and several other major economies have been compelled to use additional unconventional tools to promote full employment and target inflation, such as forward guidance and asset purchases. The neutral rate of interest is not directly observable, but we can back out an estimate of the neutral rate by relying on the observation that output should grow faster relative to potential growth the lower the federal funds rate is relative to the nominal neutral rate. In today's circumstances, the fact that the U.S. economy is growing at a pace only modestly above potential while core inflation remains restrained suggests that the nominal neutral rate may not be far above the nominal federal funds rate, even now. In fact, various econometric estimates of the level of the neutral rate, or similar concepts, are consistent with the low levels suggested by this simple heuristic approach.5 The Past and Future Neutral RateIn assessing the policy path ahead, the critical question is whether a low neutral rate is likely to be a "new normal" in the longer run or whether the neutral rate is soon likely to increase back to levels considered normal in the decades before the crisis. To answer this question, it is helpful to use economic forecasts, market-implied expectations, and econometric models to assess where real interest rates are expected to be in the longer run, and compare them with the levels that prevailed in the decades before the crisis. In doing so, it is important to abstract from shocks that are transitory or cyclical and thus likely to fade away over a year or two.6 Starting with economic forecasts, Blue Chip Forecasts publishes projections of the federal funds rate and consumer price index (CPI) inflation 6 to 10 years into the future, when the economy is typically expected to be near full employment. The implied Blue Chip consensus longer-run real federal funds rate averaged around 2.2 percent in the two decades preceding the crisis, which is close to the level of the intercept term in the Taylor (1993) rule, which in turn is based on empirical analysis of the period from the mid-1980s to the early 1990s. In contrast, the Blue Chip consensus longer-run rate is currently around 1.1 percent, about 1 percentage point lower than the pre-crisis average.7 Similarly, although the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has not explicitly defined "normal," the central tendency or the median of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) might reasonably be considered a rough proxy. By this proxy, forecasts of the neutral rate have moved down noticeably over the past several years. The median projection of the longer-run level of the real federal funds rate was 2-1/4 percent in January 2012, when projections of the longer-run federal funds rate were first included in the SEP. By comparison, the median projection for the longer-run real federal funds rate had fallen by 3/4 percentage point to 1-1/2 percent in the most recent SEP.8 Market measures of expected forward rates evidence a similar decline. For example, we can back out an implied 1-year real rate 10 years from now from the Treasury inflation-protected securities, or TIPS, yield curve. The most recent readings are around 1.3 percent, close to 2 percentage points below the average rate from 1999 through 2007. Swaps prices tell a similar story. The implied expected 1-year real rate 10 years from now is currently close to 1 percent, again well below levels prior to the financial crisis. Finally, some of the econometric models used to estimate the current neutral rate, or closely related concepts, can also be used to assess whether low neutral rates are likely to persist. While estimates will depend on the model specification, several models estimate that the neutral rate will remain low for some time to come. Laubach and Williams, for example, estimate that the natural rate, a concept closely related to the neutral rate, likely will remain near zero for the foreseeable future.9 Why Is the Neutral Rate Low?With a variety of estimates suggesting that the neutral rate of interest is likely to remain low relative to historical norms for some time, it is important to assess the underlying causes and their likely persistence. There are a host of factors that could lead the neutral rate to remain depressed in the longer run--ranging from the low level of world real interest rates, which affects the United States via the exchange rate and financial market channels, to slow-moving secular trends in the labor force and productivity, to persistent changes in risk perceptions stemming from the crisis. Although tight domestic credit conditions and concerns about downside risks to asset prices and domestic demand were the dominant drivers early in the recovery, the foreign outlook has become increasingly important as a source of downward pressure on the neutral rate in the past few years. In addition to concerns about weak demand in Japan and the euro area, more recently foreign growth concerns have broadened to include China, which is navigating difficult structural as well as cyclical adjustments. The financial reverberations from China are adversely affecting commodity exporters and emerging markets more broadly, and weak growth trajectories are now the norm in much of the world, pushing down interest rates globally. The broad-based reduction in interest rates in the rest of the world, by increasing demand for U.S. assets, puts upward pressure on the dollar, which in turn implies downward pressure on the U.S. neutral rate. One way to think about the spillover from abroad is how much adjustment in the federal funds rate might be necessary to insulate domestic employment from an appreciation in the dollar that is expected to persist. Let's take the roughly 15 percent real appreciation of the dollar that we have seen since June 2014. According to the Board's FRB/US model, it would require lowering the path of the federal funds rate by roughly 1 percentage point over the medium term to insulate domestic employment from the 15 percent stronger exchange rate in inflation adjusted terms. In the neighborhood of the zero lower bound, this shift down implies a delay in the date of liftoff and a shallower path for the federal funds rate over several years. In effect, this spillover from abroad implies some limitations on the extent to which U.S. monetary conditions can diverge from global conditions. Going forward, many observers expect global growth to stabilize and eventually move higher, easing pressure on the dollar and on commodity prices and leading to a higher neutral interest rate globally.10However, as foreign economies face structural as well as cyclical adjustments, the speed at which the stabilization and recovery of foreign growth takes place is highly uncertain, and there is a risk that this influence on the neutral rate could fade very slowly. Moreover, there are downside risks to the foreign outlook. Other factors likely pushing down the current neutral rate may prove even more persistent. Importantly, expectations that the economy's growth potential has fallen could contribute to a persistent decline in the neutral rate. Indeed, there is evidence that growth in the labor force, and perhaps productivity, have slowed persistently in recent years. After increasing noticeably over much of the post-World War II period, the labor force participation rate flattened out over the 1990s and began to decline in the early 2000s as the baby boom generation approached retirement. Most recently, the pace of decline has quickened, with the participation rate declining 1/2 percent per year, on average, over the recovery.11Productivity growth has also slowed, averaging just 1 percent per year over the recovery, about half the pace over the 50 years prior to the financial crisis.12Given this data, the Congressional Budget Office now estimates that the growth rate of potential output is only 1.7 percent currently, less than half the rate during the 50 years before 2008. Nevertheless, although there is evidence of a connection between low potential output growth and a low neutral rate, as pointed out by Hamilton and others, the relationship is not precisely estimated, which leaves considerable uncertainty about the magnitude of the effect.13 Finally, investors' risk sensitivity appears to have been altered by the experience of tail risks during the crisis, which could have a persistent depressing effect on the neutral rate. To the extent that investors or firms are more attuned to the risks associated with capital investments than before the financial crisis, it increases the premium for risky investments, or the difference in return between a risk-free investment, such as overnight reserves, and somewhat riskier investment opportunities. A higher risk premium necessitates a lower risk-free rate to encourage the same amount of riskier investments as previously. Consistent with this explanation, there is evidence that the gap between the return to capital investment and the risk free rate has risen. For example, according to dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models estimated by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the natural rate of interest has been held down during the recovery by shocks that increase the difference between the marginal product of capital and the risk free rate, pushing down investment and reducing the level of capital.14In addition, a simple measure of the marginal product of capital suggests that the return to capital investment has not changed very much, or perhaps has even increased, over the past decade despite the decline in risk free rates.15 Implications for the Path of Monetary PolicyBefore addressing what a persistently low neutral interest rate might mean for the normalization of monetary policy, it is helpful to review inflation developments. Because the federal funds rate is the real rate plus the expected rate of inflation and because it is the real rate that influences economic activity, the amount of monetary accommodation represented by a given nominal level of the federal funds rate decreases as expected inflation declines. In a low neutral rate environment, it is especially important to guard against extended periods of below-target inflation, which may lead inflation expectations to drift lower. It is thus notable that inflation has been below our 2 percent target for 3 years. Current below-target levels of inflation in part reflect disinflationary pressures from abroad, including lower import prices and lower commodity prices, which are likely to fade over time. However, inflation has been stubbornly low, even excluding energy prices. Over the 12 months ending in October, core personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, prices, which exclude the often volatile categories of food and energy, increased 1.3 percent, and the 12-month change in core prices has been around 1‑1/4 to 1-1/2 percent since the beginning of 2013. The persistent weakness in core price inflation deserves continued vigilance. In determining the outlook for inflation, the gravitational force of long-term inflation expectations is especially important. Some survey measures of inflation expectations have declined recently. For example, the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers median measure of inflation expectations at a 5-to-10 year horizon was 2.6 percent in November and has averaged 2.7 percent over the past year, slightly below the average reading over the past decade of 2.9 percent. Projections from the Survey of Professional Forecasters also suggest that 10-year-ahead inflation expectations edged lower this quarter, although they have remained at or very near 2 percent since the end of 2012. Market-based measures of inflation compensation at longer-term horizons, such as inflation swaps and the difference between nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury bond yields, have declined more noticeably over the past year and a half. Although it is difficult to precisely disentangle the contribution of changes in inflation expectations, liquidity premiums, and inflation risk premiums to this downward shift, some decompositions suggest that, while expected inflation may not have declined much, market participants may be placing a somewhat greater likelihood than previously on episodes of below-potential growth being accompanied by below-target inflation. Thus, the decline in measures of inflation expectations warrants close monitoring. The slow progress on inflation, together with the likely low level of the longer-term neutral real rate and the slow pace at which the very low shorter-term rate may move to the longer-term rate, suggest that the federal funds rate is likely to adjust more gradually and to a lower level than in previous expansions. In short, "gradual and low" is likely to be the new normal. In addition, the combination of a low neutral real rate with slow progress on inflation suggests a greater likelihood of hitting the zero lower bound than in previous decades, when the neutral rate was probably much higher. The lower the longer-term nominal neutral rate is, the smaller in magnitude an adverse economic shock must be to push growth sufficiently below potential to necessitate a nominal federal funds rate below zero to provide accommodation. Assuming there has not been a material reduction in the frequency and severity of negative shocks since the pre-crisis period, the implication is that the probability of being constrained by the zero lower bound is greater than prior to the crisis. Although empirical analysis suggests that unconventional tools affect the economy through the same channels as the federal funds rate, even so, there are greater costs and uncertainties associated with unconventional policies relative to changes in the federal funds rate.16As a result, policy is likely to remain more constrained at the zero lower bound than above it. As the probability of hitting the zero lower bound increases, the asymmetry in policy flexibility becomes more pronounced. Because we have more space to respond by raising rates if inflationary forces accelerate than by cutting rates if disinflationary forces emerge, when nominal neutral rates are likely to be lower on average, we should be cautious about raising rates, do so gradually, and carefully assess the effects on economic and financial conditions as we go. Moreover, because the Federal Reserve's asset holdings help maintain accommodative financial conditions, it would be prudent to maintain reinvestments until the normalization of the federal funds rate is sufficiently far along to allow room to cut nominal rates if economic conditions deteriorate. The asymmetry of policy flexibility at the zero lower bound also arises when there is uncertainty about the level of the neutral real rate. As discussed in recent papers, if there is significant uncertainty about the level of the neutral real rate, risk management considerations suggest that policymakers should respond cautiously to signs that the neutral real rate may be rising, particularly when the policy rate is close to the zero lower bound.17In the presence of uncertainty, there is a risk that the actual neutral real rate is either higher or lower than current estimates of the neutral real rate, and the stance of policy will therefore be either more accommodative or more restrictive than intended. If the actual neutral rate is higher than estimated, and policy is more accommodative than intended, the stance of policy can be readily tightened later to restrain any buildup in inflationary pressures. But, if the actual neutral real rate is lower than estimated, and the stance of monetary policy is tighter than intended, unexpected policy restraint may prove difficult to offset later with more accommodative policy because the policy rate is already close to the zero lower bound. Finally, there is a risk that with persistently lower neutral rates, there may be greater pressures for investors to reach for yield, increasing the demand for risky assets. As a result, macroprudential policy may take on greater importance to guard against financial stability risks. Since the crisis, the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies have implemented a number of new rules to strengthen capital, liquidity, and risk management at the largest financial institutions. Many of these rules are "through the cycle" safeguards, meaning that they impose structurally higher standards. In addition, when the risks to financial stability increase, the Federal Reserve, in consultation with the other banking agencies, can temporarily increase the amount of capital that large banks are required to hold in order to build resilience at these institutions and to restrain undue risk-taking on a cyclical basis. ConclusionA variety of evidence suggests that the longer-run neutral rate is lower now than it has been historically, and that the very low shorter-run neutral rate may adjust to it very slowly, due to a combination of weaker foreign demand growth, greater risk sensitivity as a result of the crisis, higher risk premiums for productive investment, and lower growth in potential output. The lower neutral rate means the normalization of the federal funds rate is likely to follow a more gradual and shallower path than in previous cycles, although the actual path will be determined by economic conditions. It also implies that the likelihood of the federal funds rate hitting the zero lower bound will be persistently greater than it has been previously, which could make it more difficult to achieve our objectives of full employment and 2 percent inflation. With the nominal neutral interest rate lower than in the past, and with policy options being more limited if conditions deteriorate than if inflationary pressures accelerate, the asymmetry in risk-management considerations counsels a cautious and gradual approach. ReferencesBaily, Martin Neil, James Manyika, and Shalabh Gupta (2013). "U.S. Productivity Growth: An Optimistic Perspective (PDF),"International Productivity Monitor,vol. 25 (Spring), pp. 3-12. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2014). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, September 17. Byrne, David, and Carol Corrado (2015). "Recent Trends in Communications Equipment Prices," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 29. Byrne, David M., Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel (2015). "How Fast Are Semiconductor Prices Falling? (PDF)" NBER Working Paper Series 21074. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. Byrne, David, and Eugenio Pinto (2015). "The Recent Slowdown in High-Tech Equipment Price Declines and Some Implications for Business Investment and Labor Productivity," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 26. Cúrdia, Vasco (2015). "Why So Slow? A Gradual Return for Interest Rates," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-32. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October 12. Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, Matthew Cocci, Sara Shahanaghi, and Micah Smith (2015). "Why Are Interest Rates So Low?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), May 20. Engen, Eric M., Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Evans, Charles, Jonas Fisher, Francois Gourio, and Spencer Krane (2015). "Risk Management for Monetary Policy Near the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring. Gomme, Paul, B. Ravikumar, and Peter Rupert (2015). "Secular Stagnation and Returns on Capital," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Economic Synopses, no. 19, August 18. Gust, Christopher J., Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David López-Salido (2015). "Monetary Policy, Incomplete Information, and the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-099. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 21476. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. International Monetary Fund (2015).World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices(PDF). Washington: IMF, October. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2015). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2015-16. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October. Taylor, John B. (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41. I am grateful to Jim Clouse and Andrew Figura for their assistance in preparing this text. 1.These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.For example, see Board of Governors (2014, paragraph 2).Return to text 3.The closely related concept of the natural rate of interest--the rate of interest at which investment and savings are equilibrated at full employment--is originally attributed to Swedish economist Knut Wicksell.Return to text 4.See Taylor (1993) and Taylor (1999).Return to text 5.See, for example, Cúrdia (2015) and Del Negro and others (2015).Return to text 6.Hamilton and others (2015) use moving averages of real rates as their measure of the equilibrium real rate. Using a similar measure, in the United States, the 11-year moving average of the short-term real interest rate is now at its lowest level since the beginning of the series in the late 1950s.Return to text 7.Here the longer-run real rate is defined as the consensus longer-run nominal federal funds rate minus the consensus longer-run rate of CPI inflation. Because most forecasts of economic conditions far into the future are predicated on the economy being at full employment, forecasts of relatively low actual real rates are consistent with forecasts of relatively low neutral rates.Return to text 8.In the SEP, longer-run projections represent each participant's assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.Return to text 9.Laubach and Williams define the natural rate as "the real short-term interest rate consistent with the economy operating at its full potential once transitory shocks to aggregate supply or demand have abated" (2015, p. 2).Return to text 10.See, for example, chapter 1 of the IMFWorld Economic Outlook(2015).Return to text 11.Population growth has also moved gradually lower in the United States, though the effect has not been as large as in some foreign economies, where the size of the population is now stagnant or falling.Return to text 12.It is unclear how persistent recent low rates of measured productivity growth will be. While weak investment levels, particularly early on in the recovery, likely contributed to lower productivity gains, investment levels going forward could be closer to historical norms. Also, recent technological gains may eventually contribute strongly to productivity growth; see, for example, Baily, Manyika, and Gupta (2013). In addition, there is evidence that some of the contribution of technology gains to productivity growth is being understated; see, for example, Byrne and Pinto (2015), Byrne and Corrado (2015), and Byrne, Oliner and Sichel (2015).Return to text 13.See Hamilton and others (2015).Return to text 14.See Del Negro and others (2015). In these models, the natural rate of interest is defined as the "rate of interest that would obtain if all prices and wages had adjusted so as to bring the level of economic activity to its full-employment rate."Return to text 15.See Gomme, Ravikumar, and Rupert (2015).Return to text 16.See Engen, Laubach and Reifschneider (2015), for example.Return to text 17.See the recent papers by Gust, Johannsen and López-Salido (2015) and Evans and others (2015).Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act Outreach Meeting, Arlington, Virginia Watch live On behalf of the Federal Reserve Board, let me join my colleagues from the other bank regulatory agencies in welcoming you to this sixth and final outreach meeting being held as part of the interagency review process under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). As you know, EGRPRA requires the federal banking agencies to conduct a decennial joint review of our regulations to identify those that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome. At the third outreach meeting this past spring, I suggested that we could regard the EGRPRA review as a success only if it leads to significant reduction in regulatory burden for smaller banks. Over the course of this year, there has been a wide range of comments on a wide range of regulatory practices. But many have been concentrated in what are obviously a few key areas of concern to smaller banks. These include simplifying the regulatory capital rules for smaller community banks; modifying the information collected by Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, the so-called "Call Report"; and updating certain regulations and supervisory practices under the Community Reinvestment Act to reflect current banking practices. First, many commenters have urged a change regarding the application of the Basel III capital requirements to community banks. They have argued that simpler capital rules are needed to reduce the compliance burden for smaller institutions because it is disproportionate to the benefits of the framework's increased risk sensitivity. The greater detail of the Basel III framework requires a degree of categorization, recordkeeping, and reporting that can be particularly costly for smaller community banks. As I have publicly stated before, I believe that it is possible to develop a simpler set of capital requirements for smaller banks that will be consistent both with the safety and soundness aims of prudential regulation and with our statutory obligations such as the Collins Amendment. Second, commenters have called for changes to the Call Report. The Call Report is filed quarterly and used by regulators to monitor the safety and soundness, performance, and risk profile of each institution and to assess the condition of the banking system. Many of the comments have advocated modifying the types and amounts of information collected by the report for community banks to align more closely with the relatively straightforward business models of these firms. Here, I am pleased to say, the federal banking agencies have not waited for the end of the EGRPRA comment process to respond. In September, we published proposals that would streamline and simplify regulatory reporting requirements for community banks arising from the Call Report. These proposals, published under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, would eliminate or revise several Call Report data items. The proposals complement other efforts aimed at lessening burden associated with the Call Report. These efforts include accelerating the start of a statutorily required review of the appropriateness of the data items collected by the Call Report, evaluating the feasibility and merits of creating a streamlined version of the Call Report for community banks, and holding teleconferences and webinars to explain reporting requirements and any upcoming changes. As we complete the EGRPRA review process, we will certainly consider other opportunities for change. Third, commenters have made recommendations as to how regulations and supervisory practices implementing the Community Reinvestment Act should be modernized to reflect the ways that banking services are now being provided and that banks are interacting with the communities they serve. Some commenters have requested that the regulations' asset thresholds, which are used to determine the examination method for banks of different sizes, be raised. Others have asked for cost-saving procedural changes, such as updating the requirement to maintain hard copies of a bank's public file so as to reflect changes in technology. Here again, I believe there should be ways the federal banking agencies can be responsive to this set of concerns. As this is the last outreach meeting of this EGRPRA process, I think it useful to add that we are committed to a systematic analysis and consideration of all the comments that we receive. This will allow us to prioritize recommendations and act as quickly as possible to adopt them. It is in that spirit of creating priorities for action that I identified those three areas that have commanded attention from so many commenters. Thank you again for your participation in today's session. I look forward to hearing your views.
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, D.C. Thank you to the Economic Club of Washington for inviting me to speak to you today. I would like to offer my assessment of the U.S. economy, nearly six and half years after the beginning of the current economic expansion, and my view of the economic outlook. I will describe the progress the economy has made toward the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) goals of maximum employment and stable prices and what the current situation and the outlook imply for how monetary policy is likely to evolve to best foster the attainment of those objectives. The Economic OutlookThe U.S. economy has recovered substantially since the Great Recession. The unemployment rate, which peaked at 10 percent in October 2009, declined to 5 percent in October of this year. At that level, the unemployment rate is near the median of FOMC participants' most recent estimates of its longer-run normal level.1The economy has created about 13 million jobs since the low point for employment in early 2010, and total nonfarm payrolls are now almost 4-1/2 million higher than just prior to the recession. Most recently, after a couple months of relatively modest payroll growth, employers added an estimated 271,000 jobs in October. This increase brought the average monthly gain since June to about 195,000--close to the monthly pace of around 210,000 in the first half of the year and still sufficient to be consistent with continued improvement in the labor market. Despite these substantial gains, we cannot yet, in my judgment, declare that the labor market has reached full employment. Let me describe the basis for that view. To begin with, I believe that a significant number of individuals now classified as out of the labor force would find and accept jobs in an even stronger labor market. To be classified as unemployed, working-age people must report that they have actively sought work within the past four weeks. Most of those not seeking work are appropriately not counted as unemployed. These include most retirees, teenagers and young adults in school, and those staying home to care for children and other dependent family members. Even in a stronger job market, it is likely that many of these individuals would choose not to work. But some who are counted as out of the labor force might be induced to seek work if the likelihood of finding a job rose or if the expected pay was higher. Examples here include people who had become too discouraged to search for work when the prospects for employment were poor and some who retired when their previous jobs ended. In October, almost 2 million individuals classified as outside the labor force because they had not searched for work in the previous four weeks reported that they wanted and were available for work. This is a considerable number of people, and some of them undoubtedly would be drawn back into the workforce as the labor market continued to strengthen. Likewise, some of those who report they don't want to work now could change their minds in a stronger job market. Another margin of labor market slack not reflected in the unemployment rate consists of individuals who report that they are working part time but would prefer a full-time job and cannot find one--those classified as "part time for economic reasons." The share of such workers jumped from 3 percent of total employment prior to the Great Recession to around 6-1/2 percent by 2010. Since then, however, the share of these part time workers has fallen considerably and now is less than 4 percent of those employed. While this decline represents considerable progress, particularly given secular trends that over time may have increased the prevalence of part-time employment, I think some room remains for the hours of these workers to increase as the labor market improves further. The pace of increases in labor compensation provides another possible indicator, albeit an imperfect one, of the degree of labor market slack. Until recently labor compensation had grown only modestly, at average annual rates of around 2 to 2-1/2 percent. More recently, however, we have seen a welcome pickup in the growth rate of average hourly earnings for all employees and of compensation per hour in the business sector. While it is too soon to conclude whether these more rapid rates of increase will continue, a sustained pickup would likely signal a diminution of labor market slack. Turning to overall economic activity, U.S. economic output--as measured by inflation-adjusted gross domestic product (GDP), or real GDP--has increased at a moderate pace, on balance, during the expansion. Over the first three quarters of this year, real GDP is currently estimated to have advanced at an annual rate of 2-1/4 percent, close to its average pace over the previous five years. Many economic forecasters expect growth roughly along those same lines in the fourth quarter. Growth this year has been held down by weak net exports, which have subtracted more than 1/2 percentage point, on average, from the annual rate of real GDP growth over the past three quarters. Foreign economic growth has slowed, damping increases in U.S. exports, and the U.S. dollar has appreciated substantially since the middle of last year, making our exports more expensive and imported goods cheaper. By contrast, total real private domestic final purchases (PDFP)--which includes household spending, business fixed investment, and residential investment, and currently represents about 85 percent of aggregate spending--has increased at an annual rate of 3 percent this year, significantly faster than real GDP. Household spending growth has been particularly solid in 2015, with purchases of new motor vehicles especially strong. Job growth has bolstered household income, and lower energy prices have left consumers with more to spend on other goods and services. These same factors likely have contributed to consumer confidence that is more upbeat this year than last year. Increases in home values and stock market prices in recent years, along with reductions in debt, have pushed up the net worth of households, which also supports consumer spending. Finally, interest rates for borrowers remain low, due in part to the FOMC's accommodative monetary policy, and these low rates appear to have been especially relevant for consumers considering the purchase of durable goods.2 Other components of PDFP, including residential and business investment, have also advanced this year. The same factors supporting consumer spending have supported further gains in the housing sector. Indeed, gains in real residential investment spending have been faster so far in 2015 than last year, although the level of new residential construction still remains fairly low. And outside of the drilling and mining sector, where lower oil prices have led to substantial cuts in outlays for new structures, business investment spending has posted moderate gains. On balance, the moderate average pace of real GDP growth so far this year and over the entire expansion has been sufficient to help move the labor market closer to the FOMC's goal of maximum employment. However, less progress has been made on the second leg of our dual mandate--price stability--as inflation continues to run below the FOMC's longer-run objective of 2 percent. Overall consumer price inflation--as measured by the change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures--was only 1/4 percent over the 12 months ending in October. However, this number largely reflects the sharp fall in crude oil prices since the summer of 2014 that, in turn, has pushed down retail prices for gasoline and other consumer energy products. Because food and energy prices are volatile, it is often helpful to look at inflation excluding those two categories--known as core inflation--which is typically a better indicator of future overall inflation than recent readings of headline inflation. But core inflation--which ran at 1-1/4 percent over the 12 months ending in October--is also well below our 2 percent objective, partly reflecting the appreciation of the U.S. dollar. The stronger dollar has pushed down the prices of imported goods, placing temporary downward pressure on core inflation.3The plunge in crude oil prices may also have had some small indirect effects in holding down the prices of non-energy items in core inflation, as producers passed on to their customers some of the reductions in their energy-related costs. Taking account of these effects, which may be holding down core inflation by around 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point, it appears that the underlying rate of inflation in the United States has been running in the vicinity of 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. Let me now turn to where I see the economy is likely headed over the next several years. To summarize, I anticipate continued economic growth at a moderate pace that will be sufficient to generate additional increases in employment, further reductions in the remaining margins of labor market slack, and a rise in inflation to our 2 percent objective. I expect that the fundamental factors supporting domestic spending that I have enumerated today will continue to do so, while the drag from some of the factors that have been weighing on economic growth should begin to lessen next year. Although the economic outlook, as always, is uncertain, I currently see the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as very close to balanced. Turning to the factors that have been holding down growth, as I already noted, the higher foreign exchange value of the dollar, as well as weak growth in some foreign economies, has restrained the demand for U.S. exports over the past year. In addition, lower crude oil prices have reduced activity in the domestic oil sector. I anticipate that the drag on U.S. economic growth from these factors will diminish in the next couple of years as the global economy improves and the adjustment to prior declines in oil prices is completed. Although developments in foreign economies still pose risks to U.S. economic growth that we are monitoring, these downside risks from abroad have lessened since late summer. Among emerging market economies, recent data support the view that the slowdown in the Chinese economy, which has received considerable attention, will likely continue to be modest and gradual. China has taken actions to stimulate its economy this year and could do more if necessary. A number of other emerging market economies have eased monetary and fiscal policy this year, and economic activity in these economies has improved of late. Accommodative monetary policy is also supporting economic growth in the advanced economies. A pickup in demand in many advanced economies and a stabilization in commodity prices should, in turn, boost the growth prospects of emerging market economies. A final positive development for the outlook that I will mention relates to fiscal policy. This year the effect of federal fiscal policy on real GDP growth has been roughly neutral, in contrast to earlier years in which the expiration of stimulus programs and fiscal policy actions to reduce the federal budget deficit created significant drags on growth.4Also, the budget situation for many state and local governments has improved as the economic expansion has increased the revenues of these governments, allowing them to increase their hiring and spending after a number of years of cuts in the wake of the Great Recession. Looking ahead, I anticipate that total real government purchases of goods and services should have a modest positive effect on economic growth over the next few years.5 Regarding U.S. inflation, I anticipate that the drag from the large declines in prices for crude oil and imports over the past year and a half will diminish next year. With less downward pressure on inflation from these factors and some upward pressure from a further tightening in U.S. labor and product markets, I expect inflation to move up to the FOMC's 2 percent objective over the next few years. Of course, inflation expectations play an important role in the inflation process, and my forecast of a return to our 2 percent objective over the medium term relies on a judgment that longer-term inflation expectations remain reasonably well anchored. In this regard, recent measures from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, the Blue Chip Economic Indicators, and the Survey of Primary Dealers have continued to be generally stable. The measure of longer-term inflation expectations from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, in contrast, has lately edged below its typical range in recent years. However, this measure often seems to respond modestly, though temporarily, to large changes in actual inflation, and the very low readings on headline inflation over the past year may help explain some of the recent decline in the Michigan measure.6Market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up some in recent weeks after declining to historically low levels earlier in the fall. While the low level of these measures appears to reflect, at least in part, changes in risk and liquidity premiums, we will continue to monitor this development closely. Convincing evidence that longer-term inflation expectations have moved lower would be a concern because declines in consumer and business expectations about inflation could put downward pressure on actual inflation, making the attainment of our 2 percent inflation goal more difficult. Monetary PolicyLet me now turn to the implications of the economic outlook for monetary policy. Reflecting progress toward the Committee's objectives, many FOMC participants indicated in September that they anticipated, in light of their economic forecasts at the time, that it would be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by the end of this year. Some participants projected that it would be appropriate to wait until later to raise the target funds rate range, but all agreed that the timing of a rate increase would depend on what the incoming data tell us about the economic outlook and the associated risks to that outlook. In the policy statement issued after its October meeting, the FOMC reaffirmed its judgment that it would be appropriate to increase the target range for the federal funds rate when we had seen some further improvement in the labor market and were reasonably confident that inflation would move back to the Committee's 2 percent objective over the medium term. That initial rate increase would reflect the Committee's judgment, based on a range of indicators, that the economy would continue to grow at a pace sufficient to generate further labor market improvement and a return of inflation to 2 percent, even after the reduction in policy accommodation. As I have already noted, I currently judge that U.S. economic growth is likely to be sufficient over the next year or two to result in further improvement in the labor market. Ongoing gains in the labor market, coupled with my judgment that longer-term inflation expectations remain reasonably well anchored, serve to bolster my confidence in a return of inflation to 2 percent as the disinflationary effects of declines in energy and import prices wane. Committee participants recognize that the future course of the economy is uncertain, and we take account of both the upside and downside risks around our projections when judging the appropriate stance of monetary policy. In particular, recent monetary policy decisions have reflected our recognition that, with the federal funds rate near zero, we can respond more readily to upside surprises to inflation, economic growth, and employment than to downside shocks. This asymmetry suggests that it is appropriate to be more cautious in raising our target for the federal funds rate than would be the case if short-term nominal interest rates were appreciably above zero.7Reflecting these concerns, we have maintained our current policy stance even as the labor market has improved appreciably. However, we must also take into account the well-documented lags in the effects of monetary policy.8Were the FOMC to delay the start of policy normalization for too long, we would likely end up having to tighten policy relatively abruptly to keep the economy from significantly overshooting both of our goals. Such an abrupt tightening would risk disrupting financial markets and perhaps even inadvertently push the economy into recession. Moreover, holding the federal funds rate at its current level for too long could also encourage excessive risk-taking and thus undermine financial stability. On balance, economic and financial information received since our October meeting has been consistent with our expectations of continued improvement in the labor market. And, as I have noted, continuing improvement in the labor market helps strengthen confidence that inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. That said, between today and the next FOMC meeting, we will receive additional data that bear on the economic outlook. These data include a range of indicators regarding the labor market, inflation, and economic activity. When my colleagues and I meet, we will assess all of the available data and their implications for the economic outlook in making our policy decision. As you know, there has been considerable focus on the first increase in the federal funds rate after nearly seven years in which that rate has been at its effective lower bound. We have tried to be as clear as possible about the considerations that will affect that decision. Of course, even after the initial increase in the federal funds rate, monetary policy will remain accommodative. And it bears emphasizing that what matters for the economic outlook are the public's expectations concerning the path of the federal funds rate over time: It is those expectations that affect financial conditions and thereby influence spending and investment decisions. In this regard, the Committee anticipates that even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. This expectation is consistent with an implicit assessment that theneutralnominal federal funds rate--defined as the value of the federal funds rate that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy were operating near its potential--is currently low by historical standards and is likely to rise only gradually over time. One indication that the neutral funds rate is unusually low is that U.S. economic growth has been quite modest in recent years despite the very low level of the federal funds rate and the Federal Reserve's very large holdings of longer-term securities. Had the neutral rate been running closer to the levels that are thought to have prevailed prior to the financial crisis, current monetary policy settings would have been expected to foster a very rapid economic expansion, with inflation likely rising significantly above our 2 percent objective. Empirical support for the judgment that the neutral federal funds rate is low comes from both academic research and Federal Reserve staff analysis.Figure 1employs four macroeconomic models used by Federal Reserve staff to estimate the "natural" real rate of interest, a concept closely related to the neutral rate.9The measures of the natural rate shown in this figure represent the real short-term interest rate that would prevail in the absence of frictions that slow the adjustment of wages and prices to changes in the economy; under a variety of assumptions, this interest rate has been shown to promote full employment.10The shaded blue band represents the range of the estimates of the natural real rate at each point in time. This analysis suggests that the natural real rate fell sharply with the onset of the crisis and has recovered only partially. These findings are broadly consistent with those reported in a paper by Thomas Laubach and John Williams, shown infigure 2.11 The marked decline in the neutral federal funds rate after the crisis may be partially attributable to a range of persistent economic headwinds that have weighed on aggregate demand. These headwinds have included tighter underwriting standards and limited access to credit for some borrowers, deleveraging by many households to reduce debt burdens, contractionary fiscal policy at all levels of government, weak growth abroad coupled with a significant appreciation of the dollar, slower productivity and labor force growth, and elevated uncertainty about the economic outlook.12As the restraint from these headwinds further abates, I anticipate that the neutral federal funds rate will gradually move higher over time. Indeed, in September, most FOMC participants projected that, in the long run, the nominal federal funds rate would be near 3.5 percent, and that the actual federal funds rate would rise to that level fairly slowly.13 Because the value of the neutral federal funds rate is not directly measureable and must be estimated based on our imperfect understanding of the economy and the available data, I would stress that considerable uncertainty attends our estimates of its current level and even more to its likely path going forward.14That said, we will learn more from observing economic developments in the period ahead. It is thereby important to emphasize that the actual path of monetary policy will depend on how incoming data affect the evolution of the economic outlook. Stronger growth or a more rapid increase in inflation than we currently anticipate would suggest that the neutral federal funds rate is rising more quickly than expected, making it appropriate to raise the federal funds rate more quickly as well; conversely, if the economy disappoints, the federal funds rate would likely rise more slowly. Given the persistent shortfall in inflation from our 2 percent objective, the Committee will, of course, carefully monitor actual progress toward our inflation goal as we make decisions over time on the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. In closing, let me again thank the Economic Club of Washington for this opportunity to speak about the economy and monetary policy. The economy has come a long way toward the FOMC's objectives of maximum employment and price stability. When the Committee begins to normalize the stance of policy, doing so will be a testament, also, to how far our economy has come in recovering from the effects of the financial crisis and the Great Recession. In that sense, it is a day that I expect we all are looking forward to. ReferencesAdam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 54 (3), pp. 728-52. Barsky, Robert, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi (2014). "The Natural Rate of Interest and Its Usefulness for Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 104 (May), pp. 37-43. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 16-17, 2014," press release, October 8. --------- (2015a). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 17-18, 2015," press release, April 8. --------- (2015b). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 16-17, 2015," press release, October 8. Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (2005). "Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 113 (February), pp. 1-45. Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno (2014). "Risk Shocks,"American Economic Review,vol. 104 (January), pp. 27-65. Congressional Budget Office (2015a).The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2015 to 2025.Washington: CBO, January. --------- (2015b).An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2015 to 2025.Washington: CBO, August. Cúrdia, Vasco, Andrea Ferrero, Ging Cee Ng, and Andrea Tambalotti (2015). "Has U.S. Monetary Policy Tracked the Efficient Interest Rate?"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 70 (March), pp. 72-83. Del Negro, Marco, Stefano Eusepi, Marc Giannoni, Argia Sbordone, Andrea Tambalotti, Matthew Cocci, Raiden Hasegawa, and M. Henry Linder (2013). "The FRBNY DSGE Model (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 647. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul R. Krugman (2012). "Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 123 (3), pp. 1469-513. Evans, Charles, Jonas Fisher, François Gourio, and Spencer Krane (2015). "Risk Management for Monetary Policy Near the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference Draft, March 19-20, 2015. Washington: Brookings Institution, March. Friedman, Milton (1961). "The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 69 (October), pp. 447-66. Guerrieri, Luca, and Matteo Iacoviello (2013). "Collateral Constraints and Macroeconomic Asymmetries (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1082r. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June; revised July 2014. Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni (2015). "Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liquidity Trap (PDF)," unpublished paper, University of Chicago, January. Johnson, Kathleen W., Karen M. Pence, and Daniel J. Vine (2014). "Auto Sales and Credit Suppl (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-82. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Kiley, Michael T. (2013). "Output Gaps,"Journal of Macroeconomics,vol. 37 (September), pp. 1-18. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70. --------- (2015). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux," Hutchins Center Working Papers 15. Washington: Brookings Institution, November. Nakata, Taisuke (2012). "Uncertainty at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-09. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December. Uhlig, Harald (2005). "What Are the Effects of Monetary Policy on Output? Results from an Agnostic Identification Procedure,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52 (March), pp. 381-419. Wicksell, Knut (1936).Interest and Prices: A Study of the Causes Regulating the Value of Money. Translated by R.F. Kahn. London: Macmillan and Co. First published 1898. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, Amherst, Mass., September 24. 1.See table 1 in the Summary of Economic Projections, an addendum to the minutes of the September 2015 FOMC meeting. See Board of Governors (2015b).Return to text 2.For a recent empirical assessment, see Johnson, Pence, and Vine (2014).Return to text 3.For a more detailed discussion of the recent behavior of inflation, see Yellen (2015).Return to text 4.The Congressional Budget Office estimates that current federal fiscal policies will have little effect on economic growth this year, but that earlier fiscal policy actions reduced the rate of real GDP growth roughly 1-1/2 percentage points in 2013 and about 1/4 percentage point in 2014 relative to what it would have been otherwise. See Congressional Budget Office (2015a).Return to text 5.See Congressional Budget Office (2015b).Return to text 6.For example, the University of Michigan survey measure of longer-term inflation expectations was temporarily elevated relative to its usual range in 2008 when crude oil and other commodity prices spiked and pushed up actual headline inflation for a time.Return to text 7.See, for example, Adam and Billi (2007), Nakata (2012), and Evans and others (2015).Return to text 8.Milton Friedman famously concluded that "monetary actions affect economic conditions only after a lag that is both long and variable" (1961, p. 447). Evidence that monetary policy affects inflation with a lag comes in part from vector autoregressions in which monetary policy shocks have been identified under a variety of identification assumptions. See, for example, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Uhlig (2005).Return to text 9.Note that these estimates are in real terms; to obtain estimates of the nominal natural interest rate, one would add a measure of expected inflation. The four models used are (1) a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model developed by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board and described in Kiley (2013); (2) a DSGE model developed by the staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and described in Del Negro and others (2013); (3) a DSGE model developed by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board based on Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014); and (4) a DSGE model developed by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board based on Guerrieri and Iacoviello (2013 [rev. 2014]).Return to text 10.The concept of the natural rate goes back to Wicksell, who defined it as the rate that "tends neither to raise nor to lower" (1936 [1898], p. 102) commodity prices. Wicksell posited that the natural rate would be equal to the real interest rate that would balance supply and demand absent monetary frictions. The recent academic literature draws on this notion to define the natural rate as the real interest rate that would prevail in the absence of sluggish adjustment in nominal prices and wages. In simple models, this interest rate would result in stable prices and full employment; in some more complex models, this interest rate has been found to promote stable inflation and appropriate economic activity, although monetary policymakers face important tradeoffs in such settings. Importantly, the natural rate varies over time. For example, it generally rises with expected productivity growth and with "preference shocks" that capture households' desire to consume today rather than save. For further discussion of the potential usefulness of the natural rate for monetary policy, see, for example, Barsky, Justiniano, and Melosi (2014) and Cúrdia and others (2015). By contrast, Laubach and Williams (2015) employ a statistical approach that defines the natural rate as one consistent with the economy operating at its full potential once transitory shocks to aggregate supply and demand have abated. These two approaches to the measurement of the natural real rate are different but have important similarities. Qualitatively, the two measures would be expected to move together in response to shocks to productivity growth and preferences so long as those shocks were very persistent.Return to text 11.See Laubach and Williams (2015).Return to text 12.For analyses of how a sudden tightening in access to credit can lead to household deleveraging, pushing down the neutral rate of interest, see Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2015).Return to text 13.See figure 2 in the Summary of Economic Projections, an addendum to the minutes of the September 2015 FOMC meeting. See Board of Governors (2015b). The longer-run normal level of the federal funds rate reported in the SEP presumably matches participants' assessment of the neutral nominal federal funds rate that will prevail in the longer run. Between June 2012 and September 2015 the median of FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate declined 75 basis points, to 3.5 percent. When revising down their estimates of the longer-run federal funds rate, participants have generally cited a lower assessment of the economy's longer-run potential growth rate as a contributing factor.Return to text 14.One source of uncertainty regarding the neutral federal funds rate is so-called model uncertainty. As shown in figure 1, a variety of models that provide plausible descriptions of the economy give somewhat different estimates of the neutral rate. A second source of uncertainty is the limited sample size of relevant macroeconomic data: Our estimates of the neutral federal funds rate represent inferences about a moving target. As a result, although the data provide important signals about the neutral rate, our estimates are necessarily imprecise. In Laubach and Williams (2003), for example, the standard error of the estimate of the neutral rate in one baseline model was about 2 percentage points on average. Moreover, one-sided estimates of the neutral rate--those available to policymakers, based only on data known at the time--are generally noisier than estimates of the neutral rate at some previous time that incorporate all the data available.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C. Chairman Coats, Ranking Member Maloney, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today. In my remarks I will discuss the current economic outlook before turning to monetary policy. The Economic OutlookThe U.S. economy has recovered substantially since the Great Recession. The unemployment rate, which peaked at 10 percent in October 2009, declined to 5 percent in October of this year. At that level, the unemployment rate is near the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' most recent estimates of its longer-run normal level. The economy has created about 13 million jobs since the low point for employment in early 2010, and total nonfarm payrolls are now almost 4-1/2 million higher than just prior to the recession. Most recently, after a couple of months of relatively modest payroll growth, employers added an estimated 271,000 jobs in October. This increase brought the average monthly gain since June to about 195,000--close to the monthly pace of around 210,000 in the first half of the year and still sufficient to be consistent with continued improvement in the labor market. At the same time that the labor market has improved, U.S. economic output--as measured by inflation-adjusted gross domestic product (GDP), or real GDP--has increased at a moderate pace, on balance, during the expansion. Over the first three quarters of this year, real GDP is currently estimated to have advanced at an annual rate of 2-1/4 percent, close to its average pace over the previous five years. Many economic forecasters expect growth roughly along those same lines in the fourth quarter. Growth this year has been held down by weak net exports, which have subtracted more than 1/2 percentage point, on average, from the annual rate of real GDP growth over the past three quarters. Foreign economic growth has slowed, damping increases in U.S. exports, and the U.S. dollar has appreciated substantially since the middle of last year, making our exports more expensive and imported goods cheaper. By contrast, total real private domestic final purchases (PDFP)--which includes household spending, business fixed investment, and residential investment, and currently represents about 85 percent of aggregate spending--has increased at an annual rate of 3 percent this year, significantly faster than real GDP. Household spending growth has been particularly solid in 2015, with purchases of new motor vehicles especially strong. Job growth has bolstered household income, and lower energy prices have left consumers with more to spend on other goods and services. Increases in home values and stock market prices in recent years, along with reductions in debt, have pushed up the net worth of households, which also supports consumer spending. Finally, interest rates for borrowers remain low, due in part to the FOMC's accommodative monetary policy, and these low rates appear to have been especially relevant for consumers considering the purchase of durable goods. Other components of PDFP, including residential and business investment, have also advanced this year. Indeed, gains in real residential investment spending have been faster so far this year than last year, although the level of new residential construction still remains fairly low. And outside of the drilling and mining sector, where lower oil prices have led to substantial cuts in outlays for new structures, business investment spending has posted moderate gains. Turning to inflation, it continues to run below the FOMC's longer-run objective of 2 percent. Overall consumer price inflation--as measured by the change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures--was only 1/4 percent over the 12 months ending in October. However, this number largely reflects the sharp fall in crude oil prices since the summer of 2014. Because food and energy prices are volatile, it is often helpful to look at inflation excluding those two categories--known as core inflation--which is typically a better indicator of future overall inflation than recent readings of headline inflation. But core inflation--which ran at 1‑1/4 percent over the 12 months ending in October--is also well below our 2 percent objective, partly reflecting the appreciation of the U.S. dollar, which has pushed down the prices of imported goods, placing temporary downward pressure on inflation. Even after taking account of this effect, however, inflation has been running somewhat below our objective. Let me now turn to where I see the economy is likely headed over the next several years. To summarize, I anticipate continued economic growth at a moderate pace that will be sufficient to generate additional increases in employment and a rise in inflation to our 2 percent objective. Although the economic outlook, as always, is uncertain, I currently see the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as very close to balanced. Regarding U.S. inflation, I anticipate that the drag due to the large declines in prices for crude oil and imports over the past year and a half will diminish next year. With less downward pressure on inflation from these factors and some upward pressure from a further tightening in U.S. labor and product markets, I expect inflation to move up to the FOMC's 2 percent objective over the next few years. Of course, inflation expectations play an important role in the inflation process, and my forecast of a return to our 2 percent objective over the medium term relies on a judgment that longer-term inflation expectations remain reasonably well anchored. Monetary PolicyLet me now turn to the implications of the economic outlook for monetary policy. In the policy statement issued after its October meeting, the FOMC reaffirmed its judgment that it would be appropriate to increase the target range for the federal funds rate when we had seen some further improvement in the labor market and were reasonably confident that inflation would move back to the Committee's 2 percent objective over the medium term. That initial rate increase would reflect the Committee's judgment, based on a range of indicators, that the economy would continue to grow at a pace sufficient to generate further labor market improvement and a return of inflation to 2 percent, even following the reduction in policy accommodation. As I have already noted, I currently judge that U.S. economic growth is likely to be sufficient over the next year or two to result in further improvement in the labor market. Ongoing gains in the labor market, coupled with my judgment that longer-term inflation expectations remain reasonably well anchored, serve to bolster my confidence in a return of inflation to 2 percent as the disinflationary effects of declines in energy and import prices wane. Committee participants recognize that the future course of the economy is uncertain, and we take account of both the upside and downside risks around our projections when judging the appropriate stance of monetary policy. In particular, recent monetary policy decisions have reflected our recognition that, with the federal funds rate near zero, we can respond more readily to upside surprises to inflation, economic growth, and employment than to downside shocks. This asymmetry suggests that it is appropriate to be more cautious in raising our target for the federal funds rate than would be the case if short-term nominal interest rates were appreciably above zero. Reflecting these concerns, we have maintained our current policy stance even as the labor market has improved appreciably. However, we must also take into account the well-documented lags in the effects of monetary policy. Were the FOMC to delay the start of policy normalization for too long, we would likely end up having to tighten policy relatively abruptly to keep the economy from significantly overshooting both of our goals. Such an abrupt tightening would risk disrupting financial markets and perhaps even inadvertently push the economy into recession. Moreover, holding the federal funds rate at its current level for too long could also encourage excessive risk-taking and thus undermine financial stability. On balance, economic and financial information received since our October meeting has been consistent with our expectation of continued improvement in the labor market. And, as I have noted, continuing improvement in the labor market helps strengthen our confidence that inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. That said, between today and the next FOMC meeting, we will receive additional data that bear on the economic outlook. These data include a range of indicators regarding the labor market, inflation, and economic activity. When my colleagues and I meet, we will assess all of the available data and their implications for the economic outlook in making our policy decision. As you know, there has been considerable focus on the first increase in the federal funds rate after nearly seven years in which that rate was at its effective lower bound. We have tried to be as clear as possible about the considerations that will affect that decision. Of course, even after the initial increase in the federal funds rate, monetary policy will remain accommodative. And it bears emphasizing that what matters for the economic outlook are expectations concerning the path of the federal funds rate over time: It is those expectations that affect financial conditions and thereby influence spending and investment decisions. In this regard, the Committee anticipates that even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. SummaryIn closing, the economy has come a long way toward the FOMC's objectives of maximum employment and price stability. When the Committee begins to normalize the stance of policy, doing so will be a testament, also, to how far our economy has come in recovering from the effects of the financial crisis and the Great Recession. In that sense, it is a day that I expect we all are looking forward to. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.