Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Wednesday announced that they are extending the resolution plan submission deadline for American International Group, Inc., General Electric Capital Corporation, Inc., and Prudential Financial, Inc. The three organizations will be required to submit their second annual plans by Dec. 31, 2015, instead of July 1, 2015. The Dodd-Frank Act requires that certain banking organizations with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for supervision by the Federal Reserve periodically submit resolution plans to the agencies. The plan, commonly known as a living will, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. The extension from the agencies is consistent with similar extensions provided to other firms in previous years and will allow the firms additional time to develop their plans.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Federal Reserve Board and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) on Friday announced a joint public meeting on the proposal for CIT Group, Inc., Livingston, New Jersey, to acquire IMB Holdco and its subsidiary, OneWest Bank, National Association, both of Pasadena, California. The proposal also includes the merger of CIT Bank into OneWest Bank. The purpose of the meeting is to collect information relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including a review of the insured depository institutions' performance under the Community Reinvestment Act. The agencies also will consider and collect information on other factors in making a decision on the application, including the effects of the proposal on the stability of the U.S. banking or financial system, the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, and competition in the relevant markets. The public meeting will be held at the Los Angeles Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 950 South Grand Avenue, Los Angeles, California, on Thursday, February 26, 2015, beginning at 8:00 a.m. PST. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting must submit a written request no later than 5:00 p.m. PST on February 20, 2015. A request to testify may be sent by mail to: Scott Turner, Vice President, Community Engagement, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 101 Market Street, San Francisco, California 94105; by e-mail to:[email protected]; or by facsimile: 415-977-4011. The Board will provide a copy of each request to the OCC. The request to testify must include the following information: Individuals interested only in attending the meeting, but not testifying, need not submit a written request. The presiding officers of the meeting will prepare a schedule for participants wishing to testify. To ensure an opportunity for all interested commenters to present their views, the presiding officers may limit the amount of time allotted to speak. Persons not listed on the schedule may be permitted to speak at the public meeting, if time permits, at the conclusion of the schedule of witnesses, and at the discretion of the presiding officers. Copies of testimony may, but need not, be filed before a person's presentation. Further information on the applications, including comments received and the transcript of the meeting, will be made available on the Board'swebsiteand the OCC'swebsite. The Board and OCC are also announcing today that they are extending the public comment period for both applications. Comments for the applications will be accepted through February 26, 2015. Board Votes Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Replacement checks are being mailed this week to borrowers eligible for payment under the Independent Foreclosure Review Payment Agreements and who have not yet cashed or deposited their check, the Federal Reserve Board and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency announced Wednesday. The checks are being sent by the paying agent, Rust Consulting, Inc., to replace uncashed checks that have now expired. Agreements reached in January 2013 between federal bank regulatory agencies and 13 mortgage servicers provided $3.6 billion in cash payments to borrowers whose homes were in any stage of the foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010. The mortgages were serviced by one of the following 13 companies, their affiliates, or subsidiaries: Aurora, Bank of America, Citibank, Goldman Sachs, HSBC, JPMorgan Chase, MetLife Bank, Morgan Stanley, PNC, Sovereign, SunTrust, U.S. Bank, and Wells Fargo. The payments ranged from several hundred dollars to $125,000 plus lost equity. Beginning in April 2013, payments were mailed to all of the nearly 4.2 million in-scope borrowers of these servicers. As of January 2015, more than 3.4 million of these checks, totaling more than $3.1 billion, had been cashed or deposited. This represents approximately 87 percent of the total amount of funds these servicers were required to pay. Nearly 600,000 checks mailed to borrowers of these 13 servicers remain outstanding, and have now expired. As part of the agencies' ongoing efforts to reach these borrowers, the paying agent was directed to conduct additional searches of updated addresses. The current mailing represents the third attempt directed by the agencies to provide checks to in-scope borrowers. Borrowers who have already cashed or deposited their checks will not receive additional payment. Borrowers must cash or deposit the replacement checks within 90 days of the issue date or the check will be void. After January 2013, similar agreements were reached with federal bank regulatory agencies that provided cash payments to borrowers whose homes were in any stage of the foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010 and whose mortgages were serviced by GMAC Mortgage and EverBank. As of year-end 2014, payments were mailed to all of the in-scope borrowers of these two servicers. Replacement checks for borrowers of GMAC Mortgage who have not yet cashed or deposited their checks are expected to be mailed by Rust Consulting, Inc., by May 2015. Borrowers whose mortgages were serviced by one of the 13 servicers that entered into agreements in January 2013 or by GMAC Mortgage should call Rust Consulting, Inc. with questions at 888-952-9105, Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. EST or Saturday between 11:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. EST. Borrowers who had a mortgage serviced by EverBank should contact the paying agent for that agreement, Epiq Systems, with questions at 877-819-9754.
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Catholic University of America, Columbus School of Law, Washington, D.C. Watch live It is a pleasure and a particularly personal honor for me to speak to you today as a guest of this institution.1 I am proud to say that my grandfather, James J. Hayden, earned his doctorate of law from Catholic University and later served as dean of the law school. He was an early scholar of the regulation prompted by a technological innovation that would change the world--aviation. He was, in that sense, someone who looked to the future and wanted to be a part of it. In his years leading the law school, I hope my grandfather could also glimpse the great institution that it would become. It has been a little more than six years since the fall of 2008, when the peak of a severe financial crisis presented the very real threat of a second Great Depression. The damage was extensive, and for some time, the recovery was frustratingly slow. But the economy has improved considerably over the past two years, and I am optimistic that that this improvement will continue. The financial system is also stronger and more resilient after improvements in regulation and oversight by the Federal Reserve and other agencies and better management by banks and other financial firms. The Fed acted boldly during and after the financial crisis in the face of great uncertainty. The full effects of these policies will become clearer with the passage of time. Indeed, the Federal Reserve's role in the Great Depression of the 1930s is still actively debated. That said, as I will show, the evidence as of today is very strong that the Fed's actions generally succeeded and are a major reason why the U.S. economy is now outperforming those of other advanced nations. Other central banks are now embracing some of the same bold steps undertaken much earlier by the Fed. Against that background, I am concerned about several troubling proposals that would subject monetary policy to undue political pressure and place new limits on the Fed's ability to respond to future crises. My remarks will address three such proposals. The first goes by the somewhat misleading name of "Audit the Fed," and would subject the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy to unlimited congressional policy audits (not to be confused with financial audits, which are already conducted regularly.)2The second is a proposal to require the Fed to adopt and follow a specific equation in setting monetary policy and to face immediate congressional hearings and investigation by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) whenever it deviates from the policy dictated by that equation.3And, third, there are discussions about imposing new limitations on the Fed's long-held powers to provide liquidity during a financial crisis. I think these proposals are misguided for three reasons. First, they are motivated by the belief that the Fed's response during the crisis was both ineffective and outside the bounds of its traditional role and responsibilities. In fact, the Fed's actions were effective, necessary, appropriate, and very much in keeping with the traditional role of the Fed and other central banks. Second, these proposals are based on the assertion that the Federal Reserve operates in secrecy and was not accountable for its actions during the crisis, a perspective that is in violent conflict with the facts. The Fed has been transparent, accountable, and subject to extensive oversight, especially during and since the crisis. We have also taken appropriate steps since the crisis to further enhance that transparency. Third, and most importantly, I believe these proposals fail to anticipate the significant costs and risks of subjecting monetary policy to political pressure and constraining the Fed's ability to carry out its traditional role of providing liquidity in a crisis. Appropriate and EffectiveThere is no dispute that the Fed's actions after the onset of the financial crisis were unprecedented in scale and scope. To help stabilize the financial system and keep credit flowing to households and businesses, the Federal Reserve lent to banks through the discount window and to financial institutions and markets through numerous new broad-based lending facilities it created using emergency lending authority granted by the Congress during the Great Depression.4In a limited number of cases, the Fed also extended liquidity support to individual institutions whose imminent failure threatened to bring down the global financial system. At the same time, the Federal Reserve used monetary policy to help stabilize the economy. After cutting our target for the overnight interest rate on loans between banks--our usual monetary policy tool--as low as it could go, the Fed took further action using unconventional policy tools. These policies involved communication, providing "forward guidance" that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) expected to keep rates low for longer than had been expected, and also purchasing large amounts of longer-term Treasury debt and other securities to put downward pressure on long-term interest rates. While these actions were extraordinary and in some respects unprecedented, they were taken because the threats posed by the crisis were also without precedent, even in the events that led to the Great Depression.5For the first time, cutting the Fed's policy rate to near zero proved insufficient to halt a plummeting economy; so the Fed took further action. For the first time since the Great Depression, our nation faced a financial panic so severe that the Fed's normal overnight lending to banks was not enough; so the Fed did more, using congressionally granted powers it had held but not used since the 1930s that were intended to deal with just such rare emergencies. As the Congress considers proposals that will affect the conduct of monetary policy and the Fed's ability to respond in a crisis, I believe it is also important to recognize how effective the Fed's response has been. With respect to monetary policy, the unconventional policies were designed to stimulate the economy in the same way as traditional monetary policy, by lowering interest rates. These actions helped deliver highly accommodative policy, which was essential given the depth of the recession. Without these steps, the slump in the labor market and the broader economy surely would have been even deeper and more prolonged, and the low wage and price inflation we are still experiencing might have turned into outright deflation. Critics warned that these policies would unleash uncontrollable inflation, fail to stimulate demand, and court other known and unknown risks. After I joined the Federal Reserve Board in May 2012, I too expressed doubts about the efficacy and risks of further asset purchases. But let's let the data speak: The evidence so far is clear that the benefits of these policies have been substantial, and that the risks have not materialized. Inflation has continued to run well below the Committee's 2 percent objective. Indeed, some argue today that low inflation should cause the Committee to hold off from raising interest rates. As I noted at the outset, due in part to the Fed's effective response to the crisis, the recovery in the United States has been stronger than that of other advanced economies, with more rapid job creation, lower unemployment, and faster growth. That is one reason why a number of central banks around the world have adopted forward guidance and asset purchase programs similar to the policies adopted by the Fed.6 The Federal Reserve's lending in the crisis was also successful. There is little dispute today that the crisis threatened a global financial collapse and depression, and that these liquidity policies were instrumental in arresting the crisis. Warnings about the Fed's lending also have not been borne out. Critics claimed the Fed had been reckless, throwing money ineffectively at problems and making loans to uncreditworthy borrowers. On the contrary, the Fed's lending was targeted to institutions, markets, and sectors that proved central to arresting the crisis. Loans were extended based on the same terms that the Federal Reserve has always applied—the borrowers must be solvent, the loans must be secured, and an appropriate interest rate must be charged. As a result, every single loan we made was repaid in full, on time, with interest.7 Traditional Oversight of the Federal Reserve Was Extensive and EffectiveThe Federal Reserve, like other parts of our democratic system of government, must be accountable to the public and its elected representatives. Given the scale of the Fed's actions during the Crisis, it has been not only appropriate but essential that these actions be transparent to the public and subject to close and careful scrutiny by the Congress. And that is exactly what happened. So it is jarring to hear it asserted that the Fed carries out its duties in secret and is unaccountable to the public and its elected representatives. The Federal Reserve is highly transparent and accountable to the public and to the Congress. First, the Fed does not set its own goals for monetary policy. Congress assigned us the goals of price stability and maximum employment--that is, the highest level of employment achievable without threatening price stability. Federal Reserve Board members are nominated by the President and must be confirmed by the Senate. The Chair of the Fed appears before both the House and Senate oversight committees twice every year to report on monetary policy, and, in practice, to respond to questions about anything and everything related to the Fed's activities. The Chair and other Board members routinely make additional appearances before the Congress and meet frequently with members. More generally, the Fed is open and transparent in its operations, including those related to monetary policy, accounting for itself in timely postmeeting FOMC statements, minutes, broadcast press conferences, and speeches.8Details about the Fed's balance sheet are on the public record; in fact, every security owned by the Fed is identified individually on the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.9The FOMC's plans to normalize the balance sheet have been the subject of exhaustive discussion--in FOMC meetings, in speeches by policymakers, and among the many journalists and academics who analyze and discuss Fed policies. Last September, the FOMC published its Normalization Principles, which set forth its plans to reduce the balance sheet to a more normal level over time.10 The Fed's financial statements are also a matter of public record, and are audited annually by independent, outside auditors under the watchful eye of the Fed's independent Inspector General.11I am well aware of this because I chair the committees that have oversight responsibility for the audits of the Board and the Reserve Banks. I worked for many years in the financial markets, and I can tell you that the Federal Reserve's financial statements, though they contain very large numbers, are relatively straightforward--much simpler than those of a typical regional bank. The Fed's operations, including its role regulating and supervising banks, are subject to extensive review by the GAO. If you visit the GAO's website, you'll find more than 70 reports since the crisis that are wholly or partly dedicated to reviewing the Fed's operations, including the emergency lending facilities I mentioned earlier.12The GAO works closely with the Fed's Office of Inspector General, which is involved in both financial audits and other oversight of our operations. The extensive oversight I describe intensified--appropriately so--as the Federal Reserve responded to the financial crisis. Our lending facilities were also the subject of review by the Fed's Inspector General, the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the Congressional Oversight Panel, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission established by the Congress, and numerous congressional hearings and reviews. The Fed's actions were also fully transparent. As always, monetary policy decisions were debated and voted on by the FOMC and announced immediately, with detailed explanations provided in the minutes of these deliberations. The Fed provided public guidance on its plans to purchase assets and made those purchases in open, competitive transactions that were disclosed as soon as they occurred. The terms and conditions for every lending facility were publicly disclosed. The amounts lent under each program were published on the Fed's weekly balance sheet report. The Fed created a website and issued a monthly report to the Congress disclosing details on all loans, such as the quantity and quality of collateral posted by borrowers.13 The Significant Costs of Restrictions on the Fed's IndependenceAs I said at the outset, I believe these proposals under consideration by the Congress fail to anticipate the significant costs and risks of subjecting the Fed's conduct of monetary policy to political pressure and of limiting the ability of the Fed to execute its traditional role of keeping credit flowing to American households and businesses in a financial crisis. Let me first address "Audit the Fed," which would repeal a narrow but critical exemption, adopted by the Congress in 1978, to limit GAO policy reviews of the Fed's conduct of monetary policy. The Congress granted this exemption because the costs of involving the GAO in monetary policy, including the substantial risk of political interference, far outweigh the potential benefits. It is important to note that GAO investigations are not the financial audits that many assume them to be. They extend beyond mere accounting to examine strategy, judgments and day-to-day decisionmaking. Indeed, by statute, the GAO is charged with making recommendations to Congress about the areas they have reviewed. This could put the GAO in the position of reviewing the FOMC's policy decisions and recommending its own course for monetary policy. With these features in mind, the potential benefits of GAO policy audits would be small, even before considering the potential costs. Unlike the programs that are typically the subject of GAO policy audits, such as procurement decisions that may be brought to light only by the GAO's attention, monetary policy decisions occur with all of the world watching. They are announced immediately, described in an FOMC statement, often elaborated on in a press conference, and the subject of endless same-day-analysis and debate. With all of this transparency and analysis, very little would be revealed by GAO policy audits that would help evaluate the effectiveness of monetary policy. The benefits of frequent GAO policy audits would also be low because the effects of monetary policy are felt with a considerable time lag and are often only clear years later. Audit the Fed also risks inserting the Congress directly into monetary policy decisionmaking, reversing decades of deliberate effort by the Congress to insulate the Fed from political pressure in carrying out its day-to-day duties. Indeed, some advocates of the bill have expressed support for complete elimination of the Federal Reserve. Long experience, in the United States and in other advanced economies, has demonstrated that monetary policy is most successful when decisions are rendered independent of influence by elected officials. As recent U.S. history has shown, elected officials have often pushed for easier policies that serve short-term political interests, at the expense of higher inflation and damage to the long-term health and stability of the economy.14 After World War II and as recently as the early 1970s, political pressures likely influenced Federal Reserve decisionmaking in a way which helped cause excessive inflation and related bouts of economic weakness. In 1977, as what came to be called the Great Inflation neared its peak, the Congress passed legislation that spelled out the goals for monetary policy--maximum employment and stable prices--but left it to the Fed to precisely define those goals and the means by which they would be achieved.15To preserve the Fed's independence in implementing policy to reach these goals, the Congress exempted monetary policy from the GAO investigations it was then authorizing for other Fed operations. This independence has served the nation well. Over the 20 years or so prior to the crisis, the Federal Reserve was able to maintain low and stable inflation, and recessions were brief and mild.16That is not to say that the Fed got everything just right during this period. But it seems to me that any pre-crisis shortcomings were in regulation and supervision by the Fed and other agencies, rather than in monetary policy. And there are other costs from subjecting monetary policy to GAO investigations. Frequent GAO investigations would likely inhibit the debate and flow of information and ideas at FOMC meetings among staff and policymakers, which would lead to poorer decisions. Market participants would have to wonder whether the FOMC would react to GAO criticism, and they could lose confidence in the Fed's independence, reducing its credibility. To those who may doubt that GAO investigations would be used by the Congress to try to influence monetary policy, let me briefly describe another proposal which envisions exactly that. This bill would require the FOMC to carry out monetary policy according to a simple equation and require immediate congressional hearings and a GAO audit whenever monetary policy deviates from this equation.17Simple policy rules of this nature are used by the FOMC and by central banks around the world as a guide to policy. No central bank applies them in such a mechanical fashion, and there is very little support among economists for doing so.18Based on my own experience in business, in government service, and in life, I doubt that important decisions can be reduced ultimately to such an equation. The most such a rule might do is get you 80 percent of the way there; that last 20 percent makes all the difference. Finally, there has been discussion in the Congress of imposing new restrictions on the ability of the Fed to respond as it did with liquidity facilities during the financial crisis. Although I am not aware of a specific bill at this point, the idea is to limit the Fed's authority under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, under which the Fed is empowered to lend "in unusual and exigent circumstances" to firms beyond banks for the purpose of containing a financial crisis. The Fed used this emergency lending authority to provide liquidity in the face of a systemwide panic that threatened the financial system. As the crisis receded, the Congress took two related actions. First, it gave the regulators what they had badly needed during the crisis, which was a means of resolving the largest financial institutions without threatening the financial system. Second, the Congress prohibited emergency loans to individual firms but retained the Fed's ability to establish broadly available lending programs during a crisis, with the prior approval of the Secretary of the Treasury and timely notification of the Congress. This tradeoff came after extensive consultation between the Congress and the Federal Reserve. And I believe that it struck a reasonable balance. I also believe it would be a mistake to go further and impose additional restrictions. One of the lessons of the crisis is that the financial system evolves so quickly that it is difficult to predict where threats will emerge and what actions may be needed in the future to respond. Because we cannot anticipate what may be needed in the future, the Congress should preserve the ability of the Fed to respond flexibly and nimbly to future emergencies. Further restricting or eliminating the Fed's emergency lending authority will not prevent future crises, but it will hinder the Fed's ability to limit the harm from those crises for families and businesses. ConclusionIn our democratic system, the Federal Reserve owes the public and the Congress a high degree of transparency and accountability. The Congress has wisely given the Fed the tools it needs to implement monetary policy and respond to future crises as well as crucial independence to do its work free from short-term political influence. I would urge caution regarding current proposals that threaten just such political influence and place restrictions on the very tools that so recently proved essential in preventing a new depression. Congressional oversight of the Federal Reserve, including its conduct of monetary policy, is extensive, but no doubt could be improved in ways that do not threaten the Fed's effectiveness. I would welcome discussions with the Congress about ways to aid its important oversight of monetary policy. There may be differing views of how Congress can best carry out this responsibility, but there can be no disagreement about the purpose of such oversight, which is to help the Federal Reserve succeed in promoting a healthy economy and a strong and stable financial system. Those are the goals Congress assigned the Federal Reserve a century ago, and I am optimistic that Congress and the Fed will continue to work together to pursue them on behalf of the American people. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.See Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015, H.R. 24, 114 Cong. (2015); and Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015, S. 264, 114 Cong. (2015).Return to text 3.See Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015 in note 2.Return to text 4.See Banking Act of 1935, ch. 614, 49 Stat. 684 (1935).Return to text 5.See Ben S. Bernanke (2010),statementbefore the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, Washington, D.C., September 2; and Ben Bernanke (2009),closed session (PDF)of the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, Washington, D.C., November 17.Return to text 6.On the effectiveness of the Fed’s unconventional monetary policy, see Eric M. Engen, Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015), "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policy Actions (PDF)," Finance and Economic Discussion Series 2015-005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January); Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011), "The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7 (March), pp. 3-43; Stefania D'Amico and Thomas B. King (2013), "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44 (February, issue supplement s1), pp. 3-46.Return to text 7.On the effectiveness of the Fed's emergency lending, see Sean D. Campbell, Daniel M. Covitz, William R. Nelson, and Karen M. Pence (2011), "Securitization Markets and Central Banking: An Evaluation of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility,"Journal of Finance, vol. 68 (April), pp. 715-37; and Tao Wu (2011), "The U.S. Money Market and the Term Auction Facility in the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 93 (May), pp. 617-31.Return to text 8.For example, see Statistical Release H.6, "Money Stock Measures," on theBoard's website.Return to text 9.See the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's webpage "System Open Market Account Holdings" .Return to text 10.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, September 17.Return to text 11.See "Federal Reserve System Audited Annual Financial Statements" on theBoard's website.Return to text 12.The reports are available on theGAO's website.Return to text 13.See "Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet" on theBoard's website.Return to text 14.The seminal research establishing a link between central bank independence and macroeconomic performance is Alberto Alesina and Lawrence H. Summers (1993), "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62. More recent research finds the relationship to be less solid, however, in part because independent central banks have in several cases been instituted precisely because economic performance has been subpar; for example, see Christopher Crowe and Ellen E. Meade (2007), "The Evolution of Central Bank Governance around the World,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 21 (4), pp. 69-90; Christopher Crowe and Ellen E. Meade (2008), "Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness,"European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 24 (4), pp. 763-77; and N. Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen (2014), "Central Bank Transparency and Independence: Updates and New Measures,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (1), pp. 189-259.Return to text 15.See Robert J. Samuelson (2008),The Great Inflation and Its Aftermath: The Transformation of America's Economy, Politics, and Society(New York: Random House).Return to text 16.See the figure "Annualized 12-Month PCE and Core PCE Inflation" that shows inflation and core inflation over time.Return to text 17.See Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015 in note 2.Return to text 18.As part of its ongoing Initiative on Global Markets (IGM) poll, the University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, asked 44 prominent economists to respond to the following statement: "Legislation introduced in Congress would require the Federal Reserve to "submit to the appropriate congressional committees…a Directive Policy Rule," which shall describe "the strategy or rule of the Federal Open Market Committee for the systematic quantitative adjustment of the Policy Instrument Target to respond to a change in the Intermediate Policy Inputs." Should the Fed deviate from the rule, the Fed Chair would have to "testify before the appropriate congressional committees as to why the [rule]…is not in compliance." Enacting this provision would improve monetary policy outcomes in the U.S." None of the participants agreed with the statement, and almost all disagreed or strongly disagreed. The results of the poll are available on the Booth School's IGM Forum website atwww.igmchicago.org/igm-economic-experts-panel/poll-results?SurveyID=SV_doNZ9FbNq7tDi97.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the 2015 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, Sponsored by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York Thank you. It is a great pleasure to be here to discuss some of the important issues facing the Federal Reserve and other central banks in conducting monetary policy with a large balance sheet. I will focus on two main sets of issues that the Fed has faced and will continue to face for some time. The first involves our ongoing assessment of the effects of the asset purchases. The second concerns policy normalization in the presence of a very large balance sheet. To set the stage, consider the size of the Fed's balance sheet over the past several years. Assets have risen from about $900 billion in 2006 to about $4.5 trillion today, or--as seen infigure 1--from 6 percent of nominal gross domestic product (GDP) to about 26 percent of nominal GDP. The net expansion over this period reflects primarily our large-scale asset purchase programs. Of course, many other central banks have expanded their balance sheets substantially over recent years as well. For example, assets of the Bank of Japan have increased from about 20 percent of nominal GDP to more than 60 percent of nominal GDP over this period, and assets of the Swiss National Bank have increased from 20 percent of nominal GDP to more than 80 percent of nominal GDP. The net increase in assets of the European Central Bank has so far been more modest, with assets increasing from less than 10 percent of nominal GDP to more than 20 percent of nominal GDP--but their quantitative easing (QE) program is not yet under way. For the remainder of my remarks, I will focus on the Fed, beginning with some remarks about the asset purchase programs. The Federal Reserve Asset Purchase ProgramsThe nature of our purchase programs has changed over time. In the early programs--that is to say, QE1, QE2, and the program we call the MEP, or the maturity extension program, otherwise known as "Operation Twist"--the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) specified the expected quantities of assets to be acquired over a defined period. Early in the crisis, this strategy seemed to help bolster confidence that the Fed was acting aggressively to offset the tightening in credit conditions and the steep downturn in economic activity. The communication of asset purchases changed with QE3. In September 2012, the FOMC launched an open-ended asset purchase program in which it directed the New York Fed's Open Market Desk to conduct purchases at an announced monthly pace until there was "significant improvement" in the outlook for the labor market. Later, the FOMC noted that the monthly pace of purchases was data dependent, allowing the pace to be revised up or down based on its assessment of progress toward its long-run objectives. Both of these types of asset purchase programs were aimed at putting downward pressure on long-term yields.1Table 1provides a summary of various studies' estimated effects of these programs on the term premium on 10-year Treasury securities. For example, the decline in 10-year Treasury yields associated with the first purchase program is estimated to have been as large as 100 basis points. The documented effects associated with subsequent programs are generally smaller. These results raise the question of whether the marginal effect of asset purchases has declined over time. While that question is a valid one, our conclusion is that asset purchases over more recent years have provided meaningful stimulus to the economy, and continue to do so. Figure 2provides a current estimate, based on Fed staff calculations, of the effect on the term premium on 10-year Treasury securities from the combination of all asset programs.2The results suggest that the Fed's balance sheet programs are currently depressing 10-year Treasury yields by about 110 basis points. And, with the Fed continuing to hold these securities, they should apply downward pressure on rates for some time. The declines in long-term yields have led to an associated drop in long-term borrowing costs for households and firms and higher equity valuations. Thus, the asset purchases have helped make financial conditions overall more accommodative and have provided significant stimulus for the broader economy. As shown infigure 3, a recent study estimates that the QE programs along with increasingly explicit forward guidance have reduced the unemployment rate by 1-1/4 percentage points and increased the inflation rate by 1/2 percentage point relative to what would have occurred in the absence of these policies.3Moreover, the estimates imply that these macroeconomic effects are only now manifesting themselves in full, reflecting the inherent lags in the monetary transmission mechanism. Of course, such estimates have a wide band of uncertainty around them. As is well known, a number of potential costs might be associated with QE and the Fed's elevated balance sheet. Among these are the possibility that elevated securities holdings and low interest rates could pose risks to financial stability, possible effects on the Fed's income and remittances to the U.S. Treasury, and possible difficulties in conducting policy normalization.4Such potential difficulties arise because the level of reserve balances will be very high when the FOMC begins to raise the federal funds rate, and, consequently, the Federal Reserve will employ new tools, which have their own benefits and costs, to implement monetary policy. Despite these potential costs, we think that asset purchases have had a meaningful effect in promoting economic recovery and helping to keep inflation closer to the FOMC's 2 percent goal than would otherwise have been the case. Policy NormalizationTurning to policy normalization, the FOMC and market participants anticipate that the federal funds rate will be raised sometime this year. We have for some years been considering ways to operate monetary policy with an elevated balance sheet. Prior to the financial crisis, because reserve balances outstanding averaged only around $25 billion, relatively minor variations in the total amount of reserves supplied by the Desk could move the equilibrium federal funds rate up or down. With the nearly $3 trillion in excess reserves today, the traditional mechanism of adjustments in the quantity of reserve balances to achieve the desired level of the effective federal funds rate may well not be feasible or sufficiently predictable. As discussed in the FOMC's statement on its Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, which was published following the September 2014 FOMC meeting, we will use the rate of interest paid on excess reserves (IOER) as our primary tool to move the federal funds rate into the target range.5This action should encourage banks not to lend to any private counterparty at a rate lower than the rate they can earn on balances maintained at the Fed, which should put upward pressure on a range of short-term interest rates. Because not all institutions have access to the IOER rate, we will also use an overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility, as needed. In an ON RRP operation, eligible counterparties may invest funds with the Fed overnight at a given rate. The ON RRP counterparties include 106 money market funds, 22 broker-dealers, 24 depository institutions, and 12 government-sponsored enterprises, including several Federal Home Loan Banks, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Farmer Mac. This facility should encourage these institutions to be unwilling to lend to private counterparties in money markets at a rate below that offered on overnight reverse repos by the Fed. Indeed, testing to date suggests that ON RRP operations have generally been successful in establishing a soft floor for money market interest rates.6 The Fed could also employ other tools, such as term deposits issued through the Term Deposit Facility and term RRPs, to help drain reserves and put additional upward pressure on short-term interest rates. We have been testing these tools and believe they would help support money market rates, if needed. Finally, with regard to balance sheet normalization, the FOMC has indicated that it does not anticipate sales of agency mortgage-backed securities, and that it plans to normalize the size of the balance sheet primarily by ceasing reinvestment of principal payments on its existing securities holdings when the time comes. As illustrated infigure 4, cumulative repayments of principal on our existing securities holdings from now through the end of 2025 are projected to be about $3.2 trillion. As a result, when the FOMC chooses to cease reinvestments, the size of the balance sheet will naturally decline, with a corresponding reduction in reserve balances. ConclusionI will close by highlighting that the Fed's asset purchases have been a critical means by which the FOMC has provided policy accommodation at the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. In other words, the Fed--and other central banks--can implement an expansionary monetary policy even when the policy interest rate is at the zero lower bound. The current high level of securities holdings will present some challenges for policy normalization, but we are confident that we have the tools necessary to remove accommodation at the appropriate time and at the appropriate pace. 1.The Fed staff analysis has focused mostly on the so-called stock effects of the purchase programs--that is, persistent shifts in asset prices observed as the result of a QE program. While these stock effects are well documented in the literature, there have been relatively fewer studies of "flow effects" that may occur at the time of QE transactions (for example, see Stefania D'Amico and Thomas B. King (2013), "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 108 (May), pp. 425-48; and John Kandrac and Bernd Schlusche (2013), "Flow Effects of Large-Scale Asset Purchases,"Economics Letters, vol. 121 (November), pp. 330-35).Return to text 2.The estimates shown in figure 2 are based on an extension of the work done in Ihrig, Klee, Li, Schulte, and Wei (2012). Because the term premium effect depends on both the Fed's current and expected future asset holdings, most of this effect--without further unexpected policy actions--will likely wane over the next few years as the balance sheet begins to normalize. See Jane Ihrig, Elizabeth Klee, Canlin Li, Brett Schulte, and Min Wei (2012), "Expectations about the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and the Term Structure of Interest Rates (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-57 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July).Return to text 3.See Eric Engen, Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015), "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015‑005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).Return to text 4.Reflecting securities holdings from the asset purchases, the Federal Reserve has remitted about $500 billion to the U.S. Treasury from 2008 to 2014 and is expected to have cumulative net income from 2008 to 2025 that is far higher than would have been the case in the absence of these asset purchases.Return to text 5.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Federal Reserve Issues Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, September 17.Return to text 6.Policymakers have discussed benefits and costs of an ON RRP facility. For further discussion on this topic, see, for example, the FOMC minutes for June 2014, July 2014, and January 2015 available on the Board's webpage "Federal Open Market Committee: Meeting Calendars, Statements, and Minutes (2009-2015)" ; and Josh Frost, Lorie Logan, Antoine Martin, Patrick McCabe, Fabio Natalucci, and Julie Remache (2015), "Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: Some Design Considerations (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-010 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies requested comment on a second set of regulatory categories as part of their review to identify outdated or unnecessary regulations applied to insured depository institutions. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA) requires the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to review their regulations at least every 10 years. The agencies also are required to categorize and publish the regulations for comment, and submit a report to Congress that summarizes any significant issues raised by the comments and the relative merits of such issues. The agencies have divided their regulations into 12 categories and requested comments in June 2014 for three categories. The second notice was published February 13 seeking comment on regulations in three additional categories: banking operations; capital; and the Community Reinvestment Act. Comments will be accepted until May 14, 2015. Over the next year, the agencies will jointly publish two additionalFederal Registernotices. Although each notice seeks comment on three specific categories, comments on any of the 12 categories will be accepted by the agencies. The agencies also are holding a series of outreach meetings with financial institutions and interested parties to gather additional views. Information about these meetings is available on the EGRPRA website. Related Links:
On February 12, 2015, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered 21-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 3 basis points. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on February 12, 2015, and will mature on March 5, 2015. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On February 19, 2015, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered 21-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 3 basis points. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on February 19, 2015, and will mature on March 12, 2015. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On February 5, 2015, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered 21-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 3 basis points. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on February 5, 2015, and will mature on February 26, 2015. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
As part of operational testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF), the Federal Reserve plans to conduct a series of three weekly TDF operations in February that offer 21-day term deposits with an early withdrawal feature. Term deposits in this series will settle on the same day the operation is executed, eliminating the three-day lag between the execution of an operation and settlement in previous tests. Individual operations in this series will be held on February 5, February 12, and February 19. The operations will offer 21-day, floating-rate deposits with the maximum individual award amount set at $20 billion, and the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate on excess reserves (currently 25 basis points) plus a fixed spread of 3 basis points. These operations are designed to ensure the operational readiness of the TDF and to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit procedures. Details for each of the weekly operations will be announced on the day prior to each operation on the Board’s website. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttp://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Wednesday its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by IBERIABANK Corporation, Lafayette, Louisiana, to acquire Florida Bank Group, Inc., and its wholly owned subsidiary, Florida Bank, both of Tampa, Florida. The Board also approved the applications, under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act, by IBERIABANK, Lafayette, Louisiana, to merge with Florida Bank and to establish and operate branches at the locations of Florida Bank's main office and branches. Attached is the Board's Order relating to these actions, which were approved on Friday. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday, announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group, Inc., and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation, both of Tokyo, Japan, to acquire up to 19.9 percent of the voting shares of The Bank of East Asia, Limited, Hong Kong S.A.R., People's Republic of China. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application by Taiwan Cooperative Bank, Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the applications by Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Hato Rey, Puerto Rico, to (1) acquire certain assets and assume certain liabilities from Doral Bank, San Juan, Puerto Rico, pursuant to section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and (2) establish and operate branches at the locations of the acquired branches of Doral Bank, pursuant to section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the applications by Banco Popular North America, New York, New York, to (1) acquire certain assets and assume certain liabilities from Doral Bank, San Juan, Puerto Rico, pursuant to section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and (2) establish and operate branches at the locations of the acquired branches of Doral Bank, pursuant to section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the applications by Centennial Bank, Conway, Arkansas, to (1) acquire certain assets and assume certain liabilities from Doral Bank, San Juan, Puerto Rico, pursuant to section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and (2) establish and operate branches at the locations of the acquired branches of Doral Bank, pursuant to section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Wednesday its approval of the applications under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by First Farmers Bank & Trust, Converse, Indiana, to merge with First National Bank of Chrisman, Chrisman, Illinois, and to establish a branch at the location of First National Bank of Chrisman. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action, which was approved on Tuesday. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application by Simmons First National Corporation, Pine Bluff, Arkansas, to merge with Community First Bancshares, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire First State Bank, both of Union City, Tennessee. The Board also announced its approval of a second application by Simmons First National Corporation to merge with Liberty Bancshares, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire Liberty Bank, both of Springfield, Missouri. Both applications were approved under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act. Attached are the Board's orders relating to these actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Attachment (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that results from the latest supervisory stress tests conducted as part of the Dodd-Frank Act will be released on Thursday, March 5, and the related results from the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), will be released on Wednesday, March 11. Results for both exercises will be released at 4:30 p.m. The Dodd-Frank Act stress tests are forward-looking exercises conducted by both Federal Reserve supervisors and by large bank holding companies supervised by the Federal Reserve. The exercises help assess whether institutions have sufficient capital to absorb losses and continue operating during stressful economic and financial conditions over a period of nine quarters. The results of the tests conducted by Federal Reserve supervisors will include data such as projected post-stress capital ratios, revenue, and loss estimates under hypothetical adverse and severely adverse scenarios previously published by the Federal Reserve. The standardized capital actions used for the Dodd-Frank Act stress tests assume no changes in recent levels of dividend payments and no common stock repurchases for each participating bank holding company and allow the results to be compared across the firms. The same institutions will separately release their company-run Dodd-Frank Act stress test results on or before Friday, March 20. CCAR is an annual exercise by the Federal Reserve to help assess whether large bank holding companies have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks and are supported by the companies' risk-measurement and -management practices. As part of the CCAR, the Federal Reserve evaluates each firm's plans to make capital distributions, such as dividend payments, stock repurchases, or planned acquisitions. CCAR results will include post-stress capital ratios under hypothetical adverse and severely adverse scenarios published by the Federal Reserve and will reflect the capital actions the companies plan to undertake during the nine-quarter period. In addition to the quantitative results, the Federal Reserve will indicate whether it has objected to a firm's capital plan based on qualitative grounds. The instructions, scenarios, and further information regarding the 2015 Dodd-Frank Act stress tests and CCAR are available on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcementaction listed below: FNB Bancorp, Layton, UtahWritten Agreement issued March 3, 2010Terminated February 3, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Macon Bancorp, Franklin, North CarolinaWritten Agreement issued July 20, 2012Terminated November 13, 2014 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday extended until April 3 the comment period for its proposed rule to implement capital surcharges for the largest, most systemically important U.S. bank holding companies. The proposed rule would establish a methodology to identify whether a firm is a global systemically important banking organization and would also establish the size of a firm's risk-based capital surcharge. The proposal is designed to further strengthen the capital positions of these institutions. The Board extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Originally, comments were due by March 2, 2015. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal RegisterNotice:HTML|PDF
On February 12, 2015, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer 21-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves (currently 25 basis points) plus a fixed spread of 3 basis points. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $20,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. ET to 12:30 p.m. ET, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's February 2, 2015,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On February 5, 2015, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer 21-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves (currently 25 basis points) plus a fixed spread of 3 basis points. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $20,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. ET to 12:30 p.m. ET, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's February 2, 2015,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On February 19, 2015, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer 21-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves (currently 25 basis points) plus a fixed spread of 3 basis points. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $20,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. ET to 12:30 p.m. ET, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's February 2, 2015,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, New York It has now been over six years since the most acute phase of the financial crisis. Over the intervening years, market structures have evolved, and financial firms have changed their business models in important respects. Authorities around the world are implementing reforms that address the painful lessons of the crisis, while at the same time keeping the evolution of markets and firms in mind.1 Today, I will briefly summarize this sweeping reform program as it relates to large, global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), critical financial market infrastructure, and money markets. In my view, the basic agendas in these areas are, to different degrees, well developed, although a great deal of implementation remains. In contrast, I will argue that thinking about financial stability in the context of credit markets is less advanced and presents difficult challenges for supervisors. I will consider a range of factors that may address those challenges, illustrated with a discussion of recent developments in the syndicated leveraged loan market. And I will argue that the standard for regulatory intervention in the credit markets should be higher than for the other three areas. Financial Institutions:Evenbefore the financial crisis ended, it was clear that reforms to strengthen the most systemically important firms and their regulation and supervision needed to be the first order of business. I will mention four critical elements of that program. First, these institutions are required to hold, and now do hold, much higher levels of higher-quality capital, as measured by both risk-based ratios and a much more comprehensive leverage ratio. Under the "enhanced prudential standards" of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank), the fully phased-in capital requirements will be meaningfully higher for these institutions because of the greater threat their failure would pose to the financial system and to the broader economy. Second, these institutions are for the first time becoming subject to rule-based liquidity regulation, including the Liquidity Coverage Ratio, the Net Stable Funding Ratio, and liquidity stress testing.2These innovations are in part designed to address the firms' vulnerabilities to damaging runs on their short-term financing, runs that occurred repeatedly during the crisis and clearly increased its severity. Third, we now have rigorous, forward-looking capital stress testing that recognizes the dynamic nature of the financial system and guards against the excessive optimism that can build during a credit boom. These three reforms are well advanced and, in my view, have left the G-SIBs far stronger than they were before the crisis. Together, they significantly reduce the probability of a large bank failure. But they would leave us short of meeting the overriding objective of eliminating the too-big-to-fail conundrum without a fourth reform--a viable resolution mechanism that could handle the failure of these institutions without severe damage to the economy. Until recently, no nation has had a way of handling such failures without that degree of damage. Authorities around the world have been working to develop an approach to resolving large financial firms that credibly imposes losses on shareholders and debt holders consistent with the basic tenets of our capitalist system, but does so in a way that protects the rest of the financial system and the real economy from severe damage. The single-point-of-entry approach developed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in conjunction with other U.S. supervisors is a promising innovation, especially in combination with the recent proposal of the Financial Stability Board to increase the "total loss absorbency capacity" of systemically important firms in terms of their total levels of equity and long-term debt. When fully worked out, these new regulatory regimes should permit a large, consolidated entity that owns banks or broker-dealers to continue to function even if the ultimate holding company ceases to be viable and must be recapitalized or wound down. As I said at the outset, these reforms directed at the G-SIBs are well advanced. But much implementation remains, including, most notably, addressing cross-border issues associated with the failure of complex global firms. It will take time and continued international cooperation to complete this task.3 Infrastructure:The crisis exposed a number of important weaknesses in the infrastructure of the financial markets--what might be more plainly called the plumbing. Reforms aimed at addressing these weaknesses receive less public attention than those focused on the G-SIBs, and are in some respects less advanced in their conception and execution. But they are, in my view, of great importance. I will mention two important sets of reforms in the U.S. context, one well advanced and the other still under development. The first concerns the triparty repurchase agreement (repo) market, which is a principal source of overnight financing for the largest securities dealers. Before the crisis, the functioning of this market was critically dependent on the extension of large volumes of discretionary intraday credit by two clearing banks. When confidence in Bear Stearns collapsed in March 2008, the vulnerability of this market and its settlement procedures in particular became very clear. Today, almost seven years later, in no small measure thanks to the leadership and persistence of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the triparty repo settlement process has been substantially reengineered, with reliance on discretionary intraday credit essentially eliminated.4In addition, a smaller fraction of the market now involves the financing of lower-quality collateral, and far less of the overall funding is provided overnight and thus subject to daily rollover risk.5Dealers in general manage their short-term funding risk far more conservatively than before the crisis, including by carrying substantially higher levels of liquidity, in part because of the introduction of prudential liquidity standards that I mentioned earlier. Second, as I have discussed at some length in other venues, in the run-up to the crisis, the highly opaque and fast-growing market for over-the-counter derivatives gave rise to an underappreciated and largely invisible buildup of risk, which proved a major source of instability when the crisis broke.6In light of this experience, authorities around the world agreed in 2009 that standardized derivatives should be cleared through central counterparties (CCPs), and that noncentrally cleared derivatives should be subject to minimum margin requirements. Central clearing holds the promise of enhancing financial stability through the netting of counterparty risks, creating greater transparency, and applying stronger and more consistent risk-management practices. But this reform program will only succeed if CCPs, in which counterparty credit risks are concentrated, are strong enough to withstand severe but plausible stress scenarios, including, for example, the failure of multiple clearing members. Achieving this degree of resiliency will require robust liquidity risk-management practices, including the maintenance of substantial buffers of liquid resources that can quickly be tapped. In addition, adequate loss absorption capacity is essential, including through substantial initial margin requirements and default funds. A framework for such requirements has been agreed upon at the international level through the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures.7Vigorous implementation at the national level is essential. There is also a need for greater transparency for clearing members and the public regarding the risk-management practices of CCPs, for heightened stress testing, for consideration of "skin-in-the-game" requirements, and for credible recovery and resolution plans. A great deal of work remains to be done to finalize and implement these additional reforms in all of the important CCPs around the world. Money Markets:Money markets involve money-like investments such as commercial paper and repo. Investors in these markets include money market funds, corporations and other large holders of excess cash seeking a safe return in the short term, frequently no longer than overnight. Borrowers in money markets include banks, securities dealers and other financial companies, nonfinancial corporations, and governments. By linking investors seeking a safe return with borrowers needing short-term credit, money markets do what commercial banks have always done, but without deposit insurance and other aspects of the safety net provided for regulated depository institutions. After Lehman failed and the Reserve Fund "broke the buck," money market fund investors realized that their investments were not as safe and liquid as "money" after all. There were widespread runs in these markets, and it took a U.S. Treasury guarantee, augmented by a number of unprecedented liquidity facilities established by the Federal Reserve, to stabilize the money market fund industry and, more importantly, stave off a sudden stoppage of the flow of credit to households and businesses. This experience tells us clearly that disruptions in the money markets can threaten the broader financial system. Regulation to increase the resilience of the money markets needs to reflect their systemic importance. Some important steps have been taken to address the most immediate risks--for example, through the liquidity standards for large institutions I mentioned earlier. But the risks associated with dislocations in the money markets go far beyond the large banks. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has taken some important steps to address the money market fund issue, notably through its 2014 rule amendments.8To address so-called repo runs, the Financial Stability Board is in the final phases of developing a framework of margin rules designed to be applied uniformly across nations for securities financing transactions involving nongovernmental securities. These minimum standards should increase the resiliency of those markets and mitigate the pressures on terms that inevitably emerge during benign periods. We expect to propose regulations implementing these rules in the United States in due course. Credit Markets:That brings me to the credit markets, where households, businesses and governments engage in borrowing to fund their purchases and operations. These markets figured importantly in the crisis, most notoriously through securities collateralized by subprime mortgages. The story is by now well known. Lenders offered these loans to retail borrowers, often with negligible or simply fraudulent underwriting. Many of our largest financial institutions packaged the loans into marginally capitalized securitization structures that were rated highly by the credit rating agencies and thus generally viewed as suitable for purchase by a range of investors--including the most risk averse. As conditions in the housing market deteriorated, the threat of significant mortgage defaults emerged in 2007. The panic began in earnest when it became apparent that exposure to subprime mortgages was ubiquitous, from the balance sheets of key financial intermediaries and their supposedly "off balance sheet" vehicles to the investment portfolios of other institutional investors around the world. Although the total losses were initially thought to be not so large as to threaten the system, some of these toxic mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were financed with the types of short-term, confidence-sensitive funding mechanisms I have just described, which amplified the dislocations once the run in funding markets began and caused great harm to the broader economy. As the crisis has receded, supervisors--not to mention market participants, commentators, and the general public--have eyed financial markets with a heightened sensitivity to anything that resembles the buildup of risks that occurred in the run-up to the crisis--a natural and useful exercise in pattern recognition. In that spirit, the Fed, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the FDIC have focused significant attention on the origination activities of depository institutions in the syndicated leveraged loan market, where some of the troubling patterns that were evident in subprime MBS have been observed. These conditions prompted policymakers first to ask questions and then to act. Fed officials raised concerns publicly as early as 2011.9The Fed, the OCC, and the FDIC issued supervisory guidance emphasizing these concerns in 2013.10In 2014, the agencies clarified the guidance through published FAQs and began to exercise intensive supervision at the largest regulated banks emphasizing the need to improve underwriting standards and credit risk management on safety and soundness grounds.11 The case of the leveraged loan market is an interesting one, because it sits at the intersection between core financial institutions and credit markets and illustrates the challenges supervisors face in thinking about intervention in credit markets. I will turn to that market now in some detail. The term portions of leveraged loans are typically not held in the arranging banks' portfolios, but rather sold to a wide range of institutional investors--collateralized loan obligations (CLOs), retail loan funds, pension funds, insurance companies, hedge funds, and others (figures 1and2). This "originate-to-distribute" model is now dominant across a range of markets and reflects the movement over several decades of credit intermediation from portfolio lending (from the firm's perspective, the "storage business") to the capital markets (the "moving business"). This practice transfers and disperses credit and liquidity risks from the core of the financial sector to capital market investors that are willing to bear such risks for what they deem appropriate compensation. While the risks do not disappear, the system can, in principle, be safer if the ultimate institutional investors pose lower risk to the system than banks. For example, movement of credit exposure to speculative grade firms from a bank's balance sheet to a vehicle that is stably funded by sophisticated, deep-pocket institutional investors could be a net gain to financial stability. Movement of such loans to a highly leveraged, runnable vehicle beyond the regulatory perimeter could have the opposite effect. Pre-crisis conditions in leveraged finance markets were, with the benefit of hindsight, clearly in bubble territory. Deal leverage was at historically high levels (figure 3), and spreads were at historic lows (figure 4). Interest coverage ratios were quite low (figure 5). Unusually large leveraged buyouts were common. Banks entered into very large, long duration commitments to fund deals that faced significant regulatory and other requirements before they could close. Estimates vary, but when the crisis emerged and liquidity in these markets evaporated, large dealers were left holding roughly $350 billion in loans and commitments in their pipelines that they could not sell, and these positions remained on banks' balance sheets for a time. As loan values declined an unprecedented 40 percent (figure 6), there were significant mark-to-market losses on these assets, which may have contributed to doubts about the condition of institutions at the core of the system. Subsequent default rates were not outsized by historical standards, and recovery rates were in line with past averages (figure 7). Of course, the Fed's monetary policy eased financial conditions across the economy and enabled the refinancing of many of these loans at lower rates and with issuer-friendly terms. Because leveraged loans were generally not held in investment structures that used short-term, confidence-sensitive funding, these investments were not a principal focal point of runs such as those that plagued MBS funding structures. CLOs were the largest institutional investors in leveraged loans, holding over 50 percent of loans outstanding. These structures are funded with stable capital, with both equity and debt tranches committed for several years--a longer duration than that of the underlying loans. This picture of the pre-crisis leveraged lending market is one of a sharp decline in underwriting standards and a breakdown of risk management, resulting in a large risk buildup involving many of the G-SIBs--something the Fed and other regulators want to avoid. Leveraged loans may not have been a material cause of the crisis, and leveraged lending alone would likely not have threatened the overall health of the large institutions. But caution on the part of supervisors is certainly understandable here. It is worth remembering that the destructive potential of the subprime mortgage market was not obvious in advance and not fully reflected in real-time measures of balance sheet exposure. In light of that demonstrated uncertainty, since the crisis, supervisors have opted to react earlier and more aggressively to the buildup of risk. Let's now turn to post-crisis market conditions, which exhibit both similarities and differences compared with the pre-crisis period. Borrowing through leveraged loans by speculative-grade companies has been brisk since 2010, with about $800 billion of institutional loans now outstanding (figure 8). Over much of the post-crisis low interest rate period, demand for higher-yielding assets has been very strong, often outstripping supply. Price and nonprice terms in the syndicated leveraged loan market have been highly favorable to borrowers, as credit spreads declined, albeit not to particularly low levels (figure 4), and leverage multiples increased (figure 3). The share of loan agreements that lack traditional maintenance covenants increased to historic highs (figures 9and10).12 CLOs and other stably funded investors continue to be the primary owners of leveraged loans. But in recent years, mutual funds that invest in fixed income assets have seen large inflows and have become more significant investors in this market. Some of these funds, including those holding syndicated leveraged loans and high-yield bonds, provide investors with what is called "liquidity transformation"--providing daily liquidity even when the underlying assets are relatively illiquid. The risk is that, in the event of a shock or a panic, investors will demand all of their money back at the exact time when the liquidity of the already illiquid underlying assets deteriorates even further. Investors may not anticipate or recognize this problem until it is too late--the so-called liquidity illusion. Bank loan funds, which attract retail investors and offer daily liquidity, now total about $150 billion, or 20 percent of institutional leveraged loans outstanding (figure 11). The liquidity transformation provided by these funds has not created problems so far despite recent outflows from bank loan funds, but supervisors and market participants have raised valid concerns that stressful times could well bring large-scale redemptions and threaten runs (figure 12). Chair Mary Jo White has made liquidity concerns regarding open-ended mutual funds a priority for the SEC.13 While it is possible to observe the characteristics of cash market investments, it is far more challenging to assess comparable positions in the derivatives and secured lending markets. Investors may take highly leveraged positions in leveraged loans through total return swaps and secured funding transactions, and a substantial buildup of these positions could present run and fire-sale risks if asset values started to fall. Today, the evidence suggests that such positions are fairly limited, but challenges in measurement and data make it hard to get a clear picture. While some of these conditions evoke the pre-crisis bubble period and thus raise red flags, there are important differences as well. The large institutions that arrange these loans have significantly reduced both the size and duration of their leveraged loan commitments (figure 13). Thus, they are not exposed to the large "pipeline risk" they faced as the crisis broke. In addition, banks now routinely limit their risk by including "flex" provisions that, among other things, enable them to increase the interest rate on a loan offered for sale by 150 basis points or more, at the borrower's expense. So far, we have not seen the very large transactions of the pre-crisis period. In these and other respects, the leveraged finance markets have evolved, probably because of supervision as well as lessons learned by the banks themselves. Given these changes, banks at the core of our financial system seem less likely to experience stress should conditions in leveraged lending deteriorate. Of course, the guidance now stands in the way of a return to pre-crisis conditions. Let's now step back from the leveraged loan market to ask the broader question of how supervisors should address a clear deterioration of credit market conditions. I will consider three factors that are often discussed in considering the broader question of when and how to intervene in the credit markets to promote financial stability through institution-specific supervisory policy.14 First,do conditions present a threat to the safety and soundness of financial institutions at the core of the system?It hardly needs saying that we must to be alert to the buildup of risks in the credit markets that could undermine the safety, soundness, or solvency of the G-SIBs or the broader system. If deterioration in one or more of the key credit markets would credibly raise such threats, the Fed and the other supervisors should react preemptively. An object lesson in this regard is the damage done by the accumulation of excessive exposures to high-risk MBS and other mortgage-related assets in the years leading up to the crisis. The originate-to-distribute model of mortgage lending on its face promised a social-welfare-enhancing distribution of mortgage credit risk away from banks and toward stable capital market investors. But the banks remained profoundly exposed through contractual putback rights, mortgage and MBS litigation, residual balance sheet holdings, and implicit support to sponsored investment vehicles. Since the crisis, there have been significant and eminently justified legislative and regulatory actions to assure that mortgage originators follow minimum underwriting standards and that banks are better protected from exposure to high-risk mortgages. These efforts include the Dodd-Frank risk retention rules and ability-to-pay standards, much higher capital and liquidity requirements, stricter accounting rules that limit off-balance-sheet treatment for sponsored vehicles, and a much greater supervisory focus on litigation and reputational risk. Second, is there use of run-prone financing by other investors that can lead to damaging fire sales?Supervisors should be highly alert to the reemergence in the markets--that is, not on the balance sheets of the large banks--of structures that are prone to runs and damaging fire sales triggered by sharp declines in asset values. As I mentioned earlier, two different features can create vulnerability to runs and fire-sale risk. The first involves funding of volatile assets with high leverage that includes short-term, confidence sensitive debt. These structures were widely used before the crisis in the funding of MBS. The second involves "liquidity transformation," in which the investment structure provides investors daily liquidity, but the underlying assets are far less liquid and prone to becoming quite illiquid in times of stress. Either or both of these features can be replicated in the derivatives or securities lending markets, which provide less visibility to market participants and supervisors. Financial markets evolve constantly in response to market conditions, financial engineering, and regulation. It will be important to keep up with trends in these markets that may give rise to this threat. Third, if left unaddressed, is it likely that conditions will risk meaningful damage to the real economy when the credit cycle turns?A positive answer on either of the first two questions should raise red flags for supervisors. Let's say, for the sake of argument, that the answers to these questions were negative. One might still try to make the case for supervisory intervention into the credit markets to avoid the risk of meaningful damage to the economy down the road. History shows that excesses that occur at the height of a credit boom can result in substantial losses not just to financial firms and market investors, but also to households and businesses, when that boom turns to bust.15 The question of whether to "lean against" the credit cycle through supervisory policy--and when, and with what tools--is a difficult one.16An important threshold question is whether supervisors will be able to correctly and in a timely manner identify "dangerous" conditions in credit markets, without too many false positives and without unnecessarily limiting credit availability by interfering with market forces. Interesting recent research seeks to identify observable variables that could be used to monitor credit conditions and detect trends that could threaten the performance of the real economy in the future.17This research is promising, and it could be used by supervisors to inform their thinking as it develops further. In the meantime, unless there is a plausible threat to the core of the system or potential for damaging fire sales, I would set a high bar for supervisory interventions to lean against the credit cycle. Such interventions would almost surely interfere with the traditional function of capital markets in allocating capital to productive uses and dispersing risk to the investors who willingly choose to bear it. Finally, another issue to consider when contemplating such intervention is that, particularly in the United States, activity is free to migrate outside the commercial banking system into less regulated entities. As supervisory scrutiny has increased in recent years, a growing number of nonbanks have become involved in the distribution of leveraged loans. Migration of this activity could be either a net positive or a net negative for financial stability, depending on whether it actually transfers risk irrevocably from the core of the financial system, and whether the institutions to which activity migrates rely on funding that is stable and robust to fire sale dynamics. ConclusionTo wrap up, I believe that sustaining financial stability requires supervisors to consider financial markets, in addition to financial institutions and infrastructure. That is most obviously so when conditions threaten the safety and soundness of the financial system through leverage, liquidity transformation, or deterioration of credit underwriting or other risk-management standards. At the same time, financial stability need not seek to eliminate all risks. We need to learn, but not overlearn, the lessons of the crisis. I believe there should be a high bar for "leaning against the credit cycle" in the absence of credible threats to the core or the reemergence of run-prone funding structures. In my view, the Fed and other prudential and market regulators should resist interfering with the role of markets in allocating capital to issuers and risk to investors unless the case for doing so is strong and the available tools can achieve the objective in a targeted manner and with a high degree of confidence. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2.For more information, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Liquidity Regulation," speech delivered at the Clearing House 2014 Annual Conference, New York, November 20.Return to text 3.For a more complete treatment of these issues, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2015), "Advancing Macroprudential Policy Objectives," speech delivered at "Evaluating Macroprudential Tools: Complementarities and Conflicts," a conference cosponsored by the Office of Financial Research and the Financial Stability Oversight Council, held in Arlington, Va., January 30.Return to text 4.For more on this topic, see William C. Dudley (2014), "Welcoming Remarks at Workshop on the Risks of Wholesale Funding," speech delivered at "Workshop on the Risks of Wholesale Funding," sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, August 13.Return to text 5.There have also been reforms to the money market funds that provide most of the funding in this market, as discussed later.Return to text 6.See Jerome H. Powell (2013), "OTC Market Infrastructure Reform: Opportunities and Challenges," speech delivered at the Clearing House 2013 Annual Meeting, New York, November 21; and Jerome H. Powell (2014), "A Financial System Perspective on Central Clearing of Derivatives," speech delivered at "The New International Financial System: Analyzing the Cumulative Impact of Regulatory Reform," a conference cosponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the Bank of England, Chicago, November 6.Return to text 7.See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012),Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements and International Organization of Securities Commissions, April).Return to text 8.The 2014 SEC rule amendments are available atwww.sec.gov/rules/final/2014/33-9616.pdf.Return to text 9.See, for example, Janet L. Yellen (2011), "Assessing Potential Financial Imbalances in an Era of Accommodative Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Real and Financial Linkage and Monetary Policy," an international conference sponsored by the Bank of Japan, June 1.Return to text 10.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2013), "Interagency Guidance on Leveraged Lending (PDF)," March 13.Return to text 11.Along with the Shared National Credit results, the Fed, along with the OCC and the FDIC, released on November 7, 2014,an FAQ document (PDF)regarding the guidance. Also see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2014), "Credit Risk in the Shared National Credit Portfolio Is High; Leveraged Lending Remains a Concern," joint press release, November 7. The guidance covers a wide range of risk-management issues and generally aims tighter scrutiny at deals with leverage over six times pre-tax cash flow, or with forecast debt paydown of less than 50 percent over a five-to-seven-year period; differences across industries and companies are also to be taken into consideration.Return to text 12.Highly accommodative monetary policy, while far from the only cause of ebullient credit market conditions, is designed to support economic activity by creating incentives to take credit and duration risk. See Ben S. Bernanke (2013), "Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 26.Return to text 13.See Mary Jo White (2014), "Enhancing Risk Monitoring and Regulatory Safeguards for the Asset Management Industry," speech at the New York Times DealBook Opportunities for Tomorrow Conference, New York, December 11.Return to text 14.This approach is consistent with the financial stability framework in Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013), and emphasizes the importance of leverage, maturity transformation, and common risks and behaviors in the financial system that can amplify credit losses and harm the real economy. See Tobias Adrian, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2013), "Financial Stability Monitoring," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-21 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System).Return to text 15.See, for example, Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor (2012), "Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008,"American Economic Review,vol. 102 (2), pp. 1029-61.Return to text 16.The U.S. banking agencies, following the lead of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, created a countercyclical capital buffer that could be activated during periods of excess aggregate credit growth. The Basel proposal can both "lean against the cycle" and create a capital cushion to absorb losses from the likely increase in defaults.Return to text 17.See Robin Greenwood and Samuel G. Hanson (2013), "Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns,"Review of Financial Studies,vol. 26 (June), pp. 1483-525; and David López-Salido, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek (2014), "Credit-Market Sentiment and the Business Cycle (PDF)," slide presentation.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFinancial Crimes Enforcement NetworkNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Five federal financial regulatory agencies today issued guidance to encourage federally insured depository institutions to offer youth savings programs to expand the financial capability of young people. The guidance also provides answers to frequently asked questions related to the establishment of these programs. Many financial institutions already collaborate with schools to establish programs that allow students in elementary, middle and high school to open and manage savings accounts and to learn good savings habits early. Research indicates that school-based youth savings programs--when combined with financial education--can be effective in helping students to improve their long-term financial and education prospects. The guidance does not create any new regulatory policy or establish new industry expectations. This effort is consistent with the "Starting Early for Financial Success" focus of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC). Congress created FLEC in 2003 to improve financial capability and education in the United States. The financial institution regulatory agencies are members of FLEC. The interagency guidance is being issued by the Federal Reserve Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, U.S. Department of the Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Guidance to Encourage Financial Institutions' Youth Savings Programs and Responses to Frequently Asked Questions (PDF)
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. IntroductionChairman Shelby, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on the important topic of community banks and the effects of regulatory burden on these institutions. Community banks are a critical component of our financial system and economy. Their deep ties to their local communities give them firsthand perspectives on the local economic landscape; they focus on customer relationships and often look beyond traditional credit factors to consider unique borrower characteristics when making credit decisions. Having begun my career more than 30 years ago as a community bank examiner at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and eventually becoming the officer in charge of bank supervision at the Reserve Bank, I have seen first hand how critical it is that we balance effective regulation and supervision to ensure safety and soundness of community banks, while also ensuring that undue burden does not constrain the capacity of these institutions to lend to the communities they serve. In my testimony, I will discuss measures taken by the Federal Reserve to ensure that regulations, policies, and supervisory activities do not place an undue burden on community banks. The Federal Reserve supervises approximately 850 state-chartered community banks, the majority of which are small community banks with total assets of $1 billion or less, and which are members of the Federal Reserve System (referred to as state member banks).1In addition, the Federal Reserve supervises more than 4,400 bank holding companies and more than 300 savings and loan holding companies, most of which operate small community banks and thrifts. The overall condition of community banks has improved significantly in the wake of the financial crisis. The number of banks on the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's "Problem List" fell from a peak of 888 at the end of first quarter 2011, to 329 at the end of third quarter 2014.2Despite that significant decline, the number of problem banks compares unfavorably with historical numbers of less than 100, on average, in the years prior to the crisis. Moreover, small community banks continue to experience considerable earnings pressure based on historically low net interest margins, and many report concerns about their prospects for continued growth and profitability. Soliciting Views from Community Banks on Regulatory BurdenThe Federal Reserve uses multiple channels to solicit the views of community banks on banking and economic topics, including regulatory burden. For instance, when a proposed rule or policy is issued to the public for comment, we gather information from banking organizations that assists us in assessing implementation complexity or cost, especially for the smallest institutions. The feedback received has been instrumental in helping us scale rules and policies to appropriately reflect the risks at these institutions without subjecting them to unnecessary burden. This was evident in the final capital guidelines that were issued in July 2013.3The federal banking agencies' final rules reflected several changes to respond to comments and reduce the regulatory burden on community banks. As a result, many of the requirements that apply to larger banking organizations do not apply to community banks. Also, in 2010, the Federal Reserve Board (the Board) formed the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) to provide input to the Board of Governors on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues of interest to community depository institutions.4CDIAC members are selected from representatives of banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils is selected to serve on the national CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., to discuss topics of interest to community depository institutions. Additionally, in accordance with the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA), the federal banking agencies have launched a review to identify banking regulations that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome.5The comment period for the EGRPRA review for the first set of regulations ended early in September 2014, and the agencies plan to publish three additionalFederal Registernotices seeking comment over the next year and a half. The Federal Reserve and the other agencies have begun a series of outreach meetings with bankers, consumer groups, and other interested parties as part of the EGRPRA review.6The Federal Reserve and the other agencies conducted two outreach meetings, the second of which took place in Dallas last week. Additional outreach meetings are scheduled for the coming months, including one scheduled for this August focused on issues affecting rural institutions. The comments from the industry, consumer groups, and others have been very informative and will help the agencies in assessing regulatory burden. A recurring theme from the EGRPRA outreach meetings thus far has been the question of whether the agencies could reevaluate the various thresholds and limits imposed in regulations that may constrain community banks and their lending activities. For example, bankers have asked the agencies to consider increasing the dollar threshold in the appraisal regulations for transactions below which an appraisal would not be required. Community bankers in rural areas have noted that it can be difficult to find an appraiser with knowledge about the local market at a reasonable fee, and raising the threshold would allow bankers to use a less-formal valuation of collateral for more loans. Some bankers at the EGRPRA meetings have suggested reviewing the statutorily mandated examination frequency for banks of various sizes and condition as a way to ease burden from frequent examinations. Other banks have commented on the requirements of some longstanding interagency guidance and suggested that some may now be outdated and warrant a fresh look and revision. In order to better understand and respond to concerns raised by these institutions through the various channels, the Board has established a community and regional bank subcommittee of its Committee on Bank Supervision.7The governors on this subcommittee help the Board as a whole to weigh the costs associated with regulation against the safety-and-soundness benefits of new supervisory policies for smaller institutions. The subcommittee also meets with Federal Reserve staff to hear about key supervisory initiatives at community banks and ongoing research in the community banking area. Tailoring Regulations and Policies for Community BanksAt the Federal Reserve, we weigh the burden on banks to implement new regulatory requirements against the need for requirements to safeguard the safety and soundness of the financial system. We recognize that the cost of compliance can be disproportionally greater on smaller banks versus larger institutions, as they have fewer staff available to help comply with additional regulations. To address this, we work within the constraints of the relevant statutory mandate to draft rules so as not to subject community banks to requirements that would be unnecessary or unduly burdensome to implement. Many recently established rules have been applied only to the largest, most complex banking organizations. For example, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have not applied large-bank stress testing requirements to community banks. To clarify stress testing expectations for community banks, the federal banking agencies issued a policy statement in May 2012.8While the stress testing policy statement reiterated the Federal Reserve's view that all banking organizations, regardless of size, should have the capacity to analyze the potential impact of adverse outcomes on financial conditions, the agencies also made clear that community banks were exempt from the more stringent requirements for the largest banks, such as Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act stress testing and the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. The Federal Reserve has reminded examiners that while community banks should anticipate how future events and adverse trends might affect the institution's financial condition and viability, examiners should not apply complex large-bank stress testing expectations to community banks. Most recently, the Board issued an interim final rule and proposed rule to implement Public Law 113-250, which was signed into law by the President in December 2014.9Effective immediately, the interim rule adopted by the Board excludes small savings and loan holding companies with less than $500 million in total consolidated assets that meet certain qualitative requirements from the Board's regulatory capital requirements (Regulation Q). This effectively places these savings and loan holding companies on equal footing with similarly sized bank holding companies that are subject to the Board's Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement (policy statement). The Board also issued a notice of proposed rulemaking that would raise the asset size threshold from $500 million to $1 billion for determining applicability of the policy statement, and expand its scope to include savings and loan holding companies. The policy statement facilitates the transfer of ownership of small community banks by allowing their holding companies to operate with higher levels of debt than would otherwise be permitted. Institutions subject to the policy statement are not subject to the Board's regulatory capital requirements. While consolidated capital requirements do not apply to firms covered by the policy statement, regulatory capital requirements will continue to apply at the depository institution level. The Federal Reserve has made a concerted effort to communicate clearly to both community bankers and examiners about new requirements that are applicable to which community banks. We provide a statement at the top of each Supervision and Regulation letter and each Consumer Affairs letter that clearly indicates which banking entity types are subject to the guidance. These letters are the primary means by which the Federal Reserve issues supervisory and consumer compliance guidance to bankers and examiners, and this additional clarity allows community bankers to focus efforts only on the supervisory policies that are applicable to their banks. Also, to assist community banks in understanding how new complex rules could possibly affect their business operations, the federal banking agencies have issued supplemental guides that focus on which rule requirements are most applicable to community banks. For example, the federal banking agencies issued supplemental guides for the capital requirements issued in July 2013, as well as the Volcker rule issued in December 2013.10Moreover, it is important to note that we work closely with our colleagues at the state banking agencies and the other federal regulatory agencies to ensure that our supervisory approaches and methodologies are applied as consistently as possible to all community banks. We also have developed several platforms to improve our communication with community bankers and to enhance our industry training efforts. For example, we have developed two programs--"Ask the Fed" and "Outlook Live"11--as well as periodic newsletters and other communication tools such asFedLinks.12These platforms highlight information about new requirements and examiner expectations to address issues that community banks currently face and provide resources on key supervisory policies. Changes in Regulatory Reporting RequirementsIn an action related to changes in the policy statement, the Board took immediate steps beyond what was required in the legislation to relieve regulatory reporting burden for bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies that have less than $1 billion in total consolidated assets and meet the qualitative requirements of the policy statement. Specifically, the Board eliminated quarterly and more complex consolidated financial reporting requirements (FR Y-9C) for these institutions, and instead required parent-only financial statements (FR Y-9SP) semiannually. The Board also eliminated regulatory capital reporting for savings and loan holding companies with less than $500 million in total consolidated assets from the FR Y-9SP. The Board filed an emergency request with the Office of Management and Budget and received approval to make these changes effective on March 31, 2015, while it completes the notice and comment process on the related rulemakings. The Board took this action and immediately notified the affected institutions so they would not continue to invest in system changes to report revised regulatory capital data for only a short period of time. Also, the Board took this action in response to feedback from members of the banking community who indicated that reducing the reporting frequency of financial data could save institutions time, especially time spent on internal audit and review processes associated with senior officials' attestations. A number of community banks have suggested reducing burden from required quarterly reporting of the Consolidated Reports of Condition and of Income (the Call Report). Working through the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, the Federal Reserve is considering a number of ways to be responsive to industry concerns about Call Report filing requirements and assess the potential impact of collecting less data from banks. Later this month, the federal banking agencies will host a teleconference with bankers to provide additional guidance on the reporting of revised regulatory capital information on the Call Report. Risk-Focused Supervision Examination ProcessConsistent with the Federal Reserve's approach to development of supervisory policy, our longstanding risk-focused approach to consolidated supervision provides that examination and inspection procedures should be tailored to each organization's size, complexity, risk, profile, and condition. There are distinct differences between the supervision program of a large, complex bank and a small, non-complex bank. For one, large banks generally have a dedicated supervisory team that may be resident at the bank, unlike small banks, which may only meet with an examination team every 12 to 18 months. Furthermore, if a bank is engaging in nontraditional or higher-risk activities, our supervision program typically requires greater scrutiny and a higher level of review of specific transactions. Conversely, if a well-managed bank's activities are lower risk, we adjust our expectations for examiners to a lower level of review. In this way, we alleviate examination burden on community banks with histories of sound performance and modest risk profiles. We are continually working to calibrate examination expectations so that they are commensurate with the level of risk at banking organizations. For example, the Federal Reserve has an initiative currently underway to use forward-looking risk analytics to identify high-risk community and regional banks, which would allow us to focus our supervisory response on the areas of highest risk and reduce the regulatory burden on low-risk community and regional banks. The Federal Reserve also adopted a new consumer compliance examination framework for community banks in January 2014.13While we have traditionally applied a risk-focused approach to consumer compliance examinations, the new program more explicitly bases examination intensity on the individual community bank's risk profile, weighed against the effectiveness of the bank's compliance controls. As a result, we expect that examiners will spend less time on low-risk compliance issues at community banks, increasing the efficiency of our supervision and reducing regulatory burden on many community banks. In addition, we revised our consumer compliance examination frequency policy to lengthen the time frame between on-site consumer compliance and Community Reinvestment Act examinations for many community banks with less than $1 billion in total consolidated assets. In addition to our efforts to refine our risk-focused approach to supervision, we have been investigating ways that would allow for more supervisory activities to be conducted off-site, which can improve efficiency and reduce burden on community banks. For example, we can conduct some aspects of the loan review process off-site for banks that maintain electronic loan records and have invested in technologies that would allow us to do so. While off-site loan review has benefits for both bankers and examiners, some bankers have expressed concerns that increasing off-site supervisory activities could potentially reduce the ability of banks to have face-to-face discussions with examiners regarding asset quality or risk-management issues. In that regard, we will continue to work with community banks that may prefer their loan reviews to be conducted on-site. In short, the Federal Reserve is trying to strike an appropriate balance of off-site and on-site supervisory activities to ensure that resources are used more efficiently while maintaining high-quality supervision of community banking organizations. The Federal Reserve has invested significant resources in developing various technological tools for examiners to improve the efficiency of both off-site and on-site supervisory activities, while ensuring the quality of supervision is not compromised. For instance, the Federal Reserve has automated various parts of the community bank examination process, including a set of tools used among all Reserve Banks to assist in the pre-examination planning and scoping. This automation can save examiners and bank management time, as a bank can submit requested pre-examination information electronically rather than mailing paper copies to the Federal Reserve Bank. These tools also assist examiners in the continuous, off-site monitoring of community banks, enabling examiners to determine whether a particular community bank's financial condition has deteriorated and warrants supervisory attention between on-site examinations. As we develop supervisory policies and examination practices, we are mindful of community bankers' concerns that new requirements for large banks could become viewed as "best practices" that trickle down to community banks in a way that is inappropriate. To address this concern, the Federal Reserve is enhancing communications with and training for examinations staff about expectations for community banks versus large banks to ensure that expectations are calibrated appropriately. Specifically, we are modernizing our longstanding examiner commissioning training program for community bank examiners, and a key part of this effort is reviewing the curriculum to ensure that supervisory expectations for larger banks do not make their way into the community bank examination curriculum. In addition, when new supervisory policies are issued, we typically arrange a teleconference to explain the new policy to examiners, including whether and to what extent the policy is applicable to community banks. By effectively training our examination staff and providing channels to keep them informed of newly issued policies in a timely manner, examiners are better equipped to understand the supervisory goals of regulations and guidance for community banks and to provide appropriate guidance to community banks. Additional Opportunities to Reduce BurdenIn addition to the steps taken to reduce regulatory burden that were already discussed, the Federal Reserve recently issued the first semiannual public report on applications activity.14The report aims to increase transparency about applications filings, while providing useful information to bankers to help them gain efficiency. In addition, Federal Reserve System staff are working to identify opportunities to change examination practices and rules to increase efficiency of the examination process and thereby reduce the time community bankers spend to prepare and work with examiners. We are in the process of conducting a review of community bank examination scoping procedures to make sure they are aligned with current banking practices and risks, and reflect key lessons from the crisis. Overall, these adjustments should enhance our supervisory efficiency by targeting more intensive examination work at bank activities that proved to be higher risk and reducing some examination testing at community banks that performed well throughout the crisis. Although none of the actions that we are currently taking require legislative changes, some of the relief that bankers have asked for and suggestions developed through the EGRPRA process may require legislative action. We will work with the other federal banking agencies as appropriate to consider and assess the impact of potential changes identified through the EGRPRA review process. ConclusionWe understand that one size does not fit all in supervision and regulation and that supervisory expectations for the largest, most complex firms are often inappropriate for community banks. We are committed to making sure that regulations, policies, and activities are appropriately tailored to the level of risk inherent in these institutions and that we respond to ideas for reducing burden that come through the EGRPRA process. The Federal Reserve is committed to taking a balanced approach that fosters safe and sound community banks and fair treatment of consumers, and encourages the flow of credit to consumers and businesses. Thank you for inviting me to share the Federal Reserve's views on the effect of regulatory burden on community banks. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have. 1.For supervisory purposes, the Federal Reserve uses the term "community banking organization" to describe a state member bank and/or holding company with $10 billion or less in total consolidated assets.Return to text 2.See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,Quarterly Banking Profile (PDF), Third Quarter 2014.Return to text 3.http://federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20130702a.htm.Return to text 4.http://federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htm.Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), "Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies Seek Comment on Interagency Effort to Reduce Regulatory Burden," press release, June 4, 2014.Return to text 6.See the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council's (FFIEC) EGRPRA website athttp://egrpra.ffiec.gov/for more information.Return to text 7.http://federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm.Return to text 8.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, and OCC, "Agencies Clarify Supervisory Expectations for Stress Testing by Community Banks," press release, May 14, 2012.Return to text 9.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Proposed Rule to Expand the Applicability of Board's Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement," press release, January 29, 2015.Return to text 10.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, and OCC, "New Capital Rule: Community Bank Guide (PDF)," July, 9, 2013; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, and OCC, "The Volcker Rule: Community Bank Applicability (PDF)," December 10, 2013.Return to text 11.Consumer Compliance Outlook is available atwww.philadelphiafed.org/bank-resources/publications/consumer-compliance-outlook/, and Outlook Live is available atwww.philadelphiafed.org/bank-resources/publications/consumer-compliance-outlook/outlook-live/.Return to text 12.FedLinksis available atwww.cbcfrs.org/fedlinks.Also see another Federal Reserve publication,Community Banking Connections, whichis available atwww.cbcfrs.org/.Return to text 13.See the Board's Consumer Affairs Letter CA 13-19 (November 18, 2013), "Community Bank Risk-Focused Consumer Compliance Supervision Program" and Consumer Affairs Letter CA 13-20 (November 18, 2013), "Consumer Compliance and Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Examination Frequency Policy".Return to text 14.The report can be found atwww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/semiannual-report-on-banking-applications-20141124.pdf.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meeting on January 26, 2015. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 27-28, 2015. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 27-28, 2015:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act Outreach Meeting, Dallas, Texas Watch live On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, I am pleased to be here at the second in a series of outreach meetings designed to hear your comments and suggestions about reducing regulatory burden on insured depository institutions. Thank you all for taking the time to participate in this important process, and I'd also like to extend my thanks to the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas for hosting today's meeting. The Federal Reserve takes seriously its obligations under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). The EGRPRA review provides our agencies with the opportunity to consider whether our regulations are necessary and current in keeping up with the financial services and regulatory environments. Well-conceived regulations help to ensure the safety and soundness of our banking system as well as the fair treatment of consumers. But unnecessary, outdated, or unduly burdensome regulations can exhaust the resources of insured depository institutions and reduce the important services that those institutions provide to households and businesses. Creating balanced regulations that are effective and thoughtfully calibrated to avoid undue burden requires input from stakeholders. In-person meetings, like the one we are holding today, help us gather information that is critical to our understanding of how regulations affect not only the banking industry but also the consumers and communities they serve. They also allow stakeholders to learn from one another and provide us with different perspectives on the complex issues that our regulations address. Outside of these meetings, we also look forward to receiving written comments in which you can elaborate on how to improve our regulations in more detail than we can cover in the time we have today. We understand that the sizes of depository institutions vary, that they operate through different business models, and that they manage different risks. This is why one focus of the EGRPRA review is considering the potential burden imposed by our regulations on community banks and other small insured depository institutions, so that we may carefully consider whether our regulations are appropriately adjusted for smaller institutions. We think it's important to tailor rules whenever possible to clearly distinguish requirements for different portfolios of depository institutions and reduce unnecessary burden on community banks. Of course, tailoring regulations may be more challenging in some areas, such as rules that provide transparency and fairness in consumer transactions because those are standards that apply throughout the financial system. We also recognize that, apart from changes in the regulatory and supervisory landscape, the banking industry itself has undergone major changes. For example, improvements in technology and changes in the financial industry's composition between depository institutions and nondepository companies have altered the types of financial products and services that are offered by depository institutions, as well as how those services and products are accessed. We welcome your views on how these types of industry changes have impacted the effectiveness of our regulations. Today I look forward to hearing your views on our agencies' regulations, especially in the categories of banking operations, capital, and the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). For the Federal Reserve, these topics include regulations on the availability of funds; the collection of checks and other items by the Federal Reserve Banks and fund transfers through Fedwire; prompt corrective action procedures; and the disclosure and reporting of CRA-related agreements. I'd like to conclude by saying that we will consider your comments carefully as the agencies coordinate to discuss and consider the appropriate action that is likely to best serve our financial system and the interests of depository institutions and consumers. And when possible, the agencies will act to implement regulatory burden relief before the end of the EGRPRA review period. For example, in December of last year, Congress passed legislation--which was supported by the Federal Reserve Board--that would increase the consolidated asset limit for small bank holding companies from $500 million to $1 billion under the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and that extends the same treatment to savings and loan holding companies of less than $1 billion. Last Thursday, the Federal Reserve issued for public comment both proposed and interim final rules for public comment that would implement that legislation.1The rules would reduce regulatory burden on small entities by excluding many bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies with total consolidated assets of less than $1 billion from the consolidated capital requirements. Of course, regulatory capital requirements will continue to apply to the depository institution level. The rules also would reduce the burden of regulatory reporting for these companies. The Federal Reserve currently estimates that the proposed revisions to the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement would impact over 4,200 organizations. The final results of our EGRPRA review will be contained in the agencies' report to Congress that summarizes the issues raised and the agencies' conclusions about the need for regulatory or legislative changes. Thank you for coming today. 1.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on proposed rules to expand the applicability of Board's Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement," press release, January 29.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chair Yellen submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on February 25, 2015. Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member Brown, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress. In my remarks today, I will discuss the current economic situation and outlook before turning to monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookSince my appearance before this Committee last July, the employment situation in the United States has been improving along many dimensions. The unemployment rate now stands at 5.7 percent, down from just over 6 percent last summer and from 10 percent at its peak in late 2009. The average pace of monthly job gains picked up from about 240,000 per month during the first half of last year to 280,000 per month during the second half, and employment rose 260,000 in January. In addition, long-term unemployment has declined substantially, fewer workers are reporting that they can find only part-time work when they would prefer full-time employment, and the pace of quits--often regarded as a barometer of worker confidence in labor market opportunities--has recovered nearly to its pre-recession level. However, the labor force participation rate is lower than most estimates of its trend, and wage growth remains sluggish, suggesting that some cyclical weakness persists. In short, considerable progress has been achieved in the recovery of the labor market, though room for further improvement remains. At the same time that the labor market situation has improved, domestic spending and production have been increasing at a solid rate. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is now estimated to have increased at a 3-3/4 percent annual rate during the second half of last year. While GDP growth is not anticipated to be sustained at that pace, it is expected to be strong enough to result in a further gradual decline in the unemployment rate. Consumer spending has been lifted by the improvement in the labor market as well as by the increase in household purchasing power resulting from the sharp drop in oil prices. However, housing construction continues to lag; activity remains well below levels we judge could be supported in the longer run by population growth and the likely rate of household formation. Despite the overall improvement in the U.S. economy and the U.S. economic outlook, longer-term interest rates in the United States and other advanced economies have moved down significantly since the middle of last year; the declines have reflected, at least in part, disappointing foreign growth and changes in monetary policy abroad. Another notable development has been the plunge in oil prices. The bulk of this decline appears to reflect increased global supply rather than weaker global demand. While the drop in oil prices will have negative effects on energy producers and will probably result in job losses in this sector, causing hardship for affected workers and their families, it will likely be a significant overall plus, on net, for our economy. Primarily, that boost will arise from U.S. households having the wherewithal to increase their spending on other goods and services as they spend less on gasoline. Foreign economic developments, however, could pose risks to the outlook for U.S. economic growth. Although the pace of growth abroad appears to have stepped up slightly in the second half of last year, foreign economies are confronting a number of challenges that could restrain economic activity. In China, economic growth could slow more than anticipated as policymakers address financial vulnerabilities and manage the desired transition to less reliance on exports and investment as sources of growth. In the euro area, recovery remains slow, and inflation has fallen to very low levels; although highly accommodative monetary policy should help boost economic growth and inflation there, downside risks to economic activity in the region remain. The uncertainty surrounding the foreign outlook, however, does not exclusively reflect downside risks. We could see economic activity respond to the policy stimulus now being provided by foreign central banks more strongly than we currently anticipate, and the recent decline in world oil prices could boost overall global economic growth more than we expect. U.S. inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent objective. In large part, the recent softness in the all-items measure of inflation for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) reflects the drop in oil prices. Indeed, the PCE price index edged down during the fourth quarter of last year and looks to be on track to register a more significant decline this quarter because of falling consumer energy prices. But core PCE inflation has also slowed since last summer, in part reflecting declines in the prices of many imported items and perhaps also some pass-through of lower energy costs into core consumer prices. Despite the very low recent readings on actual inflation, inflation expectations as measured in a range of surveys of households and professional forecasters have thus far remained stable. However, inflation compensation, as calculated from the yields of real and nominal Treasury securities, has declined. As best we can tell, the fall in inflation compensation mainly reflects factors other than a reduction in longer-term inflation expectations. The Committee expects inflation to decline further in the near term before rising gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of lower energy prices and other factors dissipate, but we will continue to monitor inflation developments closely. Monetary PolicyI will now turn to monetary policy. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is committed to policies that promote maximum employment and price stability, consistent with our mandate from the Congress. As my description of economic developments indicated, our economy has made important progress toward the objective of maximum employment, reflecting in part support from the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy in recent years. In light of the cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the substantial improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions--the stated objective of the Committee's recent asset purchase program--the FOMC concluded that program at the end of October. Even so, the Committee judges that a high degree of policy accommodation remains appropriate to foster further improvement in labor market conditions and to promote a return of inflation toward 2 percent over the medium term. Accordingly, the FOMC has continued to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and to keep the Federal Reserve's holdings of longer-term securities at their current elevated level to help maintain accommodative financial conditions. The FOMC is also providing forward guidance that offers information about our policy outlook and expectations for the future path of the federal funds rate. In that regard, the Committee judged, in December and January, that it can be patient in beginning to raise the federal funds rate. This judgment reflects the fact that inflation continues to run well below the Committee's 2 percent objective, and that room for sustainable improvements in labor market conditions still remains. The FOMC's assessment that it can be patient in beginning to normalize policy means that the Committee considers it unlikely that economic conditions will warrant an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate for at least the next couple of FOMC meetings. If economic conditions continue to improve, as the Committee anticipates, the Committee will at some point begin considering an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate on a meeting-by-meeting basis. Before then, the Committee will change its forward guidance. However, it is important to emphasize that a modification of the forward guidance should not be read as indicating that the Committee will necessarily increase the target range in a couple of meetings. Instead the modification should be understood as reflecting the Committee's judgment that conditions have improved to the point where it will soon be the case that a change in the target range could be warranted at any meeting. Provided that labor market conditions continue to improve and further improvement is expected, the Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when, on the basis of incoming data, the Committee is reasonably confident that inflation will move back over the medium term toward our 2 percent objective. It continues to be the FOMC's assessment that even after employment and inflation are near levels consistent with our dual mandate, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. It is possible, for example, that it may be necessary for the federal funds rate to run temporarily below its normal longer-run level because the residual effects of the financial crisis may continue to weigh on economic activity. As such factors continue to dissipate, we would expect the federal funds rate to move toward its longer-run normal level. In response to unforeseen developments, the Committee will adjust the target range for the federal funds rate to best promote the achievement of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Policy NormalizationLet me now turn to the mechanics of how we intend to normalize the stance and conduct of monetary policy when a decision is eventually made to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. Last September, the FOMC issued its statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. This statement provides information about the Committee's likely approach to raising short-term interest rates and reducing the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. As is always the case in setting policy, the Committee will determine the timing and pace of policy normalization so as to promote its statutory mandate to foster maximum employment and price stability. The FOMC intends to adjust the stance of monetary policy during normalization primarily by changing its target range for the federal funds rate and not by actively managing the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. The Committee is confident that it has the tools it needs to raise short-term interest rates when it becomes appropriate to do so and to maintain reasonable control of the level of short-term interest rates as policy continues to firm thereafter, even though the level of reserves held by depository institutions is likely to diminish only gradually. The primary means of raising the federal funds rate will be to increase the rate of interest paid on excess reserves. The Committee also will use an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility and other supplementary tools as needed to help control the federal funds rate. As economic and financial conditions evolve, the Committee will phase out these supplementary tools when they are no longer needed. The Committee intends to reduce its securities holdings in a gradual and predictable manner primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal from securities held by the Federal Reserve. It is the Committee's intention to hold, in the longer run, no more securities than necessary for the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy, and that these securities be primarily Treasury securities. SummaryIn sum, since the July 2014Monetary Policy Report,there has been important progress toward the FOMC's objective of maximum employment. However, despite this improvement, too many Americans remain unemployed or underemployed, wage growth is still sluggish, and inflation remains well below our longer-run objective. As always, the Federal Reserve remains committed to employing its tools to best promote the attainment of its objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.