Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencyFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Housing Finance Agency Five federal agencies have issued a final rule to establish capital and margin requirements for swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers, and major security-based swap participants regulated by one of the agencies ("covered swap entities"), as required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The final rule, issued by the Farm Credit Administration (FCA), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), the Federal Reserve, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), establishes minimum margin requirements for swaps and security-based swaps that are not cleared through a clearinghouse. The margin requirements help ensure the safety and soundness of swap trading in light of the risk to the financial system associated with non-cleared swaps activity. The margin requirements mandate the exchange of initial and variation margin for non-cleared swaps and non-cleared security-based swaps between covered swap entities and certain counterparties. The amount of margin will vary based on the relative risk of the non-cleared swap or non-cleared security-based swap. The requirements are intended to reduce risk, increase transparency, and promote market integrity. Following a law passed by the Congress in January 2015, the rule would not apply to swaps of small banks, savings associations, Farm Credit System institutions, and credit unions with $10 billion or less in total assets that enter into swaps for hedging purposes and meet the exceptions that are available to these small institutions from the requirement to clear standardized swaps through a clearinghouse. The non-cleared swaps of certain financial cooperatives that hedge or mitigate risks associated with originating loans for their members are also exempt from the initial or variation margin requirements of the final rule. In addition, the rule does not apply to swaps entered into by commercial end users for purposes of hedging commercial risk. The final rule is generally similar to the proposed rule issued by the agencies in September 2014 and includes some modifications that were made in light of comments. For example, the agencies have modified the treatment of inter-affiliate swap transactions. The final rule will still require a covered swap entity to collect initial margin from its affiliates, but will not require the posting of initial margin. Instead, a covered swap entity would calculate the amount that it would have been required to post to an affiliate and provide that information to the affiliate on a daily basis. The agencies believe that these changes will promote the safety and soundness of covered swap entities, make the resulting risks transparent to affiliated counterparties, and incentivize strong risk management. Staff of the five agencies consulted with staff of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission in developing the final rule, as required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The final rule will phase in the variation margin requirements between September 1, 2016, and March 1, 2017. The initial margin requirements will phase in over four years, beginning on September 1, 2016. Additionally, the agencies also issued an interim final rule relating to the rule's exemption from margin requirements for certain non-cleared swaps and non-cleared security-based swaps used for hedging purposes by commercial end-users and certain other counterparties. The regulation was issued as an interim final rule, as required by the law passed by the Congress in January 2015. The public is invited to submit comments on the interim final rule through January 31, 2016. Meeting Memoranda Open Board Meeting on October 30, 2015 Federal Register Notice - Final Rule:HTML|PDF Federal Register Notice - Interim Final Rule:HTML|PDF Board Votes Opening Statement by Chair Janet L. Yellen Opening Statement by Governor Daniel K. Tarullo
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Induction of Carroll D. Wright and Janet L. Norwood into the Department of Labor's Hall of Honor, U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, D.C. Watch live We are here to honor two exceptional public servants and the great institution they helped build. Let's consider for a moment why the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has succeeded and how Carroll Wright and Janet Norwood contributed to that success. In 1884, a time of great strife and mistrust between management and labor, the federal government created an agency with the mission of providing detailed and objective information on American workers. That task fell to Carroll Wright, who had won the confidence of workers and management as chief of the Massachusetts Bureau of Labor Statistics in the years after that state became the first to legalize labor unions. At that point, before the United States itself had recognized such rights and before the federal government could agree on labor standards, the public needed an unimpeachable assessment of the conditions faced by workers. Under Carroll Wright, what was then called the Bureau of Labor investigated major labor disputes and issued reports that shaped public opinion and were the basis for executive action and legislation. He initiated the collection of data on hours, wages, and prices and was responsible for many important advances that successively improved the reliability of these data. The respect for the thoroughness and objectivity of the research that Wright oversaw led to the dismantling of damaging trade barriers in the 1890s and later raised public awareness about the deplorable conditions faced by women in the workplace. In the U.S. Constitution, there is not a requirement that government statistics be accurate and free of political influence or bias. Carroll Wright recognized that this simple, powerful idea could help build public confidence for the government's effort to reduce conflicts between management and workers and move our nation forward. He and others are responsible for a fundamental feature of our democracy that is now often taken for granted--the public's expectation and insistence that information provided by the government can be trusted. To Carroll Wright's descendants, one of whom is with us today, thank you, on his behalf, for this valuable contribution. This legacy lives on in the agency Carroll Wright founded, and few of his successors did as much to advance this principle as Janet Norwood. One reason for this success, I am sure, is that she rose from the ranks, and the values of the BLS were deeply ingrained in her over the 28 years she served this agency. Those who worked with Janet say she strongly believed the BLS was uniquely positioned to contribute to the economic policy debate as an authoritative, unimpeachable source of information and analysis about the economy. In her 13 years as commissioner, Janet succeeded in winning support for an ambitious expansion of the BLS. She launched the annual Consumer Expenditure Survey, as well as many other important data series, and elevated the skills and quality of statistical analysis throughout the agency. To supplement the traditional measurement of productivity as output per hour of labor, she oversaw the creation of a new measure of multifactor productivity in the private sector, estimating productivity as the result of both labor and capital inputs. When budget pressures threatened to end important data series collected elsewhere at the Department of Labor, she found the means to continue these series at the BLS. At the same time, Janet faced challenges to the BLS's tradition of professionalism and objectivity. From 1979, when she was appointed by President Carter, to 1991, when she retired, the news on employment, productivity, and inflation was often bad. In this circumstance, the BLS was sometimes accused of overstating economic problems, and it occasionally came under pressure to alter the basis for its data. Janet Norwood fended off these challenges with a mixture of resolve and flexibility, channeling some of the pressure into deliberate and constructive processes that eventually yielded improvements in the consumer price index and generated alternative price measures. As commissioner and like her predecessors, Janet helped preserve the BLS's deserved reputation for accuracy and integrity by continually improving the design, procedures, and techniques of data collection. After government service, Janet had a long and active retirement in which she continued her contributions to the economic profession and the science of statistics. She passed away on March 31 of this year. To members of her family who are with us today, thank you for her extraordinary service to our country. Janet's legacy continues in the ongoing work of the exceptional agency she helped build, on the foundation laid by Carroll Wright, whom she so appropriately joins today in this Hall of Honor. The Bureau of Labor Statisticsisexceptional, and in that way, I hope it serves as an example of how effective, reliable, and trusted government can be.
Governor Lael Brainard At the "North America's Place in a Changing World Economy," 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. The will-they-or-won't-they drumbeat has grown louder of late. To remove the suspense, I do not intend to make any calendar-based statements here today. Rather, I would like to give you a sense of the considerations that weigh on both sides of that debate and lay out the case for watching and waiting.1 The OutlookDomestic real activity has proven reassuringly resilient.Most notably, the labor market has continued to improve this year, pushing the economy closer to full employment. While monthly nonfarm payroll employment growth looks to have slowed over the past three months to a 167,000 monthly pace, so far this year it has averaged about 200,000. With these gains more than sufficient to absorb trend growth in the labor force, they have led to gradual increases in resource utilization. At 5.1 percent in September, the unemployment rate has declined 1/2 percentage point since December. Alternative broader gauges of unemployment--which include individuals who are marginally attached to the labor force and employees working part-time for economic reasons--have also shown steady improvement this year. Even so, a variety of evidence suggests there may be some distance to go to achieve full employment. Although the unemployment rate is near longer-run norms, other measures of labor utilization are not. The labor force participation rate remains materially below the pre-recession trend, even after adjusting for demographics.2And the share of employees working part time for economic reasons remains a full percentage point above the pre-recession level of around 3 percent, despite considerable recent improvement. Even if there has been some trend increase in part-time work, it seems unlikely to account for all of the difference between current levels and pre-recession levels.3 Perhaps the most striking evidence in support of continued labor market slack is the absence of any acceleration in wages and prices. Our main gauges of wage inflation suggest that labor compensation is increasing at a pace of about 2 to 2-1/4 percent, little different from the rate of increase over the past several years. Indeed, the lack of wage acceleration is likely one of the key reasons that many Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants have revised down their estimates of the longer-run level of the unemployment rate. Most recently, a majority of participants moved their estimates below 5 percent.4By comparison, in September 2012, the central tendency of estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate ranged from 5.2 to 6.0 percent. More broadly, domestic real activityappears likely to continue to grow at a moderate pace. Domestic final sales, which exclude net exports and the volatile category of inventory investment, increased at an annual rate of 2-3/4 percent in the first half of the year, and recent indicators suggest a similar pace in the second half. Perhaps most notable, personal consumption expenditures are estimated to have increased at an annual rate of a little over 3 percent in the three months ending in August, and auto sales moved up to a strong 18.1 million unit annualized pace in September. Thus, even though equity prices are down this year, continued job growth, lower gas prices, rising house prices and some loosening in consumer credit look likely to support consumer spending over the second half of the year. Moreover, domestic investment also looks to be increasing at a moderate pace despite the drag from the energy sector. New orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods have turned up recently, pointing to positive equipment investment going forward, and investment in nonresidential buildings looks to have risen noticeably in the middle of the year. While investment in energy-related structures will likely move lower over the second half of the year in response to the most recent step-down in oil prices, the decline should be smaller than the sharp decline in the first half. Importantly, recent data suggest that the gradual recovery in housing continues. Single-family building permits were close to an annual rate of 700,000 units in August, up nearly 5 percent from the fourth quarter of last year. The improvement in single- family housing is welcome after having been somewhat slow to materialize. Even so, current levels remain below what would be suggested by fundamentals, such as population growth. While private consumption and investment thus appear to be on reassuringly solid trajectories, growth in government expenditures on goods and services is likely to remain tepid. Combined purchases at the federal, state, and local levels rose at an annual rate of only 1-1/4 percent in the first half of the year, and modest growth in revenue at the state and local level suggest continued limited gains going forward. In addition, spending restrictions in the Budget Control Act and the winding down of defense spending related to Afghanistan and Iraq have led to restraint at the federal level, although there is some uncertainty on the federal budget outlook. In contrast to the considerable progress in the labor market, progress on the second leg of our dual mandate has been elusive. To be clear, I do not view the improvement in the labor market as a sufficient statistic for judging the outlook for inflation. A variety of econometric estimates would suggest that the classic Phillips curve influence of resource utilization on inflation is, at best, very weak at the moment. The fact that wages have not accelerated is significant, but more so as an indicator that labor market slack is still present and that workers' bargaining power likely remains weak. Overall inflation has been subdued, running persistently below our 2 percent target. The personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index increased only 0.3 percent over the 12 months ending in August. Much of the weakness in this index can be explained by the drop in oil and energy prices over the past year. Assuming energy prices stabilize going forward, as futures markets suggest, then energy should be a neutral or perhaps even a small positive influence on inflation next year. But inflation has been stubbornly low, even excluding energy prices. Over the 12 months ending in August, core PCE prices, which exclude the often volatile categories of food and energy, increased 1.3 percent, and the 12-month change in core prices has been around 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent since the beginning of 2013. The persistence of the weakness in core price inflation deserves attention. For the post-recession period as a whole, low levels of resource utilization surely accounted for a substantial part of the weakness. But resource utilization has increased dramatically since 2009, and core price inflation has remained quite low. A sizable decline in import prices over the past year has also contributed. As a result of the sharp increase in the dollar over the past year or so, prices for non-oil imports fell at an annual rate of a little over 4 percent in the first half of the year and look to decline a further 2 percent at an annual rate over the second half. Estimates suggest the dollar's rise will hold down core inflation between 1/4 and 1/2 percentage point this year, restraint that would wane if the dollar stabilized going forward. However, recent weakness is not completely explained by import prices. Services prices excluding energy, which are generally relatively little affected by changes in the dollar, have also shown no sign of acceleration in recent years. Instead, inflation in this category has moved lower over the past year. In August, the 12-month change in non-energy services prices was 2 percent, 1/4 percentage point lower than the pace of increase from 2012 through the middle of 2014. The outlook for inflation is critical for purposes of assessing progress toward our 2 percent goal, since monetary policy operates with a lag. In this regard, the gravitational force of long-term inflation expectations is critically important. Although the story on this front is mostly reassuring, it warrants monitoring. Projections from the Survey of Professional Forecasters suggest that longer-run inflation expectations--which appear to be most relevant for predicting future inflation--have remained at 2 percent since the end of 2012. Household surveys, such as University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, suggest that households' longer-run inflation expectations have remained in a narrow range throughout the crisis and the recovery, although they have stayed in the lower end of that range over the past year. In contrast, market-based measures of inflation compensation, such as inflation swaps and the difference between nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury bond yields, have declined noticeably over the past year and a half at longer-term horizons. Of course, factors other than inflation expectations, such as changes in liquidity premiums and inflation risk premiums, may be at play. Although the balance of evidence thus suggests that long-term inflation expectations are likely to have remained fairly steady, the risks to the near-term outlook for inflation appear to be tilted to the downside, given the persistently low level of core inflation and the recent decline in longer-run inflation compensation, as well as the deflationary cross currents emanating from abroad--a subject to which I now turn. Over the past 15 months, U.S. monetary policy deliberations have been taking place against a backdrop of progressively gloomier projections of global demand. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has marked down 2015 emerging market and world growth repeatedly since April 2014. In the second half of 2014, persistently weak aggregate demand in Japan and the Euro Area led to heightened deflationary pressures. The policy response to these pressures and the anticipated divergence between the policy trajectory in these economies and the United States contributed to a 10 percent appreciation in the dollar in inflation-adjusted terms through the spring of this year, pushing down net exports and restraining activity in the United States. Net exports subtracted nearly 1 percentage point from the annual rate of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the first part of the year, and the most recent trade data suggest another substantial subtraction in the third quarter. More recently, weakness in foreign demand has extended to emerging market economies, which now account for about half of world output and have been an important source of growth for more than the past decade. Growing recognition of this weakness pushed the dollar up further to 15 percent above its level last summer, and has contributed to a more general tightening of financial conditions in the past few months. Much of the focus has been on China, whose large size and double-digit growth rate put it at the center of a powerful global commodity super-cycle over the past decade. Consequently, the challenges China faces today are raising questions about emerging market growth prospects more broadly. Most immediately, China's buildup of past property, and more-recent stock market, bubbles together with a steep run-up in business debt levels and questions about the policy stance and the outlook have raised concerns about downside risks. In weighing the implications for the U.S. outlook, it would be misleading to focus narrowly on the direct effect of U.S.-Chinese bilateral trade alone. Many commodity-exporting countries that have depended heavily on Chinese demand are adjusting with difficulty to the recent sharp commodity price declines. After increasing at an average rate of nearly 5-1/2 percent over the period from 2003 through 2011, GDP growth in emerging market commodity exporters is projected to be only 3-1/2 percent this year. Projected growth going forward has also been marked down materially. Moreover, more developed economies, such as Mexico and Canada, our most important trading partners, have also been affected, with Canadian GDP declining in the first two quarters of the year.5 In addition, many non-commodity-producing East Asian economies are closely tied to China through trade and investment. Because of these ties, and for other idiosyncratic reasons, growth in East Asian economies has been weak so far this year. Growth in emerging Asia economies outside of China that are important destinations of U.S. exports slipped to 2-1/2 percent in the first half of the year, well below a trend rate of close to 5 percent. Downgrades to foreign growth affect the U.S. outlook through several channels. First, weak growth abroad reduces demand for U.S. exports. Second, the expected divergence in U.S. growth increases demand for U.S. assets, putting upward pressure on the dollar, which, in turn, weighs on net exports. The estimated effect of dollar appreciation on net exports has been shown to be substantial and to persist for several years.6Weak demand weighs on global commodity prices, which, together with the effects on the dollar, restrains U.S. inflation. Finally, the anticipation of weaker global growth can make market participants more attuned to downside risks, which can reduce prices for risky assets, both abroad and in the United States--as we saw in late August--with attendant effects on consumption and investment. Over the past year, a feedback loop has transmitted market expectations of policy divergence between the United States and our major trade partners into financial tightening in the U.S. through exchange rate and financial market channels. Thus, even as liftoff is coming into clearer view ahead, by some estimates, the substantial financial tightening that has already taken place has been comparable in its effect to the equivalent of a couple of rate increases. Looking ahead, one of the biggest sources of known uncertainty to the U.S. outlook is whether this foreign weakness fades or intensifies. A plausible baseline scenario might include a soft landing in China and growth in other emerging markets moving gradually back up to underlying trends. Of course, it is possible that a recovery in emerging market growth occurs sooner than in the baseline, such that the U.S economy moves modestly more quickly toward our goals. However, demand in emerging markets could also fall short of such a baseline. China is only part-way through challenging economic adjustments and financial market reforms, including reform of its exchange rate regime, debt deleveraging, and rebalancing of its economy toward more consumer-driven growth. During this process, market participants may have less accuracy in forecasting developments in China relative to many other major economies due to less clarity regarding the macroeconomic data and the policy framework. A more negative assessment of underlying Chinese growth fundamentals or its exchange rate regime would likely affect other important economies in the region, as well as commodity-producing economies, pushing global demand down further. In turn, expectations of additional weakness in global demand could have important effects on the exchange rate of the dollar, the valuation of risky assets in the United States, and U.S. inflation, moving the economy further from our goals. Policy ConsiderationsThere is a risk that the intensification of international cross currents could weigh more heavily on U.S. demand directly, or that the anticipation of a sharper divergence in U.S. policy could impose restraint through additional tightening of financial conditions. For these reasons, I view the risks to the economic outlook as tilted to the downside. The downside risks make a strong case for continuing to carefully nurture the U.S. recovery--and argue against prematurely taking away the support that has been so critical to its vitality. These risks matter more than usual because the ability to provide additional accommodation if downside risks materialize is, in practice, more constrained than the ability to remove accommodation more rapidly if upside risks materialize. The asymmetry in risk management stems from the combination of the likely low current level of the neutral real interest rate and the effective lower bound. Let me take each in turn. First, casual empiricism would suggest that we are experiencing a period of unusually low rates not only in the United States but also at the global level. Ten-year sovereign bond yields in G-7 economies excluding Japan currently range from just above 1/2 percent to just above 2 percent--well below the average range of 4 1/2 to 5 percent in the decade before the financial crisis.7This observation receives substantial support from a number of rigorous empirical papers over the past year that have estimated the longer-run equilibrium federal funds rate to be lower now than previously.8The projection of a relatively low neutral rate over the next few years also receives some weight in the September 2015 Summary of Economic Projections. Most FOMC participants lowered their estimate of the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate in the long run, and a majority of participants now forecast a level no higher than 3.62 percent--down from 4.12 percent in September 2012.9A lower equilibrium funds rate implies a higher probability of policy being constrained by a lower bound for nominal interest rates. Second, the ability of policymakers to react to unexpected shocks using conventional tools remains highly asymmetric in the neighborhood of an effective lower bound. From the perspective of risk management, in today's circumstances, we have considerably greater latitude to adjust the path of policy in response to inflation that exceeds current forecasts than we have to provide additional accommodation in response to additional adverse shocks. Consider two possible scenarios. First, many observers have suggested that the economy will soon begin to strain available resources without some monetary tightening. Because monetary policy acts with a lag, in this scenario, high rates of resource utilization may lead to a large buildup of inflationary pressures, a rise in inflation expectations and persistent inflation in excess of our 2 percent target. However, we have well-tested tools to address such a situation and plenty of policy room in which to use them. Moreover, the persistently deflationary international environment, the gradual pace of increases in U.S. resource utilization, the estimated small effect of resource utilization on inflation, the likely low level of neutral interest rates, and the persistence of inflation below our 2 percent target suggests this risk remains modest. Financial markets appear to agree, as five-year inflation compensation is well below 2 percent. Now, take the alternative risk: that the underlying momentum of the domestic economy is not strong enough to resist the deflationary pull of the international environment. A further step-down in global demand growth and a further strengthening in the dollar could increase the already sizable negative effect of the global environment on U.S. demand, pushing U.S. growth back to, or below, potential. Progress toward full employment and 2 percent inflation would stall or reverse. With limited ability to ease policy, it would be more difficult to move the economy back on track. Indeed, many central banks in advanced economies have tightened policy since the financial crisis, prompted by improving domestic activity. In these cases, the tightening was reversed as the outlook evolved. Given the current uncertainty, we should put some weight on the risk of following this pattern. Indeed, market participants put the probability of returning to the zero lower bound within two years of liftoff at 20 percent.10 To be fair, the past few years have demonstrated the capacity and will of central banks in many jurisdictions to deploy unconventional monetary policy tools, including quantitative and credit easing, forward guidance, and negative rates. That said, resorting to such tools is not without costs and uncertainties. We should not take the continued strength of domestic demand growth for granted. Although the outlook for domestic demand is good, global forces are weighing on net exports and inflation, and the risks from abroad appear tilted to the downside. Our economy has made good progress toward full employment, but sluggish wage growth suggests there is some room to go, and inflation has remained persistently below our target. With equilibrium real interest rates likely to remain low for some time and policy options that are more limited if conditions deteriorate than if they accelerate, risk-management considerations counsel a stance of waiting to see if the risks to the outlook diminish. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Fall), pp. 197-275. Cajner, Tomaz, Dennis Mawhirter, Christopher Nekarda, and David Ratner (2014). "Why Is Involuntary Part-Time Work Elevated?" FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 14. Erceg, Christopher J., and Andrew T. Levin (2014). "Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 46 (October), pp. 3-49. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future," NBER Working Paper Series 21476. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. International Monetary Fund (2015).World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices(PDF).Washington: IMF, October. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (4), pp. 1063-70. Valletta, Rob, and Catherine van der List (2015). "Involuntary Part-Time Work: Here to Stay?" FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-19. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June. I am grateful to Andrew Figura for his assistance in preparing this text. 1.These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.Much of the decline in recent years is due to the aging of the baby boom cohort. But even holding demographics constant, the participation rate is considerably lower now than before the recession, suggesting it is cyclically depressed. Aaronson and others (2014) find that demographics can explain only about half of the decline in the participation rate since the end of 2007. Thus, it may be a while further before the participation rate fully reacts to the full amount of improvement in labor market conditions that we have seen thus far, since wage growth has remained low, and the decision to participate in the labor force may respond with a lag to cyclical improvements. See Aaronson and others (2014) and Erceg and Levin (2014).Return to text 3.Changes in the structure of labor demand, such as a shift toward occupations or industries characterized by flexible and part-time hours, may have led to an increase in the equilibrium level of part-time work. For more on this issue, see Cajner and others (2014) and Valletta and van der List (2015). If workers combine two or more part-time jobs to arrive at a full-time workweek, part-time employment could be elevated with average weekly hours at normal levels. But the logistical costs of multiple job holding make such an outcome unlikely, and in recent years elevated part-time employment has not coincided with an increase in official estimates of multiple job holding.Return to text 4.See "Figure 3.B, Distribution of Participants' Projections for the Unemployment Rate, 2015-18 and over the Longer Run," in the Summary of Economic Projections, addendum to theminutes of the September 2015 FOMC meeting (PDF), released on October 8, 2015.Return to text 5.For more detail on the recent experiences and likely prospects of commodity exporters, see "Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath of the Commodity Boom," chapter 2 of the International Monetary Fund's (IMF, 2015)World Economic Outlook(PDF).Return to text 6.Looking across a broad set of countries, the IMF (2015) estimates that a 10 percent appreciation in the real exchange rate will cause an eventual 1.5 percentage point reduction in the contribution of net exports to real GDP, with effects lasting for several years (see chapter 3, "Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected? (PDF)").Return to text 7.In Japan, the level is currently around 0.3 percent, down from an average of 1.5 percent in the decade before the crisis.Return to text 8.Building on the work of Laubach and Williams (2003), both Hamilton, Harris, Hatzius, and West (2015) and Kiley (2015), for example, have recently constructed alternative estimates of the longer-run equilibrium federal funds rate. While these papers differ in their estimates and acknowledge a considerable amount of uncertainty, they all weigh in on the side of a relatively low equilibrium federal funds rate over the next few years.Return to text 9.See "Figure 3.E, Distribution of Participants' Judgments of the Midpoint of the Appropriate Target Range for the Federal Funds Rate or the Appropriate Target Level for the Federal Funds Rate, 2015-18 and over the Longer Run," in the Summary of Economic Projections, addendum to theminutes of the September 2015 FOMC meeting (PDF), released October 8, 2015.Return to text 10.See the July 2015 "Responses to Survey of Market Participants (PDF)," from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application by Korea Exchange Bank, Seoul, Republic of Korea, to establish an agency in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application by Royal Bank of Canada, Montreal, Canada, to establish a branch in Jersey City, New Jersey. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under sections 10(e) and 10(c) of the Home Owners' Loan Act, as amended, by Synchrony Financial, Stamford, Connecticut, to operate as a publicly owned savings and loan holding company and retain control of its subsidiary federal savings association, Synchrony Bank, Draper, Utah, and to continue to engage in certain business activities through its control of non-savings association subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the applications under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Royal Bank of Canada, Montreal, Canada, and RBC USA Holdco Corporation, New York, New York, to acquire City National Corporation and thereby indirectly acquire its wholly owned subsidiary, City National Bank, both of Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced a $90.3 million penalty and consent cease and desist order against Crédit Agricole S.A., of Paris, France, related to violations of U.S. sanctions. The order requires Crédit Agricole, including its foreign subsidiary, Crédit Agricole Corporate and Investment Bank, to implement an enhanced program to ensure global compliance with U.S. sanctions administered by the U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control. The actions were taken by the Federal Reserve for unsafe and unsound practices at Crédit Agricole. The firm did not have sufficient policies and procedures to ensure that activities conducted at its offices outside of the United States complied with U.S. sanctions laws. The Federal Reserve's order is being taken in conjunction with actions by the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control, the New York County District Attorney's Office, and the New York Department of Financial Services for violations of U.S. sanctions requirements, and various New York state laws. The penalties issued by all of the agencies total $787.3 million. The Federal Reserve order also prohibits Crédit Agricole from re-employing the individuals involved in the past actions or retaining them as consultants or contractors. The Federal Reserve is also investigating whether enforcement actions are appropriate against these or other individuals who may have been involved in the conduct underlying the enforcement actions against the institution. Crédit Agricole has agreed to cooperate in these investigations, but is not the subject of these investigations. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that the public comment period has been extended through October 30, 2015, on the application by Goldman Sachs Bank USA, New York, New York, to assume certain liabilities and acquire certain assets of GE Capital Bank, Holladay, Utah, under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act ("Bank Merger Act"). The original comment period, which closed on September 19, 2015, is being extended to allow interested persons more time to review the proposal and to provide comments on the application in light of the standards the Board must consider in reviewing the proposal under the Bank Merger Act. These standards include the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, the effects of the proposal on the stability of the U.S. banking or financial system, the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the institutions involved in the proposal, and competition in the relevant markets. Comments regarding this application must be received at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (Attention: Bank Applications Officer, 33 Liberty Street, New York, New York 10045;[email protected]) or the Office of the Secretary of the Board (20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, D.C. 20551) on or before October 30, 2015. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday barred Thomas A. Neely, Jr., former Executive Vice-President and Business Services Credit Executive of Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, from participating in the affairs of any insured depository institution and ordered him to pay a civil penalty of $100,000 to settle administrative charges he breached his fiduciary duties. The issuance of a consent order of prohibition and assessment of a civil money penalty resolves administrative chargebrought by the Federal Reserve Board in June 2014. Those charges alleged that Mr. Neely had engaged in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of his fiduciary duties in connection with his role in Regions Bank's improper reporting of nonaccrual loans in the first quarter of 2009, and by providing misleading information to federal and state bank examiners. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: ABCT Holdings, Inc., Waco, TexasWritten Agreement issued August 5, 2013Terminated September 28, 2015 Countricorp, White Sulphur Springs, MontanaWritten Agreement issued January 29, 2013Terminated September 29, 2015 Oxford Financial Corporation, Oak Brook, IllinoisWritten Agreement issued November 29, 2010Terminated September 29, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday proposed a new rule that would strengthen the ability of the largest domestic and foreign banks operating in the United States to be resolved without extraordinary government support or taxpayer assistance. The proposed rule would apply to domestic firms identified by the Board as global systemically important banks (GSIBs) and to the U.S. operations of foreign GSIBs. These institutions would be required to meet a new long-term debt requirement and a new "total loss-absorbing capacity," or TLAC, requirement. The requirements will bolster financial stability by improving the ability of banks covered by the rule to withstand financial stress and failure without imposing losses on taxpayers. To reduce the systemic impact of the failure of a GSIB, an orderly resolution process should allow a GSIB to fail, and its investors to suffer losses, while the critical operations of the firm continue to function. Requiring GSIBs to hold sufficient amounts of long-term debt, which can be converted to equity during resolution, would facilitate this by providing a source of private capital to support the firms' critical operations during resolution. "The long-term debt requirement we are proposing today, combined with our other work to improve the resolvability of systemic banking firms, would substantially reduce the risk to taxpayers and the threat to financial stability stemming from the failure of these firms," Chair Janet L. Yellen said. "This is an important step toward ending the market perception that any banking firm is ‘too big to fail.'" For domestic GSIBs, the proposed long-term debt requirement would set a minimum level of long-term debt that could be used to recapitalize these firms' critical operations upon failure. The complementary TLAC requirement would set a new minimum level of total loss-absorbing capacity, which can be met with both regulatory capital and long-term debt. These requirements will improve the prospects for the orderly resolution of a failed domestic GSIB and will strengthen the resiliency of all GSIBs. Domestic GSIBs would be required to hold at a minimum: "By increasing required loss-absorbing capacity by 60% or more, the long-term debt requirement will bring us closer to the goal of ensuring that even one of the nation's largest banks could fail without either endangering the financial system or prompting a government bailout," Governor Daniel K. Tarullo said. To further facilitate an orderly resolution, the proposal also would require the parent holding company of a domestic GSIB to avoid entering into certain financial arrangements that would create obstacles to an orderly resolution. These "clean holding company" requirements would include bans on issuance of short-term debt to external investors and on entering into derivatives and certain other types of financial contracts with external counterparties. These requirements will reduce the risk of destabilizing funding runs at the holding company, reduce holding company complexity, and enhance the resiliency of operating subsidiaries during an orderly resolution. The proposal also includes regulatory capital deductions for Board-regulated banking firms that hold unsecured debt of the parent holding companies of domestic GSIBs. To mitigate the threats to U.S. financial stability from the failure of a large foreign bank, the proposal would also establish long-term debt and TLAC requirements for the U.S. operations of foreign GSIBs. However the long-term debt and TLAC would be required to be issued internally, from the U.S. operations to the foreign parent, rather than sold to external investors. This feature of the proposal would help ensure that the U.S. operations of a failed foreign GSIB could be recapitalized and kept operating in the event of resolution of the foreign bank by its home resolution authority. The U.S. operations of foreign GSIBs generally would be required to hold at a minimum: Comments on the proposal will be accepted through February 1, 2016. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Register Notice:HTML|PDF Depiction of Proposed LTD Requirement and Fully Phased-in Tier 1 Risk-Based Capital Requirements (PDF) Board Votes Meeting Memoranda Open Board Meeting on October 30, 2015
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace. Household spending and business fixed investment have been increasing at solid rates in recent months, and the housing sector has improved further; however, net exports have been soft. The pace of job gains slowed and the unemployment rate held steady. Nonetheless, labor market indicators, on balance, show that underutilization of labor resources has diminished since early this year. Inflation has continued to run below the Committee's longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation moved slightly lower; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced but is monitoring global economic and financial developments. Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining whether it will be appropriate to raise the target range at its next meeting, the Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen some further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Charles L. Evans; Stanley Fischer; Dennis P. Lockhart; Jerome H. Powell; Daniel K. Tarullo; and John C. Williams. Voting against the action was Jeffrey M. Lacker, who preferred to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points at this meeting.
Governor Lael Brainard At the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act Outreach Meeting, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Watch live On behalf of the Federal Reserve Board, I want to thank everyone for participating in the fifth outreach meeting held as part of the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) review process. I also want to thank President Charles Evans for hosting today. Under EGRPRA, the federal banking agencies are required to conduct a joint review of our regulations every 10 years. At the Federal Reserve, we view the current review as a timely opportunity to step back and look for ways to reduce regulatory burden, particularly for smaller or less complex banks that pose less risk to the system. Our ultimate goal is to identify outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome regulations and to take action to address those burdens. I was pleased to participate, along with colleagues from the other banking agencies, in the launch meeting held last November in Los Angeles. Since that time, staff across the Federal Reserve System, including here in Chicago, have been hard at work evaluating comments and identifying actions that will meaningfully reduce burden. In some cases, where we have authority and the benefit is straightforward, we have taken action. In other cases, which may require interagency agreement and changes to rules, the process will take longer. In still other cases, we may need to look to Congress to take action. I want to spend the rest of my time this morning highlighting those areas that hold the greatest promise to reduce undue regulatory burden, especially for our community banks.1 Regulatory ReportsWe have heard the request to achieve a meaningful reduction in the burden associated with regulatory reporting, and we are taking action. In early September, the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) detailed steps regulators are taking to streamline and simplify regulatory reporting requirements for community banks and reduce their reporting burden. As an initial step to streamline some reporting requirements, the federal banking agencies, under the auspices of the FFIEC, are seeking comment on proposals to, in part, eliminate or revise several Call Report data items. Additionally, the federal banking agencies are evaluating the feasibility and merits of creating a streamlined version of the quarterly Call Report for community banking organizations. The Federal Reserve Board is conducting a separate review of the FR series of reports for holding companies to identify unnecessary burden. Of course, any changes to the bank Call Report forms will likely be reflected with corresponding changes to the Bank Holding Company FR Y-9 reports, but there are additional reports for holding companies that are included in our broader review. Small Bank Holding Company Policy ThresholdThe Federal Reserve Board has taken action to address burden concerns from community banks by expanding the universe of small bank holding companies covered by the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement. In December 2014, following congressional action, the Federal Reserve amended its regulation to raise the total asset threshold for the policy statement's applicability from $500 million to $1 billion in total consolidated assets. As a result, more than 700 holding companies (that are not engaged in complex activities) are now exempt from consolidated regulatory capital requirements, reducing both the cost of capital and reporting requirements for small depository institutions.2 Community Reinvestment ActThe Federal Reserve Board and the other federal banking agencies have received numerous constructive comments on ways to update the implementation of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) to better reflect changes in the ways banking services are being provided and banks are interacting with their communities. A few of the most common issues raised include those related to whether the definition of Assessment Areas should be revised because of changes in technology that allow banks to gather deposits and make loans far from existing branches and deposit-taking ATMs, whether the asset thresholds that determine the examination methods for banks of different sizes should be raised to lessen regulatory burden on smaller banks, and whether the performance tests should be revised to give more meaningful consideration to community development activities. These are important issues, and we are looking at a wide range of suggestions and options, which may mean it will take us time to distill the comments and formulate effective policy responses in collaboration with the other banking agencies. In the meantime, I urge you to continue providing specific suggestions to help inform our interagency deliberations. Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money LaunderingWe have heard from many community bankers that they would welcome guidance that would assist them in meeting their compliance obligations under the Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering rules in more cost-effective ways. Accordingly, we are taking a careful look at options that might reduce exam frequency for lower-risk banks and might enable small banking institutions to share expert resources. There may also be an opportunity to align insider abuse Suspicious Activity Report filing requirements with other filing requirements applicable to all other known or suspected criminal violations. Expediting and Improving ApplicationsThe Federal Reserve Board has received comments regarding the amount of time it takes to process applications. Last year, we started publishing a semiannual report that improves the transparency of the applications process by providing information on the applications that have been approved, denied, and withdrawn and the length of time to review applications.3We are currently reviewing our rules to see whether there are ways to expedite the applications review process by delegating additional matters to the Reserve Banks. In addition, we have received suggestions regarding possibly broadening the measure of the degree of competition in a banking market to include the activities of Internet banks.4Doing so would reduce the market shares of other banks and the measures of local market concentration, which in turn may help community banks in rural areas that are engaged in acquisitions. Appraisal ThresholdsAt past EGRPRA outreach meetings, participants have raised concerns that the requirement to obtain an appraisal on small dollar real estate loans is a significant burden, particularly in rural areas. The prudential regulators' rules issued under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA) currently do not require the use of a state-certified or state-licensed appraiser for federally related transactions of $250,000 or less, or real estate secured business loans of $1million or less when the primary source of repayment is not sale proceeds or rental income from the property. The statute allows the agencies to determine the appropriate threshold below which an appraisal by a state-certified or state-licensed appraiser is not required if that threshold would not represent a threat to the safety and soundness of financial institutions. The agencies adopted these two thresholds in 1994. Given the passage of time and changes in the condition of real estate markets, I believe it is appropriate for the agencies to again review the current thresholds. In particular, the agencies need to assess whether the thresholds appropriately address collateral and credit risk in small dollar real estate loans and are reasonably balanced against the cost and time to obtain an appraisal, particularly in rural markets where fewer appraisers may be available. Of course, the agencies would need to consider whether any revision to the $250,000 threshold level would provide reasonable protection for consumers. Board staff is evaluating the appropriateness of the thresholds in the prudential appraisal regulation. We will work with other agencies in completing this analysis.5 Simplified Capital for Small InstitutionsAt previous outreach meetings, community banks have asked whether the Federal Reserve can exempt smaller financial institutions from meeting all of the revised capital requirements. Based on lessons from the crisis, bank capital requirements were significantly revised to make the requirements more risk-sensitive and raise the quality and quantity of capital. In some instances, smaller institutions have indicated that the degree of categorization of risks, the attendant recordkeeping and systems changes, and the increased reporting burden on their institutions are generating significantly increased compliance costs that are not commensurate with the risk profile of the institution. For smaller and less complex community banks, the benefit from this increased risk sensitivity may be outweighed by the burden of increased complexity, and a commensurate improvement in safety and soundness of the institution may be achievable by simply holding a larger cushion of capital measured against a simpler definition of assets. To be workable, such an approach would need to provide a robust measure of the financial institution's capital health and meet the objectives of the Collins amendment. We are currently exploring possible options.6 Stress Tests for Regional BanksOne additional item that I would consider worthy of congressional consideration in the EGRPRA context would be the stress tests currently performed by smaller, regional lenders, or those above $10 billion in assets but less than $50 billion in assets. It might be worthwhile to examine the prudential benefits--the additional insights gained by us as supervisors as well as by the banks' senior managers from the stress tests--against the opportunity costs in terms of compliance measures and the allocation of management and examination resources for both supervisors and those banks. And I look forward to discussing this in the coming months. In considering these issues, it is also important to underscore that we are already tailoring our expectations for the stress tests to the lower risk profile of smaller banking institutions, and the stress tests currently performed by these institutions should in no way be designed to mimic the more comprehensive and extensive stress testing program for larger and more complex institutions, particularly the Comprehensive Capital and Analysis Review (CCAR) program. Examination CycleWe are also examining whether there may be scope to extend examination cycles for community banks with lower risk profiles and in some areas have already taken action. For example, the Federal Reserve recently revised our consumer compliance examination frequency policy to lengthen the time frame between on-site consumer compliance and CRA examinations for lower-risk community banks with less than $1 billion in total consolidated assets. Another item to evaluate includes potentially increasing the number of healthy, well-managed community institutions that could qualify for an 18-month examination cycle by raising the threshold from its current $500 million level. In addition to reducing the examination burden on many community banks, this would also allow the federal banking agencies to better allocate resources to those banks that pose more significant supervisory concerns. Volcker RuleFinally, EGRPRA may provide a good opportunity to reevaluate whether community banks should be subject to the Volcker rule. Exempting banks with less than $10 billion in assets from its requirements would significantly help reduce burden on smaller institutions.7 ConclusionThe list that I have laid out here is meant to be suggestive, not comprehensive. I look forward to hearing your views on these issues as well as any additional suggestions you believe to be worthy of consideration. Each of the agencies will be using the information gathered at this outreach meeting and our other outreach efforts to support the review process, so we can reduce burden where possible, particularly for community banks. I encourage everybody to speak frankly and to be as specific as possible. Thank you again for coming. I am grateful to Angelyque Campbell for her assistance in preparing this text. 1.These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Rule to Expand Applicability of Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and Apply It to Certain Savings and Loan Holding Companies," news release, April 9, 2015. Regulatory capital requirements will continue to apply to the depository institution subsidiaries of these companies.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve Board releases First Semiannual Report on Banking Applications Activity," news release, November 24, 2015.Return to text 4.The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") is used to measure economic concentration in a banking market under the Department of Justice Bank Merger Competitive Review guidelines.Return to text 5.It is important to note that any change in the appraisal threshold will only affect federally related transactions covered by the prudential regulators' rules. The majority of residential mortgages would remain subject to the appraisal requirements set by secondary market, particularly by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.Return to text 6.See Daniel K. Tarullo, "Tailoring Community Bank Regulation and Supervision" (speech at the Independent Community Bankers of America 2015 Washington Policy Summit, Washington, DC).Return to text 7.See Tarullo, "Tailoring Community Bank Regulation and Supervision"; and Jerome H. Powell, "Regulation and Supervision of Community Banks" (speech at the Annual Community Bankers Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York).Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts It is a pleasure to speak at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's annual conference, and I am grateful to President Rosengren and the organizers for inviting me. This afternoon I would like to discuss the challenges to formulating macroprudential policy for the U.S. financial system.1 The U.S. financial system is extremely complex. We have one of the largest nonbank sectors as a percentage of the overall financial system among advanced market economies. Since the crisis, changes in the regulation and supervision of the financial sector, most significantly those related to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act) and the Basel III process, have addressed many of the weaknesses revealed by the crisis. Nonetheless, challenges to our efforts to preserve financial stability remain. The Structure, Vulnerabilities, and Regulation of the U.S. Financial SystemTo set the stage, it is useful to start with a brief overview of the structure of the U.S. financial system. A diverse set of institutions provides credit to households and businesses, and others provide deposit-like services and facilitate transactions across the financial system.2As can be seen from panel A offigure 1, banks currently supply about one-third of the credit in the U.S. system. In addition to banks, institutions thought of as long-term investors, such as insurance companies, pension funds, and mutual funds, provide anotherone-third of credit within the system, while the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), primarily Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, supply 20 percent of credit. A final group, which I will refer to as other nonbanks and is often associated with substantial reliance on short-term wholesale funding, consists of broker-dealers, money market mutual funds (MMFs), finance companies, issuers of asset-backed securities, and mortgage real estate investment trusts, which together provide 14 percent of credit.3 In the first quarter of this year, U.S. financial firms held credit market debt equal to $38 trillion, or 2.2 times the gross domestic product (GDP) of the United States. As the figure shows, the size of the financial sector relative to GDP grew for nearly 50 years but declined after the financial crisis and has only started increasing again this year. From the perspective of financial stability, there are two important dimensions along which the categories of institutions in figure 1 differ. First, banks, the GSEs, and most of what I have called other nonbanks tend to be more leveraged than other institutions. Second, some institutions are more reliant on short-term funding and hence vulnerable to runs. For example, MMFs were pressured during the recent crisis, as their deposit-like liabilities--held as assets by highly risk-averse investors and not backstopped by a deposit insurance system--led to a run dynamic after a large fund broke the buck. In addition (as highlighted intable 1), nearly half of the liabilities of broker-dealers consists--and consisted then--of short-term wholesale funding, which proved to be unstable in the crisis. The pros and cons of a multifaceted financial systemThe significant role of nonbanks in the U.S. financial system and the associated complex web of interconnections bring both advantages and challenges relative to the more bank-dependent systems of other advanced economies.4A potential advantage of lower bank dependence is the possibility that a contraction in credit supply from banks can be offset by credit supply from other institutions or capital markets, thereby acting as a spare tire for credit supply. As shown intable 2, historical evidence suggests that the credit provided by what I termed long-term investors--that is, insurance companies, pension funds, and mutual funds--has tended to offset movements in bank credit relative to GDP, as indicated by the strong negative correlation of credit held by these institutions with bank credit during recessions. In other words, these institutions have acted as a spare tire for the banking sector.5 However, complexity also poses challenges. While the financial crisis arguably started in the nonbank sector, it quickly spread to the banking sector because of interconnections that were hard for regulators to detect and greatly underappreciated by investors and risk managers in the private sector.6For example, when banks provide loans directly to households and businesses, the chain of intermediation is short and simple; in the nonbank sector, intermediation chains are long and often involve a multitude of both banks and other nonbank financial institutions.7 Regulatory, supervisory, and financial industry reforms since the crisisU.S. regulators have undertaken a number of reforms to address weaknesses revealed by the crisis. The most significant set of reforms has focused on the banking sector and, in particular, on regulation and supervision of the largest, most interconnected firms. Changes include significantly higher capital requirements, additional capital charges for global systemically important banks, macro-based stress testing, and requirements that improve the resilience of banks' liquidity risk profile. Changes for the nonbank sector have been more limited, but steps have been taken, including the final rule on risk retention in securitization, issued jointly by the Federal Reserve and five other agencies in October of last year, and the new MMF rules issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in July of last year, following a Section 120 recommendation by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC).8More recently, the SEC has also proposed rules to modernize data reporting by investment companies and advisers, as well as to enhance liquidity risk management and disclosure by open-end mutual funds, including exchange-traded funds.9Other provisions include the central clearing requirement for standardized over-the-counter derivatives and the designation by the FSOC of four nonbanks as systemically important financial institutions.10The industry has also undertaken important changes to bolster the resilience of its practices, including notable improvements to internal risk-management processes.11 Some challenges to macroprudential policyThe steps taken since the crisis have almost certainly improved the resilience of the U.S. financial system, but I would like to highlight two significant challenges that remain. First, new regulations may lead to shifts in the institutional location of particular financial activities, which can potentially offset the expected effects of the regulatory reforms. The most significant changes in regulation have focused on large banks. This focus has been appropriate, as large banks are the most interconnected and complex institutions. Nonetheless, potential shifts of activity away from more regulated to less regulated institutions could lead to new risks. It is still too early to gauge the degree to which such adaptations to regulatory changes may occur, although there are tentative signs. For example, we have seen notable growth in mortgage originations at independent mortgage companies as reflected in the striking increase in the share of home-purchase originations by independent mortgage companies from 35 percent in 2010 to 47 percent in 2014. This growth coincides with the timing of Basel III, stress testing, and banks' renewed appreciation of the legal risks in mortgage originations.12As another example, there have also been many reports of diminished liquidity in fixed-income markets. Some observers have linked this shift to new regulations that have raised the costs of market making, although the evidence for changes in market liquidity is far from conclusive and a range of factors related to market structure may have contributed to the reporting of such shifts.13 Despite limited evidence to date, the possibility of activity relocating in response to regulation is a potential impediment to the effectiveness of macroprudential policy. This is clearly the case when activity moves from a regulated to an unregulated institution. But it may also be relevant even when activity moves from one regulated institution to an institution regulated by a different authority. This scenario can occur in the United States because different regulators are responsible for different institutions, and financial stability traditionally has not been, and in a number of cases is still not, a central component of these regulators' mandates. To be sure, the situation has improved since the crisis, as the FSOC facilitates interagency dialogue and has a shared responsibility for identifying risks and reporting on these findings and actions taken in its annual report submitted to the Congress. In addition, FSOC members jointly identify systemically important nonbank financial institutions. Despite these improvements, it remains possible that the FSOC members' different mandates, some of which do not include macroprudential regulation, may hinder coordination. By contrast, in the United Kingdom, fewer member agencies are represented on the Financial Policy Committee at the Bank of England, and each agency has an explicit macroprudential mandate. The committee has a number of tools to carry out this mandate, which currently are sectoral capital requirements, the countercyclical capital buffer, and limits on loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios for mortgage lending. A second significant challenge to macroprudential policy remains the relative lack of measures in the U.S. macroeconomic toolkit to address a cyclical buildup of financial stability risks. Since the crisis, frameworks have been or are currently being developed to deploy some countercyclical tools during periods when risks escalate, including the analysis of salient risks in annual stress tests for banks, the Basel III countercyclical capital buffer, and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) proposal for minimum margins on securities financing transactions. But the FSB proposal is far from being implemented, and a number of tools used in other countries are either not available to U.S. regulators or very far from being implemented. For example, several other countries have used tools such as time-varying risk weights and time-varying loan-to-value and debt-to-income caps on mortgages. Indeed, international experience points to the usefulness of these tools, whereas the efficacy of new tools in the United States, such as the countercyclical capital buffer, remains untested.14 In considering the difficulties caused by the relative unavailability of macroprudential tools in the United States, we need to recognize that there may well be an interaction between the extent to which the entire financial system can be strengthened and made more robust through structural measures--such as those imposed on the banking system since the Dodd-Frank Act--and the extent to which a country needs to rely more on macroprudential measures.15Inter alia, this recognition could provide an ex post rationalization for the United States having imposed stronger capital and other charges than most foreign countries. Implications for monetary policyThough I remain concerned that the U.S. macroprudential toolkit is not large and not yet battle tested, that does not imply that I see acute risks to financial stability in the near term. Indeed, banks are well capitalized and have sizable liquidity buffers, the housing market is not overheated, and borrowing by households and businesses has only begun to pick up after years of decline or very slow growth. Further, I believe that the careful monitoring of the financial system now carried out by Fed staff members, particularly those in the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, and by the FSOC contributes to the stability of the U.S. financial system--though we have always to remind ourselves that, historically, not even the best intelligence services have succeeded in identifying every significant potential threat accurately and in a timely manner. This is another reminder of the importance of building resilience in the financial system. Nonetheless, the limited macroprudential toolkit in the United States leads me to conclude that there may be times when adjustments in monetary policy should be discussed as a means to curb risks to financial stability. The deployment of monetary policy comes with significant costs. A more restrictive monetary policy would, all else being equal, lead to deviations from price stability and full employment. Moreover, financial stability considerations can sometimes point to the need for accommodative monetary policy. For example, the accommodative U.S. monetary policy since 2008 has helped repair the balance sheets of households, nonfinancial firms, and the financial sector. Given these considerations, how should monetary policy be deployed to foster financial stability? This topic is a matter for further research, some of which will look similar to the analysis in an earlier time of whether and how monetary policy should react to rapidly rising asset prices. That discussion reached the conclusion that monetary policy should be deployed to deal with errant asset prices (assuming, of course, that they could be identified) only to the extent that not doing so would result in a worse outcome for current and future output and inflation.16 There are some calculations--for example, by Lars Svensson--that suggest it would hardly ever make sense to deploy monetary policy to deal with potential financial instability. The contention that macroprudential measures would be a better approach is persuasive, except when there are no relevant macroprudential measures available. I believe we need more research into the question. I also struggle in trying to find consistency between the certainty that many have that higher interest rates would have prevented the Global Financial Crisis and the view that the interest rate should not be used to deal with potential financial instabilities. Perhaps that problem can be solved by seeking to distinguish between a situation in whichtheinterest rate is not at its short-run natural rate and one in which asset-pricing problems are sector specific. Of course, we should not exaggerate. It is one thing to say we have no macroprudential tools and another to say that having more macroprudential measures--particularly in the area of housing finance--could provide major financial stability benefits. It also seems likely that monetary policy should be used for macroprudential purposes with an eye to the tradeoffs between reduced financial imbalances, price stability, and maximum employment. In this regard, a number of recent research papers have begun to frame the issue in terms of such tradeoffs, although this is a new area that deserves further research.17 It may also be fruitful for researchers to continue investigating the deployment of new or little-used monetary policy tools. For example, it is arguable that reserve requirements--a traditional monetary policy instrument--can be viewed as a macroprudential tool. In addition, some research has begun to ask important questions about the size and structure of monetary authority liabilities in fostering financial stability.18 ConclusionTo sum up: The need for coordination across different regulators with distinct mandates creates challenges to the timely deployment of macroprudential measures in the United States. Further, the toolkit to act countercyclically in the face of building financial stability risks is limited, requires more research on its efficacy, and may need to be enhanced. Given these challenges, we need to consider the potential role of monetary policy in fostering financial stability while recognizing that there is more research to be done in clarifying the potential costs and benefits of doing so when conditions appear so to warrant. After all of the successful work that has been done to reform the financial system since the Global Financial Crisis, this summary may appear daunting and disappointing. But it is important to highlight these challenges now. Currently, the U.S. financial system appears resilient, reflecting the impressive progress made since the crisis. We need to address these questions now, before new risks emerge. ReferencesAdrian, Tobias, and Hyun-Song. Shin (2010). "The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation and the Financial Crisis of 2007-09 (PDF)," Staff Reports Working Paper No. 439. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April. Ajello, Andrea, Thomas Laubach, David López-Salido, and Taisuke Nakata (2015). "Financial Stability and Optimal Interest-Rate Policy (PDF)," working paper. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Bhutta, Neil, Jack Popper, and Daniel R. Ringo (forthcoming). "The 2014 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Data,"Federal Reserve Bulletin. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Housing Finance Agency, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Securities and Exchange Commission (2014). "Six Federal Agencies Jointly Approve Final Risk Retention Rule," press release, October 22. Cecchetti, Stephen G., and Enisse Kharroubi (2012). "Reassessing the Impact of Finance on Growth (PDF)," BIS Working Papers 381. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, July. Claessens, Stijn (2014). "An Overview of Macroprudential Policy Tools (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/14/214. Washington: International Monetary Fund, December. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2012). "Registration of Swap Dealers and Major Swap Participants (PDF)," final rules,Federal Register,vol. 77 (January 19), pp.2613-29. Dudley, William C. (2015). "Regulation and Liquidity Provision," speech delivered at the SIFMA Liquidity Forum, New York, September 30. Financial Stability Board (2013).Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking Entities (PDF).Basel, Switzerland: FSB, August. -------- (2014).Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2014 (PDF).Basel, Switzerland: FSB, October. Fischer, Stanley (2015a). "The Importance of the Nonbank Financial Sector," speech delivered at the Bundesbank conference "Debt and Financial Stability--Regulatory Challenges," Frankfurt, Germany, March 27. -------- (2015b). "Nonbank Financial Intermediation, Financial Stability, and the Road Forward," speech delivered at "Central Banking in the Shadows: Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Postcrisis," 20th Annual Financial Markets Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Stone Mountain, Ga., March 30. Frost, Joshua, Lorie Logan, Antoine Martin, Patrick McCabe, Fabio Natalucci, and Julie Remache (2015). "Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: Some Design Considerations (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 712. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February. International Monetary Fund (2014). "Shadow Banking around the Globe: How Large, and How Risky? (PDF)" inGlobal Financial Stability Report: Risk Taking, Liquidity, and Shadow Banking--Curbing Excess while Promoting Growth.Washington: IMF, October, pp. 65-104. Joint Forum (2015).Developments in Credit Risk Management across Sectors: Current Practices and Recommendations (PDF).Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, June. Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein (2012). "The Optimal Conduct of Monetary Policy with Interest on Reserves,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 4 (January), pp. 266-82. Kuttner, Kenneth N., and Ilhyock Shim (2013). "Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies," NBER Working Paper Series 19723. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, December. Philippon, Thomas, and Ariell Reshef (2012). "Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Financial Industry: 1909-2006,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 127 (November), pp. 1551-1609. Svensson, Lars (2015). "Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind," presentation delivered at the AQR Institute of Asset Management event "Perspectives: Unprecedented Monetary Policy Intervention," London Business School, London, June 25. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2015).Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 (PDF).Washington: Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors, FRBNY, SEC, and CFTC, July. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2012). "Clearing Agency Standards (PDF)," final rule, 17 C.F.R. pt. 240, October 22. -------- (2014). "SEC Adopts Money Market Fund Reform Rules: Rules Provide Structural and Operational Reform to Address Run Risks in Money Market Funds," press release, July 23. -------- (2015a). "SEC Proposes Rules to Modernize and Enhance Information Reported by Investment Companies and Investment Advisers: Proposals Would Improve Quality and Accessibility of Information for Investors and Regulatory Monitoring," press release, May 20. -------- (2015b). "SEC Proposes Liquidity Management Rules for Mutual Funds and ETFs," press release, September 22. Zingales, Luigi (2015). "Does Finance Benefit Society?" NBER Working Paper Series 20894. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Sirio Aramonte, Rochelle Edge, Luca Guerrieri, Michael Kiley, Nellie Liang, and Stacey Tevlin for their help in preparing this speech.Return to text 2.In my overview of the financial system, I am sizing the major players by their credit provision. But clearly, this is not the only metric that could and should be applied. If we consider net income, or other proxies for value-added by different subsegments of the financial system, we also capture the role of financial service companies and organized exchanges--companies with limited balance sheets, but which nonetheless play a vital role in the workings of our financial system.Return to text 3.Other nonbanks are often referred to as shadow banks because they engage in bank-like credit intermediation but are generally not subject to the same supervision and regulation as traditional banks and do not have direct access to deposit insurance. I will continue to call them other nonbanks. There is no universally accepted definition of what constitutes shadow banking. As noted in International Monetary Fund (2014), most definitions classify shadow banks by entity. Accordingly, by referring to other nonbanks as shadow banks, I am following an entity-based definition. Indeed, the definition that I am using is what the International Monetary Fund would call the Flow of Funds definition of shadow banks (see table 2.1, page 73). The Financial Stability Board (2013) describes shadow banking as "credit intermediation involving entities and activities (fully or partially) outside the regular banking system" (p. ii) and, in its annualGlobal Shadow Banking Monitoring Report(see Financial Stability Board, 2014), focuses on a class of institutions called Other Financial Intermediaries, which includes all financial intermediaries that are not banks, insurance companies, pension funds, public financial institutions, or central banks (p. 8). This definition is close to the one that I am using but includes mutual funds. The definition used by Adrian and Shin (2010) is also close to the one that I am using but includes public financial institutions (specifically, GSEs and agency and GSE-backed mortgage pools). As the International Monetary Fund (2014) notes, shadow banking can also be defined according to activities and, indeed, they propose a classification that defines shadow banking as encompassing those activities by banks and nonbanks financed by nontraditional (noncore) liabilities.Return to text 4.See Financial Stability Board (2014) for comparisons of the size of the bank and nonbank sectors in other advanced economies.Return to text 5.Recent research has examined the potential benefits and costs associated with the growth and complexity of the financial system, including Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012), Philippon and Reshef (2012), and Zingales (2015).Return to text 6.See Fischer (2015a, 2015b) for more detailed narratives on developments in the nonbank sector at the start of the global financial crisis.Return to text 7.For example, in the old days, a bank would originate a mortgage and hold it in its portfolio. Today, a bank might originate the same mortgage, but, instead of holding that loan on its balance sheet, it could securitize it--in effect, sell it--and the resulting security might be purchased with the help of short-term funding provided by an MMF. And the process might not end there: Next, that mortgage-backed security might be sold and repackaged into several new securities, and so on.Return to text 8.The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the SEC, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and the Department of Housing and Urban Development approved final rules for risk retention, as required under the Dodd-Frank Act, in October 2014 (Board of Governors and others, 2014). Under the final rules, sponsors of almost all types of securities will have to hold a 5percent stake in the securities, although securitizations that are collateralized by qualified residential mortgages (as defined by the agencies) are exempt from risk retention. The intent of risk retention is to improve loan underwriting and securitization structuring by better aligning the interests of lenders, securitization sponsors, and investors. The SEC adopted new MMF rules in July 2014 (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2014). These rules include two key provisions: a floating net asset value requirement for prime MMFs sold to institutional investors and a system of "standby" liquidity fees and temporary restrictions on redemptions, or "gates," for all MMFs except government MMFs that can be imposed at the discretion of an MMF's board when the fund's liquidity is impaired. These rules are intended to mitigate the vulnerability of MMFs to destabilizing runs.Return to text 9.On May 20, 2015, the SEC proposed rules to enhance and modernize disclosure of portfolio information and risks by registered investment companies, including mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2015a). The proposals would require funds to disclose to the SEC and the public more information about their borrowing, usage, and terms of derivatives and repurchase agreements, securities lending activity, and sensitivity to interest rates. In addition, the proposal would introduce structured reporting formats to facilitate analysis of the data by the SEC and the public. Also on May 20, 2015, the SEC proposed rules to require investment advisers to report more information about the assets, borrowing, and derivatives exposures of the separately managed accounts that they manage (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2015a). On September 22, 2015, the SEC proposed rules to enhance liquidity risk management by mutual funds and ETFs (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2015b).The proposal would require each of these funds to adopt a liquidity risk-management program, categorize the liquidity of every portfolio asset, set its own minimum share of "three-day liquid assets," and disclose information about portfolio liquidity and the use of lines of credit and inter-fund lending. The proposal also would allow mutual funds to use "swing pricing," a process of adjusting the net asset value of a fund's shares to pass on to purchasing or redeeming investors more of the costs associated with their trading activity.Return to text 10.The Dodd-Frank Act requires that standardized swaps that previously traded in over-the-counter (OTC) markets be cleared through central counterparties, and that large participants in standardized swap markets be subject to heightened regulation. These requirements are meant to address the vulnerabilities in the OTC derivatives market that were highlighted by the 2008 financial crisis. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and the SEC are tasked with implementing the Dodd-Frank Act provisions by defining registration and business-conduct requirements that apply to the clearing organizations, to large participants in the swap market, and to data repositories. The SEC and the CFTC have finalized or initiated the rulemaking process for many of these regulations. For instance, the CFTC issued the final rule on the registration of swap dealers and major swap participants in January 2012 (Commodity Futures Trading Commission, 2012), while the SEC issued the final rule on operational and risk-management requirements for clearing agencies in October 2012 (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2012).Return to text 11.The list of reforms in this section of the speech is not comprehensive and omits important steps taken by the private sector. For example, supervisory and industry efforts have reduced the amount of intraday credit provided by the two large clearing banks (JPMorgan Chase and Bank of New York Mellon), which should improve the resilience of the triparty repurchase agreement market. The industry has also undertaken important changes to bolster the resilience of its practices. For example, firms in many parts of the financial system have initiated notable improvements to their internal risk-management processes. See Joint Forum (2015) for examples of enhancements to credit risk practices that have been made by firms since the crisis. These enhancements include increased focus on stress tests, enhanced reporting of exposures to counterparties and to industries, and improved systems to enable more detailed and more timely reporting.Return to text 12.For further description of recent dynamics in the mortgage market, see Bhutta, Popper, and Ringo (forthcoming).Return to text 13.As highlighted in detail in the report about events in U.S. Treasury markets on October 15, 2014, the move toward increasingly electronic, algorithmic, and high-speed trading in the foreign exchange, equity, and Treasury securities markets is almost certainly changing some aspects of liquidity. See U.S. Treasury and others (2015), which includes the findings of staff from the Department of the Treasury, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the SEC, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. See also Dudley (2015).Return to text 14.See Claessens (2014) for a comprehensive list of macroprudential tools and their uses across countries. See also Kuttner and Shim (2013), who find stronger effects of policies like loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratio caps on housing credit relative to policies targeted at banks' balance sheets and thereby loan supply.Return to text 15.I am grateful to Michael Kiley of the Fed for this insight.Return to text 16.For more information on monetary policy and financial stability, see Svensson (2015).Return to text 17.See Ajello and others (2015) and Svensson (2015) for examples of recent research in this area.Return to text 18.See Kashyap and Stein (2012) and Frost and others (2015) for examples of research on these questions.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for August 31 and September 15, 2015. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 16-17, 2015. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 16-17, 2015:HTML|PDF
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York (via prerecorded video) I am pleased to be here with this distinguished group of market participants, academics, government officials, and many others who are vitally interested in the issues before us today.1I am sure that all of us recognize the importance of the U.S. Treasury markets to our economy and our financial system; indeed, to the world economy and the global financial system. As Bill just outlined, for the next two days, we will collectively address the most important questions facing the Treasury markets today.2Are there significant problems in these markets that are not likely to self-correct? More specifically, is liquidity in broad decline, or more prone to sudden disappearance? If so, what are the causes? And what are the costs and benefits of potential market-led or regulatory responses? The design of this conference is to provide a forum for differing perspectives on these issues. It has been one year since the events of October 15, 2014. Appropriately, the conference will begin with a review of the findings of the recent Joint Staff Report issued by the U.S. Department of Treasury, the Board of Governors, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.3The report analyzes in depth the unprecedented events and market conditions that day. It also shows clearly how dramatically the structure of Treasury markets has changed in recent years. New participants and new technologies have taken prominent roles in these markets, and long-time market participants have adopted new business models. Today's discussions will reflect this altered landscape, with panels on automated trading, market making, and the impacts that changes in Treasury markets have had on liquidity and on end users. My discussions with market participants and regulatory colleagues suggest a range of opinions about Treasury market liquidity. While most market participants perceive some reduction in liquidity, views on the severity of the situation seem to be more mixed. Some measures such as trade size and market depth have declined, and investors today have to employ increasingly sophisticated strategies to execute larger trades at a good price. Some other measures show no decline in overall market liquidity. However, we need to consider not just the average level of liquidity under normal trading conditions, but also the risk that liquidity may be more prone to disappearing at times when it is most needed, as it seemed to do on October 15. This concern is an important one. Because U.S. Treasury securities reflect the full faith and credit of our government, they are rightly considered risk-free. But the value of any security, even a U.S. Treasury, will reflect not just its inherent credit risk but also investors' faith in the markets where it is traded. We need investors to have full faith in thestructure and functioningof Treasury markets themselves. Treasury markets need to be as safe as the securities that trade on them. Episodes such as October 15, in which Treasury prices fluctuated wildly with no obvious reason, threaten to erode investor confidence. The growing list of similar events in equity and other markets underscores this concern. Confidence in Treasury markets helps to support demand for Treasury securities and keep our government's financing costs low. Households and firms and even foreign governments hold Treasury securities as a key form of savings in no small part because of their trust in their safety and liquidity. Financial firms have particular reasons to care about these markets. Many types of financial firms are represented here today, with diverse roles within Treasury markets. Since before the financial crisis, one of the driving narratives within financial markets has been the growing demand for safe assets. Many have argued that this demand helped to engender the crisis, as a variety of assets came to be accepted as risk-free when in fact they were anything but that. Treasury bills and bonds are about the only freely tradeable dollar-denominated assets that really can be calledsafe. We have a shared interest in guarding against an outcome where the Treasury market becomes a source of stress, rather than a safe haven in times of stress. And if declining market function did undermine confidence in Treasury securities, we would be putting at risk a key source of credit creation. Our financial system depends on high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) for collateral that is used by banks, dealers, CCPs, money market mutual funds, and countless others. If Treasury prices can fluctuate wildly at any time for no or little reason, then over time investors could require higher haircuts and regulators could see a need for even more HQLA. How can we protect and strengthen the structure of these markets? In tomorrow's session, several panels will discuss market structure, including potential risks to clearing and settlement infrastructure, and ask how current structures might be adapted to provide greater liquidity and better guard against liquidity risk. I would point to four important trends that have been driving the changing structure of these markets: first, advances in computerized trading and high-speed communications and the entry of new players using these technologies; second, the intensified prudential regulation and supervision of the systemically important banks that are the largest dealers; third, the banks' own re-evaluation of risk in the wake of the financial crisis; and fourth, the increasing importance of mutual funds and other asset managers. While markets will always continue to evolve, there is no reason to think these trends will suddenly reverse. In all likelihood, they are here to stay. Although post-crisis regulatory changes have likely increased the costs of market making, markets were already undergoing dramatic changes well before the crisis. High-frequency and algorithmic trading firms already accounted for a large and growing share of transactions in the interdealer market, altering the speed and nature of market making. As traditional dealers have lost market share, they have sought to remain competitive by internalizing a greater share of their customer trades, finding matches between their own customers and keeping those trades off the public interdealer markets. But internalization does not eliminate the need for a public market, which is where price discovery mainly occurs. Dealers need to place the orders that they cannot internalize onto that market, and at times of market stress such as on October 15, they will likely need to put most of their orders onto the public market. The current structure of the trading platforms in both the cash and futures markets is based on a central limit order book, which provides for continuous trading but also provides strong incentives to be the fastest. There may be adaptations of this market structure that could give greater emphasis to liquidity provision rather than a never-ending competition for more speed. Some of the panelists we'll hear from tomorrow argue that it may be possible to do so, for example by considering frequent batch auctions as an alternative to the central limit order book, or by placing minimum time limits on orders. Ideas such as these make me wonder whether it might collectively be possible to come to a compromise in which more trading is done directly on the public market, if at the same time the public market rules were adjusted to emphasize greater liquidity provision, and particularly more stable liquidity provision, over speed. Perhaps public-private forums such as this conference can help in achieving that type of cooperative approach. I look forward to hearing views on these ideas tomorrow. Treasury repo markets have also been undergoing structural changes. This is a good time to look at potential changes to the clearance and settlement infrastructure in these markets, as we will discuss tomorrow afternoon. We should take this opportunity to ask whether current market structures are well-suited to the new environment, or whether we should be aiming for a substantially different approach in the longer run. There is a tight link between funding liquidity in repo markets and market liquidity in cash and futures markets, so a healthy, liquid repo market is essential to the overall health of the market. However, regulatory changes have made repo activity more expensive.4There are currently a number of private proposals to expand the use of central clearing for repo markets that could help to reduce those costs. Since the crisis, reforms have supported greater use of clearing for a wide range of products, and I believe that greater clearing in Treasury repo markets could be beneficial. The conference will conclude tomorrow with a discussion of regulatory requirements in Treasury markets. Many point to post-crisis regulation as a key factor driving any recent decline in liquidity. Although regulation seems to have had little to do with the events of October 15, I would agree that it is one factor driving recent changes in market making. The same regulations have also greatly strengthened the major banks and made another financial crisis far less likely. In my view, we should be prepared to accept some increase in the cost of market making in order to improve our overall financial stability. That said, these regulations are new, and we should be willing to learn from experience. Regulatory requirements for Treasury markets may need to change over time to reflect a rapidly evolving market environment. Markets will adapt to new regulation and other developments. We all have a responsibilityto make sure that market and regulatory incentives appropriately encourage an evolution that will enhance market liquidity and functioning. I've been eagerly looking forward to this conference, in the belief that our discussions here can do just that. 1.These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.References to the "Treasury markets" refer to the interdealer cash and futures markets, unless otherwise specified.Return to text 3.Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014(PDF).Return to text 4.Regulatory efforts have also made tri-party repo infrastructure considerably safer by sharply reducing the market's reliance on discretionary extensions of intraday credit by the clearing banks and fostering improvements in market participants' liquidity and credit risk-management practices.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Group of Thirty International Banking Seminar, Lima, Peru The U.S. economy continues to grow at a moderate pace, a pace sufficient to generate ongoing improvements in the labor market. On average, payrolls have expanded about 200,000 per month so far this year, and the unemployment rate has declined to 5.1 percent, just a bit above Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' median estimate of the normal long-run level of unemployment. But there remain additional forms of slack in the labor market that are not fully captured by the standard unemployment rate. The labor force participation rate remains below most estimates of its underlying trend, and an unusually large number of people are working part time but would prefer to work full time. Moreover, nominal wage growth has remained subdued. Real wage growth has also been subdued, possibly reflecting the low rates of productivity growth in the United States economy during recent years. As you know, the last two months saw slower reported payroll gains of about 140,000 per month. While this step-down is somewhat disappointing, the pace of job growth is still sufficiently strong gradually to erode slack in the labor market, and the prospects for further labor market improvement look good overall. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the first half of 2015 is now estimated to have been at an annual rate of 2-1/4 percent, and private forecasters are projecting GDP to continue to rise, at a pace in the neighborhood of 2 percent, in the second half. Consumer spending has been rising solidly of late, likely a reflection of the boost to purchasing power from the lower oil prices as well as the ongoing job gains and a wealth-to-income ratio that remains high even after the recent declines in the stock market. Further, the negative effect of low oil prices on the growth of investment in the U.S. energy sector appears to be waning. The restraint on net exports stemming from the appreciation of the dollar over the past year, and from global developments more generally, may be a negative influence on GDP growth for somewhat longer, but that restraint is likely to continue to be outweighed by the other sources of growth. Although the labor market has been approaching estimates of maximum employment, inflation has been well below the FOMC's 2 percent objective. Inflation has been held down by the declines in crude oil prices over the past year, and the stronger dollar is exerting downward pressure on U.S. inflation as well. Year-over-year changes in headline personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices have been running only a little above zero, and core inflation is at about 1-1/4 percent. But for reasons discussed at length in Janet Yellen's recent speech at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored, inflation is likely to move back toward 2 percent as the transitory effects of oil prices and the dollar fade, and as the economic expansion continues. What about Monetary Policy?In support of our dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability, the Federal Reserve has maintained a highly accommodative monetary policy stance since the financial crisis; this policy has fostered the marked improvement in labor market conditions that we have seen and has helped check undesirable disinflationary pressures. In its statement at the end of the September meeting, the FOMC noted that it anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen some further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to 2 percent over the medium term. In the SEP, the Summary of Economic Projections prepared by FOMC participants in advance of the September meeting, most participants, myself included, anticipated that achieving these conditions would entail an initial increase in the federal funds rate later this year. Of course, that assessment was premised on the assumption of continued solid economic growth and further improvement in the labor market, which are key factors supporting our expectation that inflation will rise to our 2 percent objective. A great deal of market attention has focused on the exact timing of our first increase in the funds rate, but what matters for overall financial conditions is expectations for the entire trajectory of short-term interest rates. In that regard, most members of the FOMC anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant raising short-term interest rates at a gradual pace over the next few years. However, that is an expectation, not a commitment. Both the timing of the first rate increase and any subsequent adjustments to the federal funds rate target will depend critically on future developments in the economy. For example, it is conceivable that inflation may rise more slowly or rapidly than we currently anticipate. Should such developments occur, we would adjust the stance of policy in response. Considerable uncertainties also surround the outlook for economic activity. For example, we cannot be certain about the pace at which the headwinds still restraining the domestic economy will continue to fade. Moreover, net exports have served as a significant drag on growth over the past year and recent global economic and financial developments highlight the risk that a slowdown in foreign growth might restrain U.S. economic activity somewhat further. The decision not to raise the interest rate in September has generated a great deal of discussion at this meeting of the IMF and World Bank and elsewhere. The decision was based, in part, on a desire to have more time to appraise recent developments in the global economy, especially those originating in the Chinese economy, before beginning the normalization of interest rates. There may well have been more comments on foreign economic developments in recent FOMC statements than was common in the past. That is natural given the increasing influence of foreign economic developments on the United States economy, both through imports and exports, and through capital account developments. The September statement notes that we are monitoring developments abroad. Nonetheless, we do not currently anticipate that the effects of these recent developments on the U.S. economy will prove to be large enough to have a significant effect on the path for policy. That said, recent employment reports have been somewhat disappointing and, as always, we are closely monitoring developments that could affect our sense of the economic outlook and the risks surrounding that outlook. Among these risks is the possibility that shifting expectations concerning U.S. interest rates could lead to more volatility in financial markets and the value of the dollar, intensifying spillovers to other economies, including emerging market economies. We are mindful that this could be the case even though monetary policy normalization in the United States will only occur in the context of a strengthening U.S. economy, and even though it has been clear from conversations at this conference that many officials of emerging market and other countries feel sufficiently forewarned and prepared for them to want us "to just do it." However, we have to remain cognizant of the risks ahead. We remain committed to communicating our intentions as clearly as possible--but not more clearly than the facts warrant--to assist market participants, be they in the private or the public sector, in understanding our intentions as they make their investment decisions.