Federal Reserve Board of GovernorsConsumer Financial Protection Bureau The Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) today announced the dollar thresholds in Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) that will apply for determining exempt consumer credit and lease transactions in 2016. These thresholds are set pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) amendments to the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act that require adjusting these thresholds annually based on the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). If there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the Federal Reserve Board and the CFPB will not adjust this exemption threshold from the prior year. Transactions at or below the thresholds are subject to the protections of the regulations. Based on the annual percentage decrease in the CPI-W as of June 1, 2015, the protections of the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act generally will apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases of $54,600 or less in 2016--the same thresholds that applied in 2015. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property (such as mortgages) are subject to the Truth in Lending Act regardless of the amount of the loan. Although the Dodd-Frank Act generally transferred rulemaking authority under the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to the CFPB, the Federal Reserve Board retains authority to issue rules for certain motor vehicle dealers. Therefore, the agencies are issuing these notices jointly. The attached notices will be published shortly in theFederal Register. Federal Register notice - Regulation M:HTML|PDF Federal Register notice - Regulation Z:HTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal banking agencies will hold an outreach meeting on Wednesday, December 2, 2015, at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in Arlington, Va., as part of their regulatory review under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA). The meeting is the sixth and final in a series of outreach sessions that the FDIC, the Federal Reserve Board, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency have held throughout the country. The meeting will feature panel presentations by bankers and consumer and community groups. Interested people may also present their views on any of the 12 categories of regulations listed onhttp://egrpra.ffiec.gov. FDIC Chairman Martin J. Gruenberg, Comptroller of the Currency Thomas J. Curry, and Federal Reserve Governor Daniel K. Tarullo are scheduled to attend. Stephen C. Taylor, acting commissioner of the District of Columbia Department of Insurance, Securities and Banking, and E. Joseph Face, Jr., commissioner of the Virginia Bureau of Financial Institutions, are also scheduled to attend. Other state banking regulators are invited to participate through the State Liaison Committee of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). The meeting will be webcast live athttp://egrpra.ffiec.gov. Online viewers will be able to submit written comments using the text chat feature at any time during the presentations. In addition, a toll-free telephone number also will be provided for people who would like to listen to the meeting, and who may choose later to submit written comments. EGRPRA requires the agencies, along with the FFIEC, to conduct a review at least every 10 years to identify outdated or otherwise unnecessary regulations. The agencies have divided their regulations into 12 categories and requested comments in theFederal Registerfor nine categories. The agencies will request comment on the remaining three categories later this year. The previously publishedFederal Registernotices are available athttp://egrpra.ffiec.gov/federal-register-notices/fedreg-index.html. As previously announced, the agencies have expanded the scope of the EGRPRA review to cover newly issued regulations. Comments will be accepted on all agency rules that are finalized before the end of the year. Details on the Arlington, Va., meeting, including registration information and the agenda, are available on the EGRPRA Web site,http://egrpra.ffiec.gov/outreach/outreach-index.html. The five previous outreach meetings were held in Los Angeles on December 2, 2014; Dallas on February 4, 2015; Boston on May 4, 2015; Kansas City, Mo., on August 4, 2015; and Chicago on October 19, 2015.
Consumer Financial Protection BureauFederal Reserve Board of GovernorsOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), Federal Reserve Board, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) today announced that the threshold for exempting loans from special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans during 2016 will remain $25,500. The threshold amount will be effective January 1, 2016, and is the same threshold that applied in 2015--based on the annual percentage decrease in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) as of June 1, 2015. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 amended the Truth in Lending Act to add special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans, including a requirement that creditors obtain a written appraisal based on a physical visit to the home's interior before making a higher-priced mortgage loan. The rules implementing these requirements contain an exemption for loans of $25,000 or less and also provide that the exemption threshold will be adjusted annually to reflect increases in the CPI-W. If there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the agencies will not adjust this exemption threshold from the prior year. TheFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Register notice:HTML|PDF
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the 2015 Herbert Stein Memorial Lecture National Economists Club, Washington, D.C. It is a pleasure to speak to you tonight and an honor to deliver the 2015 Herbert Stein Memorial Lecture.1My subject tonight is central bank independence. But before turning to that topic, I would like to explain why this is a special occasion for me. My first real-world involvement in economic policy began late in 1983, when I was invited by Secretary of State George Shultz to join a small team to advise him on the stabilization of the Israeli economy, then suffering from triple-digit inflation and other ills. Herb Stein, formerly chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers under Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford, was also on that team. Herb was 67, wise, witty, and experienced, and I was 40 years old, with a lot still to learn. By mid-1984, the advisory team consisted of only Herb and me. The experience of working for George Shultz, in partnership with Herb, was not only wonderful, but it also changed my life, for after that I had the policy bug. I believe our team made a real contribution to the success of the Israeli stabilization program that began in mid-1985 and which is now recognized as a critical turning point in Israel's economic history. But tonight is not the occasion to retell that story. Rather, let me tell you a bit about Herb via what should be called Herbisms. The most famous one is "If something cannot go on forever, it will stop," which comes in very handy when trying to persuade someone to stop implementing policies that are driving their economy straight into a stone wall. A second Herbism is extremely useful when discussing economic growth or interest rates: "The difference between a growth rate of 1 percent and a growth rate of 2 percent is 100 percent." I have many more but will stop at three. While we were having dinner in a Washington, D.C. restaurant sometime in 1984, Herb asked me what was happening in the Israeli economy. I replied with an excellent exposition of monetary and fiscal policies, the accelerating inflation rate, all of the mistakes that were being made, who was doing what to whom, and more. If I had been a graduate student, I would certainly have received an A. Herb's response was not to congratulate me on the excellence of my analysis, but to ask gently, "Yes, but what do we want them todo?" That is a question one should always remember to ask when trying to advise a policymaker. In brief, I learned an enormous amount from working with Herb and soon came to admire him as a man of strong but softly stated principles and immense decency, with whom it was a pleasure and privilege to be able to work and to talk--and, of course, to joke, for he had a great sense of humor. If you want to know more about him, go to Google, look up Herbert Stein, and find the speech that his son Ben delivered at the first Herbert Stein Memorial Lecture, in 2012. And I'm very happy indeed that Herb and Mildred's two children, Rachel and Ben, are here tonight. Central Bank Independence over the Past 20 YearsThe modern academic literature on central bank independence developed largely in the late 1980s and the first half of the 1990s. The world of central banking was very different then--a fact brought home by recalling that, in the early 1990s, the interest rate in the United Kingdom was still set by the Treasury and not the Bank of England. At its tercentenary celebration in 1994, the Bank of England organized a symposium on central banking, motivated in part by its desire for independence from the Treasury and the modernization of its legal structure. I gave a speech on monetary policy independence and modern central banking at the tercentenary celebration, in which I made the case for central bank independence and concluded with the sentence "On her 300th birthday, it is time to allow the Old Lady to take on the responsibilities of independence."2At that time, visitors to Britain who raised the issue of independence for the Bank of England were typically treated to a lecture on why that was not possible in the British political system. Nonetheless, independence was granted to the Bank of England by a newly elected Labour government in 1997, and subsequent researchers have linked this independence to declines in both longer-term inflation risk premiums and inflation expectations.3 The literature I discussed in my 1994 speech was developed with an emphasis--based on post‑World War II experience--on the problem of preventing high inflation. But we are no longer in that era. The inflation problem with which most of the leading economies are dealing is inflation that is too low, not too high. Further, now that we have had time to understand better the damage that the global financial crisis has wreaked on the world economy, and after much research on the effect of major financial crises on growth and on the dynamics of business cycles, we are focused to a much greater extent than in the past on the importance of financial stability. I would like to use our time tonight to reflect on how the analysis of central bank independence of 20 years ago should be updated to reflect the different economic environment in which we are now living. I shall argue that, although high inflation is not the immediate concern that it was in the 1980s and 1990s, monetary policy independence remains of the highest importance, and that it is important that we preserve monetary policy independence to help foster desirable macroeconomic outcomes and financial stability. The Case for Monetary Policy IndependenceBy 1994, both theory and evidence suggested that more independent central banks deliver better outcomes, particularly lower and more stable inflation. The theoretical case for monetary policy independence focused on countering inflationary biases that were likely to exert themselves in the absence of an independent central bank. Such a bias could result from political pressure to boost output in the short run--for example, before an election--or to use a central bank's power to issue money as a means to finance government spending. Even in the absence of political interference, inflationary bias can result from the problem of dynamic inconsistency if central banks cannot credibly commit to keeping inflation low.4 On the empirical side, many scholars have studied whether monetary policy independence fosters low and stable inflation in practice. Summarizing roughly 25 years of research in his 2008 paper, Alex Cukierman observed that "the evidence is consistent with the conclusion that inflation and actual [independence] are negatively related in both developed and developing countries."5Further, monetary policy independence does not appear to be associated with adverse economic consequences. In particular, to the extent that independence of the central bank helps restrain inflation, it does not appear to result in significantly more volatile output, as some theoretical models had predicted.6Cukierman goes on to note, however, that the causality from independence to lower inflation is not clear, and several studies over the past 10 to 15 years have found conflicting results on that front.7 Let me touch on four issues that are now an essential part of the understanding of central bank independence, but that were less prominent in the 1990s. First, there is a distinction between the termsmonetary policy independenceandcentral bank independence. In the literature that developed before the global financial crisis, central bank independence referred to independence from political influencesin the setting of monetary policy. But many central banks have roles outside monetary policy--in particular, bank regulation and supervision. These roles are in certain cases granted their own level of independence, a subject to which I shall return later in the lecture. Second, there is a useful distinction betweengoal independenceandinstrument independence.8A central bank's mission--its purposes and goals--are set out in its founding legislation and subsequent refinements. The purposes may be general, such as preserving the value of the currency, maintaining the stability of the financial system, and, in some countries, promoting economic growth or employment. These purposes have typically to be translated into operational goals--for instance, maintaining an inflation rate of 2 percent. The question of goal independence is whether the central bank itself establishes the operational goals or whether some other official body does so. Examples of such bodies are the finance ministry or the cabinet. If the central bank sets the operational goals, it hasgoal independence; if those operational goals are defined by some other body, the central bank does not have goal independence. The academic literature was developed during the early 1990s when the Federal Reserve had already been given its statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability. After careful deliberation, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) clarified that inflation of 2 percent is most consistent with the goal of price stability. The powers and instruments the central bank has at its command are also generally specified in legislation. If the central bank has control over the policy instruments it has been assigned, it hasinstrument independence. Virtually every central bank has the authority to engage in asset market transactions, with the goal of setting a specific--typically short-term--interest rate or, closely related, of controlling the money supply. There have been proposals--for instance, by Milton Friedman--that the central bank be required to cause the money supply to grow at a constant rate, 4 percent. Such a central bank would have neither instrument nor goal independence. Third, the power to set the short-term interest rate or the money supply is a formidable one. Well exercised, that power can support the stability of both prices and output; poorly exercised, it can create economic havoc. Any institution to which such responsibility has been delegated must be held accountable for carrying out its mission effectively and efficiently. In almost all countries, the central bank's accountability is enforced by requiring regular reporting on monetary policy actions and outcomes to the legislature, to the executive branch, and to the public. The formal centerpiece of the required reporting is generally exercised by the regular publication and presentation to the legislature of an inflation report or monetary policy report, followed by public hearings on the report and related matters.Accountability can be further enhanced by increasing the transparency of central banks about their operations. Accountability of the central bank helps deal with the potential conflict between the benefits of shielding the central bank from political pressures and the fact that unelected officials--albeit officials who are commonly nominated by the government and, in many cases, confirmed by the legislative branch--are determining policies critical to the country's economy. Fourth, there is an argument in the profession about the difficulties of presenting a central bank with more than one policy goal. The argument is often put as "You need as many instruments of policy as you have policy goals," a result often attributed to Jan Tinbergen, co-winner of the first Nobel Prize in economics.9Tinbergen's result is correct if the targets have to be achieved exactly, but it is not correct if there are tradeoffs among the goals of policy, and the central bank utility or loss function includes the costs of missing each of the targets and the interactions among them.10 Based on the Tinbergen result, central banks whose mandated goals are narrow, such as having only an inflation target, are often considered to have more independence than central banks with additional targets or with multifaceted objectives. In practice, I doubt that any central bank targets inflation to the exclusion of all other outcomes. For example, the Bundesbank was generally thought to have a very strict focus on inflation in the years in which it had an independent monetary policy before the founding of the European Central Bank. But researchers who have studied the Bundesbank's policies of that period have concluded that it likely responded to deviations from target of both expected inflation and output growth.11I do not regard the Fed's dual mandate, which gives it both an inflation and an employment goal, as causing significant difficulties for Fed decisionmakers, and note that if the Fed had only an inflation target and found itself in the situation we find ourselves today, it would face precisely the same difficulty we currently face--how to get the inflation rate up to meet the inflation target. The Fed TodayThe Federal Reserve System's current mandate of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates was established by an amendment to the Federal Reserve Act in 1977. The Congress, in effect, recognized the principle of instrument independence by requiring that the Federal Reserve Board report semiannually directly to the Congress about the Board's and the FOMC's plans to meet these objectives and by exempting monetary policy from Government Accountability Office (GAO) review as part of the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978. By passing these two pieces of legislation, the Congress put in place a mechanism for holding the Fed accountable for meeting its statutory mandate. A key venue for reviewing the Fed's approach to pursuing its mandated goals remains the semiannual testimony of the Chair, along with the associatedMonetary Policy Report.In general, the provision of such an accountability structure is important, since, as previously noted, accountability to elected officials and the public is an essential complement to central bank independence.12 The Federal Reserve's accountability structure has been largely stable since the 1970s reforms. At the same time, the Federal Reserve has greatly augmented its public communications about its economic outlook and its policy strategy. Over the past 20 years, this augmentation includes the release, beginning in 1994, of postmeeting statements explaining policy decisions.13Other changes include the inclusion of roll call votes in the postmeeting statements in 2002; the release of the FOMC minutes three weeks after the meeting rather than following the subsequent meeting, beginning in 2005; the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections in 2007 and the inclusion in 2012 of the "dot plot" showing FOMC participants' federal funds rate projections; the Chair's quarterly postmeeting press conferences in 2011; and the issuance in 2012 of the FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which is reaffirmed every January.14 This increased transparency has been a key complement to the Fed's independence and accountability by regularly demonstrating that the Fed has been appropriately pursuing its mandated goals. Transparency can also make monetary policy more effective by helping to guide the public's expectations and clarify the Committee's policy intentions.15 The Fed, like other central banks, does appropriately retain some matters for private discussions. These discussions often contain market-sensitive information and may, by necessity, involve frank assessments of market- or even firm-specific conditions as well as outside-the-box ideas needed to deal with evolving economic situations. These exceptions reflect the view that transparency should preserve the ability of policymakers to think out of the box and should not inhibit free give-and-take and the testing of ideas that is essential to reaching good decisions. Transcripts of the FOMC's meetings are made available with a five-year lag, allowing researchers to study the closed-door discussions after an appropriate time has elapsed. Central Bank Independence and New ChallengesLow inflationThe basic governance structure set up in the late 1970s was envisioned as a means to monitor and encourage the Federal Reserve to pursue its mandates, and an aggressive and successful campaign to bring down inflation followed. Indeed, the high inflation of the 1970s and early 1980s was one of the primary motivations for the broadening and deepening of monetary policy independence worldwide. Today consumer price inflation remainsbelowthe FOMC's objective of 2 percent. According to the personal consumption expenditures index, the 12-month change in core prices (prices excluding the food and energy categories) has been around 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent since the beginning of 2013. At the September 2015 FOMC meeting, participants saw inflation as very low this year but expected it to pick up notably next year and rise further in 2017.16 Although the presence of low inflation makes the traditional inflationary bias less of an immediate concern, actions that would compromise monetary policy independence would still be dangerous. The anchoring of inflation expectations has been a hard-fought product of the disinflation of the 1980s and subsequent Federal Reserve policy. Today, even with low inflation, the balance of evidence suggests that survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have likely remained fairly steady and consistent with our objective. The anchoring of these expectations is due in great part, I suspect, to the continued credibility of the Fed's independence from political interference, along with the adoption of the explicit inflation target of 2 percent. To put this point clearly, the concern over the effects of political interference in monetary policy remains as valid in practice when inflation is too low as when inflation is too high. That is primarily because political horizons are typically shorter than those that need to be taken into account in making monetary policy decisions. Recently, there have been proposals to restrict monetary policy independence. One proposal, labeled "Audit the Fed," would subject the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy to unlimited congressionalpolicyaudits.17(Financial audits are already conducted regularly.)18 Another proposal would require the FOMC to adopt and follow a specific equation in setting monetary policy and to face immediate congressional hearings and investigation by the GAO whenever the FOMC deviates from the policy dictated by that equation.19In the terminology I have used in this speech, these proposals could accurately be described more as restrictions on the Federal Reserve's instrument independence than as measures that would increase transparency or accountability. They would thus represent a departure from the modern governance structure that has come to characterize the Fed and leading central banks around the world. Since the Federal Reserve is already very transparent about its monetary policy decisions, review by the GAO would not meaningfully augment communications with the public but would instead reflect an effort by the Congress to influence the Fed's policy decisions. We should recognize that if a GAO review and, likely, a congressional hearing were held every time a monetary policy decision deviated from a simple equation, as has been proposed, the Fed would be subjected to the very sort of political pressure from which experience suggests central banks should be independent. Instead, a modern governance framework calls for the political system to give the central bank a mandate along with the operational freedom to pursue that mandate, supported by transparency and accountability.20 In addition, using a central bank as a source of revenue to cover the cost of a fiscal program is dangerous to its independence. For example, recently some have proposed that the Fed be used to provide revenue to fund specific government initiatives, which amounts to quasi-fiscal policy, with manifold implications for central bank independence as well as for the quality of fiscal policy decisions.21 The Great Recession and the use of unconventional central bank instrumentsThe basic delegated-authority governance framework I have described--mandated goals, instrument independence, and accountability--has allowed the Federal Reserve to respond to dramatic changes in the economic environment over the past 20 years. In particular, during the Great Recession, instrument independence afforded the FOMC the flexibility needed to develop new tools that could address the large and extraordinary challenges it faced in pursuing its dual mandate. The legislative proposals just discussed appear to be motivated by the belief that the Fed's response during the crisis was somehow ineffective or inappropriate. In fact, the Fed's response was a carefully considered exercise of instrument independence that was effective, appropriate, and necessary in light of the congressional mandate to which it is held accountable. Indeed, without those operations, the U.S. economy would have suffered a significantly deeper and longer recession than the very substantial recession we did suffer. Financial stabilityThe research on monetary policy independence at the end of the 20th century was conducted on the assumption that the central bank was focused on its direct macroeconomic mandates such as inflation and employment. After the global financial crisis, we cannot ignore the fact that central banks are typically tasked with multiple responsibilities, often among them, preserving or contributing to financial stability. These responsibilities do not represent a new mandate--they were the impetus behind the 1913 legislation setting up the Federal Reserve System and, in a somewhat subordinate role, behind the legislation setting up both the independent Bank of England and the European Central Bank as well as many other central banks whose legal framework has changed in the past two decades.22But these responsibilities have received far more emphasis following the financial crisis. As has long been known, a central bank must take into account risks to financial stability if it is to help achieve good macroeconomic performance.23 Could central bank involvement in dealing with potential financial instability present a challenge to central bank independence? In answering this question, we need to consider an important difference between the use of traditional monetary policy and the use of macroprudential policies. Macroprudential policies are typically aimed at a specific sector. Often the housing sector is disproportionately involved in financial crises. In the face of an incipient bubble growing in the housing sector at a time when inflation and unemployment are at their target levels, the first instinct of regulators and others--the central bank among them--is to turn to macroprudential instruments, such as constraints on the loan-to-value ratio or the debt-service-to-income ratio of borrowers. However, doing so would affect particular sectors of the population. This difficulty can, to some extent, be dealt with by tailoring the macroprudential measures in ways that soften their effect on groups of particular concern.24Nonetheless, the housing issue is often politically important, and it could be argued that the political authorities should have some representation in discussing measures taken to deal with it. This representation can be done as in the British case by having a separate committee to make financial stability decisions, the Financial Policy Committee (FPC), located in the Bank of England, whose membership is different from that of the Monetary Policy Committee and on which also sits a nonvoting member from the U.K. Treasury.25In the U.S. case, the Financial Stability Oversight Council is a coordinating committee, with all of the principal regulators as members and the Secretary of the Treasury as chairman. Because the member regulatory agencies are independent, coordination among them--the function of the FSOC--is critical to the financial regulatory system's success in addressing risks to financial stability. There are many other models for the governance of the responsibility for financial stability. For instance, in Australia, there is a single integrated prudential regulator, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority, as well as the Council of Financial Regulators, whose chair is the governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia and whose members are drawn from the central bank, the prudential authority, the Australian Securities and Investments Commission, and the Treasury. These various approaches each have their own merits, but the ultimate stress test for any particular institutional structure will, of course, come as these new governance structures face the challenges of dealing with financial stress and potential financial crises. The structure of the FPC ensures that the Bank of England is nearly fully independent with regard to financial stability.26The Fed does not have that independence, even though it has been assigned the responsibility of helping to ensure financial stability. I have heard foreign central bankers argue, "You can't be independent in one function (monetary policy) and not independent in another (financial stability), without the nonindependence with respect to financial stability seeping over to weaken the independence of monetary policy." I do not believe this is correct--as proof, I think each of us feels and is more independent in some of the decisions we make about our lives than in others. Thus, I think the Fed retains its monetary policy independence despite its nonindependence with respect to financial stability policy. No doubt economists will long debate the appropriate institutional structure for financial stability authority. Because financial markets and political institutions differ widely across economies and because historical accident affects the current situation in each, it seems unlikely that any single set of arrangements will be optimal in all cases.27In any event, as time and future potential crises go by--and may they be few and far between--there will be far more experience on which to base the choice of regulatory system, and changes will quite likely be made.28 Finally, as I mentioned at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston last month, as a result of the currently limited nature of the macroprudential toolkit, there could be times when adjustments in monetary policy itself should be discussed as a means to curb emerging risks to financial stability. Alternatively, financial stability considerations can sometimes point to the need for accommodative monetary policy. For example, the accommodative U.S. monetary policy since 2008 has helped repair the balance sheets of households, nonfinancial firms, and the financial sector. The challenge to monetary policy independence then derives from the use of a single tool to achieve multiple outcomes across different time horizons. I do not regard this challenge as a serious constraint on monetary policy independence, but rather as an inherent aspect of the fact that monetary policy works in the first instance through financial markets and financial institutions. The multifaceted nature of macroprudential policy and its interactions with the governance of monetary policy have important consequences that are not yet fully understood. The interaction between financial stability and monetary policy, its implications for central bank independence, and the resulting effects on macroeconomic outcomes deserve extensive study that is already well under way but probably still in its infancy. ConclusionThe economic environment has changed considerably in the quarter-century since economists began the careful study of the theory and evidence on the potential benefits of monetary policy independence. Over that time, central bankers have had to make use of their tools--some of them not used previously--to meet unprecedented challenges. Without the independence to pursue their mandates, this work would have been impossible. But following the global financial crisis, we are living in a different world, one in which issues of financial stability have moved out of the shadows and into the center of our concerns. The resulting challenges are only beginning to be understood--and they need to be understood and taken seriously if we are to reduce the probability of future financial crises. ReferencesBank for International Settlements (2003). "Fiscal Issues and Central Banking in Emerging Economies (PDF)," BIS Papers Series 20. Basel, Switzerland: BIS, October. Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983). "Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 12 (July), pp. 101-21. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 16-17, 2015," press release, October 8. Capie, Forrest, Stanley Fischer, Charles Goodhart, and Norbert Schnadt (1994).The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England.Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Cecchetti, Stephen G. (2013). "Central Bank Independence--A Path Less Clear (PDF)," remarks prepared for the International Conference held to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the autonomy of the Bank of Mexico, Mexico City, October 14. Clarida, Richard, and Mark Gertler (1997). "How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary Policy," in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 363-412. Clement, Piet (2010). "The Term 'Macroprudential': Origins and Evolution (PDF),"BIS Quarterly Review(March), pp. 59-67. Crockett, Andrew (2000). "Marrying the Micro- and Macro-Prudential Dimensions of Financial Stability (PDF)," remarks before the Eleventh International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Basel, Switzerland, September 21. Crowe, Christopher, and Ellen Meade (2008). "Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness,"European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 24 (December), pp. 763-77. Cukierman, Alex (2008). "Central Bank Independence and Monetary Policymaking Institutions--Past, Present and Future,"European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 24 (December), pp. 722-36. Cukierman, Alex, Pantelis Kalaitzidakis, Lawrence H. Summers, and Steven B. Webb (1993). "Central Bank Independence, Growth, Investment, and Real Rates."Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 95-140. Cukierman, Alex, Steven B. Webb, and Bilin Neyapti (1992). "Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes,"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 6 (September), pp. 353-98. Debelle, Guy, and Stanley Fischer (1994). "How Independent Should a Central Bank Be? (PDF)" proceedings of a conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Falmouth, Mass., June, pp. 195-221. Dincer, N. Nergiz, and Barry Eichengreen (2014). "Central Bank Transparency and Independence: Updates and New Measures,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 10 (March), pp. 189-253. Dixit, Avinash K. (1996).The Making of Economic Policy: A Transaction-Cost Politics Perspective.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Fischer, Stanley (1995a). "Modern Approaches to Central Banking," NBER Working Paper Series 5064. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March. -------- (1995b). "Central-Bank Independence Revisited,"American Economic Review, vol. 85 (May), pp. 201-06. -------- (2010). Contribution to panel discussion, in Christopher Kent and Michael Robson, eds.,Reserve Bank of Australia 50th Anniversary Symposium(PDF).Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, pp. 38-41, . -------- (2014). "Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We?" speech delivered as the Martin Feldstein Lecture, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. -------- (2015). "Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 2. Forder, James (1996). "On the Assessment and Implementation of 'Institutional' Remedies,"Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 48 (January), pp. 39-51. Gerberding, Christina, Andreas Worms, and Franz Seitz (2004). "How the Bundesbank Really Conducted Monetary Policy: An Analysis Based on Real-Time Data (PDF)," Discussion Paper Series 1: Studies of the Economic Research Centre 25/2004. Frankfurt: Deutsche Bundesbank. Joyce, Michael A. S., Peter Lildholdt, and Steffen Sorensen (2010). "Extracting Inflation Expectations and Inflation Risk Premia from the Term Structure: A Joint Model of the UK Nominal and Real Yield Curves,"Journal of Banking & Finance, vol. 34 (February), pp. 281-94. Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977). "Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (June), pp. 473-92. Posen, Adam S. (1995). "Declarations Are Not Enough: Financial Sector Sources of Central Bank Independence," in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 10. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 253‑74. Powell, Jerome (2015). "'Audit the Fed' and Other Proposals," speech delivered at the Catholic University of America, Columbus School of Law, Washington, February 9. Rogoff, Kenneth (1985). "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 100 (November), pp. 1169-89. Stein, Herbert (1969).The Fiscal Revolution in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Svensson, Lars (2015). "Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind," presentation delivered at the AQR Institute of Asset Management event "Perspectives: Unprecedented Monetary Policy Intervention," London Business School, London, June 25. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2014). "Monetary Policy and Financial Stability," speech delivered at the 30th Annual National Association for Business Economics Economic Policy Conference, Arlington, Va., February 25. Tinbergen, Jan (1952).On the Theory of Economic Policy. Amsterdam: North‐Holland. Walsh, Carl E. (1995). "Optimal Contracts for Central Bankers,"American Economic Review, vol. 85 (March), pp. 150-67. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis, Ellen Meade, and Jonathan Rose for their help in preparing this speech.Return to text 2.The lecture, titled "Modern Central Banking," was printed in the conference volume, Capie and others (1994). A standalone version, including revisions following the discussion at that conference, is available as Fischer (1995a).Return to text 3.See Joyce, Lildholdt, and Sorensen (2010).Return to text 4.These theoretical results are demonstrated in the seminal work of Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983).Return to text 5.See Cukierman (2008).Return to text 6.See Rogoff (1985) for a well-known model that predicted such an outcome.Return to text 7.See also Posen (1995) and Forder (1996).Return to text 8.This distinction was introduced by Guy Debelle and the present author; see Debelle and Fischer (1994) and Fischer (1995a).Return to text 9.See Tinbergen (1952).Return to text 10.For further discussion of this issue, see Fischer (2010), a set of comments given as part of a panel at the Reserve Bank of Australia 50th Anniversary Symposium.Return to text 11.See Gerberding, Worms, and Seitz (2004); and Clarida and Gertler (1997).Return to text 12.Not only do the principles of democracy demand such accountability, but economic theory also points to accountability as one way of addressing an inflationary bias that might otherwise take hold. I have in mind here the principal-agent model of Walsh (1995).Return to text 13.Prior to 1999, the FOMC released statements only after meetings at which the federal funds rate was changed. Over time, the statements released by the FOMC have become more informative about the Committee's views of the economy and policy.Return to text 14.There are a number of additional transparency improvements that are less directly related to monetary policy communication, including detailed reports on liquidity facility and lending programs during the financial crisis, which can be found on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_reports.htm. In addition, a full list of securities held in the System Open Market Account portfolio is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website atwww.newyorkfed.org/markets/soma/sysopen_accholdings.html.Return to text 15.Given the benefits of transparency, central banks around the world have also greatly augmented their public communications over the past 20 years. Recent papers measuring transparency across central banks include Crowe and Meade (2008) and Dincer and Eichengreen (2014). Dincer and Eichengreen (2014) conclude that almost all of the central banks around the world had greater transparency in 2010 than they did in 1998. See for example Figure 1 in that paper. These measures of transparency cover a variety of factors, including the openness about policy objectives and economic data, disclosures about the procedures used in deliberations, the speed of such disclosures, and transparency about the operational aspects of meeting targets.Return to text 16.See the Summary of Economic Projections submitted in conjunction with the September 2015 FOMC meeting, an addendum to Board of Governors (2015).Return to text 17.See Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015, H.R. 24, 114 Cong. (2015); and Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015, S. 264, 114 Cong. (2015).Return to text 18.Audited financial statements for the Federal Reserve System can be found on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm.Return to text 19.See the Fed Oversight Reform and Modernization Act of 2015, H.R. 3189, 114 Cong. (2015).Return to text 20.For additional discussion of these proposals, see Powell (2015).Return to text 21.Discussions and descriptions of issues related to central banking remittances to fiscal authorities and the challenges involved are discussed in Bank for International Settlements (2003), particularly the chapter "Central Bank Balance Sheets and Fiscal Operations."Return to text 22.Recall that the Federal Reserve was itself created in response to a severe financial panic, the Panic of 1907. This panic led to the creation of the National Monetary Commission, whose 1911 report was a major factor in the creation of the Federal Reserve Act, signed into law in 1913.Return to text 23.See, for example, Tarullo (2014).Return to text 24.The use of the federal funds rate also affects particular sectors more than others--but that effect is softened by being spread over the entire economy.Return to text 25.A few of the members--namely, the governor and deputy governors of the Bank of England--are on both the Monetary Policy Committee and the FPC, but the remaining members do not overlap. The FPC members are the governor, three of the deputy governors, the chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority, the bank's executive director for financial stability strategy and risk, four external members appointed by the chancellor, and a nonvoting representative of the Treasury. The current membership of the FPC is available on the Bank of England's website atwww.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Pages/people/fpc.aspx.Return to text 26.The macroprudential tools that the FPC may use were granted to it by specific acts of the U.K. Parliament. In addition, each year, the chancellor remits a letter to the FPC on issues that are of particular relevance to the government.Return to text 27.This is an instance of a general point made by Avinash Dixit (1996).Return to text 28.In the U.K. case, all responsibility for supervision of the financial sector was taken away from the Bank of England shortly after it was given its monetary policy independence; it was returned to the bank in the reforms implemented after the outbreak of the global financial crisis.Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Clearing House Annual Conference, New York, New York Thank you for inviting me to speak today.1I attended The Clearing House annual meeting in 2013 and spoke about financial market infrastructure reform. Two years have passed, and this is a good opportunity to take stock. I'll start by reviewing the progress made in strengthening central counterparty (or CCP) clearing, and then offer some thoughts on expanded central clearing for repurchase agreement (or repo) markets--an area of significant current interest. In the years leading up to the financial crisis, the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives market experienced rapid growth and an underappreciated buildup of risk. The huge losses suffered by the American International Group (AIG) on its derivatives positions and the lack of transparency about the exposures of AIG's counterparties were major accelerants to the financial panic that reached its acute phase in September 2008. In response, in 2009 the Group of Twenty nations committed to moving standardized derivatives to central clearing, and to requiring posting of margin for derivatives that are not centrally cleared.2 I am a believer in the potential benefits of central clearing under the right circumstances. But central clearing is not a panacea. Charts similar to that inFigure 1are often used to illustrate the netting of exposures and simplification that central clearing can bring to an OTC market. The tangled and highly opaque picture of a purely bilateral market is replaced by the neat hub-and-spoke network in which a CCP is buyer to every seller, and seller to every buyer, allowing netting and greater transparency for participants and regulators alike. Of course, reality is not so elegant, asFigure 2illustrates. There are multiple CCPs, even within product classes, and major dealers act as clearing members across a broad network of CCPs. Clearing members also perform a range of services for CCPs, including custody, liquidity provision, and settlement. By design, increased central clearing will concentrate risks in CCPs; it is essential that, as these risks accumulate, the CCPs build up their ability to manage them. It is often noted that CCPs made it through the recent financial crisis without direct government assistance. But many of their major clearing members did receive such assistance. CCPs must now plan for a world in which these large firms will fail and be resolved without government support. Recognizing the importance of strengthening our financial market infrastructure, the regulatory community has clarified and significantly raised expectations for CCPs and all key financial market infrastructures (FMIs or market infrastructures). These heightened expectations are set forth in thePrinciples for Financial Market Infrastructures(or PFMIs), which were adopted in 2012 by the Committee on Payment and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO).3The PFMIs lay out comprehensive requirements for financial market infrastructures, including CCPs. Clearing and settlement activities are cross-border and indeed global in nature. Major U.S. financial institutions interact with market infrastructures around the world. The PFMIs have established a rigorous set of internationally agreed upon standards for the quality and quantity of loss-absorbing resources and liquidity, governance, risk management, stress testing, recovery and orderly wind-down, and other key areas. I believe that there has been reasonably good progress in implementing these reforms here in the United States. For example, according to the Financial Stability Board, over 70 percent of new U.S. interest rate and credit derivatives are now centrally cleared.4And the Federal Reserve and other U.S. regulatory agencies have recently announced final margin rules for uncleared derivatives as well, which should enhance the resilience of trading that still occurs outside of central clearing.5 But there is still plenty of work left to do. CCPs are implementing the PFMIs under the oversight of national regulators; clearing members have been vocal commentators on this process. To assure that the standards are consistently implemented across jurisdictions and across FMIs, CPMI and IOSCO are conducting joint reviews of the risk-management practices of a range of global derivatives-clearing CCPs. Working in conjunction with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Board (FSB), they have also set out a detailed work plan for further enhancing the resilience, recovery planning and resolvability of CCPs. Earlier this year, CPMI-IOSCO conducted surveys of more than 30 of the most systemically important CCPs regarding their stress testing, margin, recovery planning, and loss allocation frameworks. The survey responses have now been received and are being analyzed. I expect that these exercises will result in more granular guidance to CCPs covering a wide set of operational areas, further helping to ensure consistency of implementation of the PFMIs and market infrastructure resilience. Further work on resolution is also necessary. The FSB has conducted a survey on CCP resolution regimes and resolution planning within its membership, and found that many jurisdictions are still in the process of developing resolution regimes. As the reform process moves forward, this will be an important area of focus. All of these efforts are directly aimed at strengthening FMIs. But the strength and resilience of a CCP ultimately depends on the strength and resilience of its clearing members. I'd now like to shift focus to the relationship between these market utilities and the institutions that use them. Barring an operational event, CCPs only face credit or liquidity risk when one of their members fails to make a payment when due. Thus, one effective way to make a CCP safer is to make its members safer. In that sense, the post-crisis reforms that have greatly strengthened our largest and most systemically important banking institutions have directly benefitted CCPs and other FMIs. While requiring bank holding companies and their associated broker-dealers to be better capitalized and hold more liquid assets has unquestionably made them safer, it has also raised their balance sheet costs and thereby created incentives to scale back on less profitable business lines. Clearing has traditionally been a low margin business, and broker-dealers have often offered these services to clients in the belief that doing so may lead to more profitable business. In the new environment, broker dealers are reconsidering this model, and may reduce services to smaller clients or move to an agency model with higher fees. Banks and broker-dealers serve not only as clearing members of CCPs, but also as liquidity providers and as custodians of their cash and securities. CCPs typically have lines of credit with banks and other arrangements for secured credit to meet their potential liquidity needs. The higher cost of funding for large financial institutions has made these liquidity arrangements substantially more expensive and more difficult to obtain. Given the balance sheet costs involved, financial institutions may also be less willing to hold cash deposits on behalf of their CCP clients. These considerations suggest that there will be a period of adjustment as firms and market infrastructures adapt their business models to the new regulatory landscape. This is not necessarily a cause for alarm. To some extent, these adjustments are desirable. Liquidity risk seems to have been systematically underpriced before the crisis. Firms are now much more focused on both managing and more accurately pricing this risk. It is also appropriate that the pricing of a bank's services accurately reflect the costs and profitability of different business lines, which should lead to a more efficient allocation of resources. One area where market participants are actively searching for new business models is the repo market, where there are currently several private initiatives for greater central clearing. Expanded repo clearing could potentially bring a range of benefits, including greater opportunities for netting and related reductions in balance sheet costs for dealers affiliated with a bank holding company. The evolution of repo markets and central clearing can serve to illustrate both the potential benefits and the complexities that arise as the market seeks new infrastructure models. Repo ClearingThe U.S. repo market is composed of several segments, as illustrated inFigure 3. Dealers are at the center of the figure and operate in all five of the segments shown. In the bilateral market (segments 1 through 3), participants often impose narrow restrictions on the specific securities eligible for collateral. In this portion of the market, cash providers tend to be professional investors such as asset managers (segment 1), or the securities dealers themselves. Cash borrowers include prime brokerage clients (segment 3). Securities dealers may also borrow cash in this market, or may borrow it and then redistribute it to other dealers (segment 2).The tri-party repo market (segments 4 and 5) is used to finance general collateral pools rather than specific securities, and trades in this portion of the market are settled on the books of the two clearing banks, Bank of New York Mellon and JP Morgan Chase.6Money market mutual funds and securities lenders are among the most prominent cash providers in segment 4, while securities dealers are the primary borrowers of cash. Dealers may use this cash to fund their own portfolios; they may also lend it to other dealers in the general collateral finance (GCF) repo market (segment 5). This segment is cleared through the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation, and is currently the only segment of the market that is centrally cleared.Based on figures from September 2015, the size of the tri-party repo market, segment 4, was approximately $1.5 trillion and the GCF market (segment 5) was approximately $300 billion. The general lack of data on bilateral repo activity makes it difficult to know the precise size of each individual segment of that market, but bilateral repo and securities lending taken together accounted for approximately $1.7 trillion in outstanding activity.7Given its vast scale and position at the center of the wholesale finance markets, repo is without doubt a critical activity. Repo is a key source of financing for a wide range of firms, and an important "safe asset" for investors. The GCF segment, although modest in size compared to the overall market, is a key source of financing for smaller dealers, particularly in times of financial stress. The availability of repo funding for a diverse range of participants supports market liquidity by enabling them to make markets in Treasury and agency securities. CCPs themselves also rely on these markets, often using repo to earn interest on cash collateral and counting on access to repo markets in their liquidity planning.The FSB has called on authorities to "consider the pros and cons of broadening participation in repo clearing arrangements."8What are the potential benefits of greater clearing in this market? In addition to the potential netting benefits I mentioned earlier, a CCP typically performs three other beneficial economic functions: 1) a reduction in the potential cost of counterparty default coming from the orderly liquidation of a defaulting member's positions, 2) greater transparency and a reduction in operational risk from enhanced reporting requirements and standardization of data, and 3) the sharing of risk among members of the CCP through some mutualization of the costs of a counterparty's default. I'll discuss each of these in turn.Orderly liquidationWhile repos are generally a low risk, low margin business, they proved to be vulnerable to runs during the financial crisis, when concerns of possible defaults by large financial firms led to a sudden withdrawal of funding from repo markets. As a result, a reform project led by my colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York produced a set of measures that have sharply reduced the amount of intraday credit and improved risk management practices in the tri-party repo market. These reforms have made the overall structure of that market much safer, and significantly reduced the likelihood of a borrower default. But if a default were to take place, some counterparties, particularly those unwilling or unable to hold sizable positions, would retain strong incentives to sell assets quickly regardless of the price received.A repo CCP could help to address this "fire sale" risk. CCPs have rule-based processes to dispose of the portfolio of a defaulted member. CCPs can transfer positions to solvent broker-dealers, or hedge positions and auction them off over time.Greater transparency and reduction in operational riskCentral clearing could also improve transparency and bring a reduction in operational risks.CCPs are in position to aggregate trade information from all clearing members, and thus to monitor and manage counterparty and market-risk exposure better than individual members. As I noted earlier, we have relatively little information on bilateral repo activity, so greater clearing in this segment could have significant benefits in helping to aggregate market information.CCPs also provide participants with central confirmation of trades and netting of positions, allowing their members to reduce operational risk of post-trade processing.Risk sharingIn terms of risk sharing, when a CCP clearing member defaults, any resulting losses are shared among the surviving members and the CCP itself according to pre-agreed rules. Members of a CCP contribute to a default fund that can be used to absorb these losses. The degree of risk sharing depends on the design of the CCP, but transparent rules help to create an orderly, predictable process for managing a default.9Finding a way forwardThe potential benefits of proposals for expanded central clearing of repo in U.S. markets are undergoing a period of evaluation by regulatory authorities and market participants alike. For these proposals, it will not be a simple matter to find a way forward while meeting the heightened regulatory expectations I mentioned earlier. The liquidity requirement of the PFMIs will present a particular challenge--a CCP must have sufficient liquid resources to meet its payment obligations on time in extreme but plausible market conditions, including in the event of a default of that participant whose default would generate the largest obligations.10In repo trading, unlike in swaps, the full notional principal amount is exchanged at the beginning and end of the trade. As a result, the liquidity requirements for repo clearing will be quite high.Another key question is how great the opportunities for netting actually are, in light of the dominance of "one-way flows" in U.S. repo markets. Netting for balance sheet purposes is only permitted for offsetting trades with the same maturity and counterparty.11The many repo market participants who act as either lenders or borrowers--but not both--have little opportunity for netting. Netting opportunities are therefore more likely to occur in the interdealer market, so it is not surprising that the current repo CCP operates in this segment of the market.12Further gains in netting could arise if clearing expanded to the bilateral market or if some of the larger end users in the tri-party market, for example money market mutual funds or hedge funds, were able to gain access to the CCP. This could pose its own complications, however, as some of these institutions may be unwilling or legally unable to engage in the risk mutualization that exists in most clearing models.ConclusionDespite these challenges, it is worth noting that, in the right setting, central clearing can produce significant benefits, including reduced credit and liquidity risks; improved default management and reduced risk of fire sales; greater transparency; and improved risk management. Of course, this does not mean that every product should be cleared, or that every type of repo trading would benefit from clearing. In my view, clearing should be limited to those assets that are highly liquid and expected to remain so even in severely stressed market conditions. While any model for expanded repo clearing will have to satisfy stringent regulatory requirements, regulators should be open to emerging clearing solutions where they provide substantial benefits and can meet these standards. This may be particularly true for repo trading in government and agency securities, since new regulations require financial institutions to hold such high-quality collateral under the assumption that it can be quickly converted to cash. It is therefore important to consider ways to support their continued liquidity where possible.1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2.G20 Leaders Statement: The Pittsburg Summit (PDF), September 24-25 2009.Return to text3. Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012), "Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PDF)," final report, April.Return to text4. See Financial Stability Board (2015), "OTC Derivatives Market Reforms: Ninth Progress Report on Implementation (PDF)" (Basel, Switzerland: FSB, July).Return to text5. Seewww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20151030b1.pdf.Return to text6.General collateralorGCrepo involve repo transactions secured by a range of Treasury or other assets that are accepted as collateral by the majority of intermediaries in the repo market. GC repo assets are high quality and liquid, but not subject to exceptional specific demand.Return to text7. These estimates are based on the methodology described in Adam Copeland, Isaac Davis, Eric LeSueur, and Antoine Martin (2012), "Mapping and Sizing the U.S. Repo Market."Return to text8. Financial Stability Board (2013), "Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Addressing Shadow Banking Risks in Securities Lending and Repos (PDF)" (Basel, Switzerland: FSB, August).Return to text9. While details vary, in a waterfall, to cover losses resulting from a defaulting member, a CCP typically first uses the financial resources of the defaulting member, including margin and default fund contributions. If losses still exist, then the CCP uses its capital (skin in the game), followed by the default fund contributions of surviving members. Further losses could be absorbed by additional assessments on surviving members.Return to text10. Principle 7 in thePrinciples for Financial Market Infrastructures, April 2012 (PDF). Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions.Return to text11. See Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 41, "Offsetting of Amounts Related to Certain Repurchase and Reverse Purchase Agreements."Return to text12. Repo CCPs mainly exist in markets where the underlying flows provide large-scale opportunities for multilateral netting. For example, CCPs play a large role in the European and the Canadian repo markets, which are primarily interbank markets.Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Repo ClearingThe U.S. repo market is composed of several segments, as illustrated inFigure 3. Dealers are at the center of the figure and operate in all five of the segments shown. In the bilateral market (segments 1 through 3), participants often impose narrow restrictions on the specific securities eligible for collateral. In this portion of the market, cash providers tend to be professional investors such as asset managers (segment 1), or the securities dealers themselves. Cash borrowers include prime brokerage clients (segment 3). Securities dealers may also borrow cash in this market, or may borrow it and then redistribute it to other dealers (segment 2). The tri-party repo market (segments 4 and 5) is used to finance general collateral pools rather than specific securities, and trades in this portion of the market are settled on the books of the two clearing banks, Bank of New York Mellon and JP Morgan Chase.6Money market mutual funds and securities lenders are among the most prominent cash providers in segment 4, while securities dealers are the primary borrowers of cash. Dealers may use this cash to fund their own portfolios; they may also lend it to other dealers in the general collateral finance (GCF) repo market (segment 5). This segment is cleared through the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation, and is currently the only segment of the market that is centrally cleared. Based on figures from September 2015, the size of the tri-party repo market, segment 4, was approximately $1.5 trillion and the GCF market (segment 5) was approximately $300 billion. The general lack of data on bilateral repo activity makes it difficult to know the precise size of each individual segment of that market, but bilateral repo and securities lending taken together accounted for approximately $1.7 trillion in outstanding activity.7 Given its vast scale and position at the center of the wholesale finance markets, repo is without doubt a critical activity. Repo is a key source of financing for a wide range of firms, and an important "safe asset" for investors. The GCF segment, although modest in size compared to the overall market, is a key source of financing for smaller dealers, particularly in times of financial stress. The availability of repo funding for a diverse range of participants supports market liquidity by enabling them to make markets in Treasury and agency securities. CCPs themselves also rely on these markets, often using repo to earn interest on cash collateral and counting on access to repo markets in their liquidity planning. The FSB has called on authorities to "consider the pros and cons of broadening participation in repo clearing arrangements."8What are the potential benefits of greater clearing in this market? In addition to the potential netting benefits I mentioned earlier, a CCP typically performs three other beneficial economic functions: 1) a reduction in the potential cost of counterparty default coming from the orderly liquidation of a defaulting member's positions, 2) greater transparency and a reduction in operational risk from enhanced reporting requirements and standardization of data, and 3) the sharing of risk among members of the CCP through some mutualization of the costs of a counterparty's default. I'll discuss each of these in turn. Orderly liquidationWhile repos are generally a low risk, low margin business, they proved to be vulnerable to runs during the financial crisis, when concerns of possible defaults by large financial firms led to a sudden withdrawal of funding from repo markets. As a result, a reform project led by my colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York produced a set of measures that have sharply reduced the amount of intraday credit and improved risk management practices in the tri-party repo market. These reforms have made the overall structure of that market much safer, and significantly reduced the likelihood of a borrower default. But if a default were to take place, some counterparties, particularly those unwilling or unable to hold sizable positions, would retain strong incentives to sell assets quickly regardless of the price received. A repo CCP could help to address this "fire sale" risk. CCPs have rule-based processes to dispose of the portfolio of a defaulted member. CCPs can transfer positions to solvent broker-dealers, or hedge positions and auction them off over time. Greater transparency and reduction in operational riskCentral clearing could also improve transparency and bring a reduction in operational risks.CCPs are in position to aggregate trade information from all clearing members, and thus to monitor and manage counterparty and market-risk exposure better than individual members. As I noted earlier, we have relatively little information on bilateral repo activity, so greater clearing in this segment could have significant benefits in helping to aggregate market information.CCPs also provide participants with central confirmation of trades and netting of positions, allowing their members to reduce operational risk of post-trade processing. Risk sharingIn terms of risk sharing, when a CCP clearing member defaults, any resulting losses are shared among the surviving members and the CCP itself according to pre-agreed rules. Members of a CCP contribute to a default fund that can be used to absorb these losses. The degree of risk sharing depends on the design of the CCP, but transparent rules help to create an orderly, predictable process for managing a default.9 Finding a way forwardThe potential benefits of proposals for expanded central clearing of repo in U.S. markets are undergoing a period of evaluation by regulatory authorities and market participants alike. For these proposals, it will not be a simple matter to find a way forward while meeting the heightened regulatory expectations I mentioned earlier. The liquidity requirement of the PFMIs will present a particular challenge--a CCP must have sufficient liquid resources to meet its payment obligations on time in extreme but plausible market conditions, including in the event of a default of that participant whose default would generate the largest obligations.10In repo trading, unlike in swaps, the full notional principal amount is exchanged at the beginning and end of the trade. As a result, the liquidity requirements for repo clearing will be quite high. Another key question is how great the opportunities for netting actually are, in light of the dominance of "one-way flows" in U.S. repo markets. Netting for balance sheet purposes is only permitted for offsetting trades with the same maturity and counterparty.11The many repo market participants who act as either lenders or borrowers--but not both--have little opportunity for netting. Netting opportunities are therefore more likely to occur in the interdealer market, so it is not surprising that the current repo CCP operates in this segment of the market.12Further gains in netting could arise if clearing expanded to the bilateral market or if some of the larger end users in the tri-party market, for example money market mutual funds or hedge funds, were able to gain access to the CCP. This could pose its own complications, however, as some of these institutions may be unwilling or legally unable to engage in the risk mutualization that exists in most clearing models. ConclusionDespite these challenges, it is worth noting that, in the right setting, central clearing can produce significant benefits, including reduced credit and liquidity risks; improved default management and reduced risk of fire sales; greater transparency; and improved risk management. Of course, this does not mean that every product should be cleared, or that every type of repo trading would benefit from clearing. In my view, clearing should be limited to those assets that are highly liquid and expected to remain so even in severely stressed market conditions. While any model for expanded repo clearing will have to satisfy stringent regulatory requirements, regulators should be open to emerging clearing solutions where they provide substantial benefits and can meet these standards. This may be particularly true for repo trading in government and agency securities, since new regulations require financial institutions to hold such high-quality collateral under the assumption that it can be quickly converted to cash. It is therefore important to consider ways to support their continued liquidity where possible. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2.G20 Leaders Statement: The Pittsburg Summit (PDF), September 24-25 2009.Return to text3. Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012), "Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PDF)," final report, April.Return to text4. See Financial Stability Board (2015), "OTC Derivatives Market Reforms: Ninth Progress Report on Implementation (PDF)" (Basel, Switzerland: FSB, July).Return to text5. Seewww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20151030b1.pdf.Return to text6.General collateralorGCrepo involve repo transactions secured by a range of Treasury or other assets that are accepted as collateral by the majority of intermediaries in the repo market. GC repo assets are high quality and liquid, but not subject to exceptional specific demand.Return to text7. These estimates are based on the methodology described in Adam Copeland, Isaac Davis, Eric LeSueur, and Antoine Martin (2012), "Mapping and Sizing the U.S. Repo Market."Return to text8. Financial Stability Board (2013), "Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Addressing Shadow Banking Risks in Securities Lending and Repos (PDF)" (Basel, Switzerland: FSB, August).Return to text9. While details vary, in a waterfall, to cover losses resulting from a defaulting member, a CCP typically first uses the financial resources of the defaulting member, including margin and default fund contributions. If losses still exist, then the CCP uses its capital (skin in the game), followed by the default fund contributions of surviving members. Further losses could be absorbed by additional assessments on surviving members.Return to text10. Principle 7 in thePrinciples for Financial Market Infrastructures, April 2012 (PDF). Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions.Return to text11. See Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 41, "Offsetting of Amounts Related to Certain Repurchase and Reverse Purchase Agreements."Return to text12. Repo CCPs mainly exist in markets where the underlying flows provide large-scale opportunities for multilateral netting. For example, CCPs play a large role in the European and the Canadian repo markets, which are primarily interbank markets.Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.G20 Leaders Statement: The Pittsburg Summit (PDF), September 24-25 2009.Return to text 3. Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012), "Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PDF)," final report, April.Return to text 4. See Financial Stability Board (2015), "OTC Derivatives Market Reforms: Ninth Progress Report on Implementation (PDF)" (Basel, Switzerland: FSB, July).Return to text 5. Seewww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20151030b1.pdf.Return to text 6.General collateralorGCrepo involve repo transactions secured by a range of Treasury or other assets that are accepted as collateral by the majority of intermediaries in the repo market. GC repo assets are high quality and liquid, but not subject to exceptional specific demand.Return to text 7. These estimates are based on the methodology described in Adam Copeland, Isaac Davis, Eric LeSueur, and Antoine Martin (2012), "Mapping and Sizing the U.S. Repo Market."Return to text 8. Financial Stability Board (2013), "Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Addressing Shadow Banking Risks in Securities Lending and Repos (PDF)" (Basel, Switzerland: FSB, August).Return to text 9. While details vary, in a waterfall, to cover losses resulting from a defaulting member, a CCP typically first uses the financial resources of the defaulting member, including margin and default fund contributions. If losses still exist, then the CCP uses its capital (skin in the game), followed by the default fund contributions of surviving members. Further losses could be absorbed by additional assessments on surviving members.Return to text 10. Principle 7 in thePrinciples for Financial Market Infrastructures, April 2012 (PDF). Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions.Return to text 11. See Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 41, "Offsetting of Amounts Related to Certain Repurchase and Reverse Purchase Agreements."Return to text 12. Repo CCPs mainly exist in markets where the underlying flows provide large-scale opportunities for multilateral netting. For example, CCPs play a large role in the European and the Canadian repo markets, which are primarily interbank markets.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Policy Challenges in a Diverging Global Economy" 2015 Asia Economic Policy Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California I am grateful for the opportunity to participate in the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's Asia Economic Policy Conference, and I thank the organizers for inviting me.1After a long period of rapid economic growth, Asia's emerging economies appear to have entered a transitional phase. For decades, emerging Asian economies have been among the fastest growing and most dynamic in the world. Supported by an export-oriented development model, annual growth averaged 7-1/2 percent in the three decades leading up to the global financial crisis. As shown intable 1, the fast pace of growth in emerging Asia has also supported impressive gains in per capita income within the region. As the economies of emerging Asia have developed, they have followed a similar growth trajectory, also apparent in table 1. Along a path pioneered by Japan in the 1960s, initial integration into the global economy has been followed by a period of rapid export-led economic growth, which subsequently slows as the economy develops and incomes rise. In a process that has been likened to the pattern of flying geese, development in Japan pushed more labor-intensive production from Japan into the "Asian tigers"--that is, Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan--with that set of countries experiencing rapid growth in the 1970s and 1980s. As the tigers developed, low-value-added production was pushed further on, into the group of countries known as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)--primarily Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and, more recently, China, where growth took off in the 1980s and accelerated through the 2000s.2At each step in this process, the slowing of growth in the relatively developed and globally integrated Asian economies was matched by an acceleration of growth in the less developed and less integrated economies, maintaining the overall rapid pace of growth in the region.3 Now, with China perhaps beginning to follow the same trajectory of slowing growth as has been experienced by its predecessors in the East Asian growth model and without economies of sufficient scale to fill the gap (with the notable exception of India, which I will discuss later), growth for the region as a whole is declining. As shown intable 2, taken from the most recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) regional outlook for Asia, growth in emerging Asia is set to decline in 2015 and 2016, with China's growth decelerating.4Furthermore, the IMF projections through 2020 call for almost no pickup from this slower pace. In my discussion, I will first address some of the factors behind slowing growth in emerging Asia, importantly including demographics. I will then cover one of the global implications of this deceleration, the effect on commodity markets, before looking at the prospects for India to recharge the region's growth dynamic. I will end with some thoughts on Asia's place in the global economy both now and in the years to come. Why Is Growth in Emerging Asia Slowing?The first thing to say and think about Asian growth is that growth at a rate of above 6 percent is not slow; it is slower than it has been, but it remains impressive. There are four factors weighing on emerging Asian growth that I would like to highlight. First, emerging Asia continues to be negatively affected by slow demand growth elsewhere, including in the advanced economies. Second, economies generally decelerate as they develop, a pattern that has already been evidenced in many of emerging Asia's growth pioneers. Third, the tremendous growth of trade in the region, driven by the process of global integration and the growth of production-sharing networks, may have plateaued. Lastly, demographic trends in a number of emerging Asian countries are likely to affect growth in the coming years.5 Regarding the first of the factors that I just listed, contrary to often-repeated and often-resurrected stories of emerging market growth "decoupling" from that of the advanced economies, the truth is that advanced-economy demand continues to play a key role in emerging Asia's economic conditions.6And, as we all know, advanced-economy demand for imports in recent years has been lackluster. Real goods imports in the United States, Japan, and the euro area have all increased at an average annual pace of about 3-1/2 percent over the past three years, in all cases about half the average pace recorded in the two decades leading up to the financial crisis. Regarding the second factor, as is well established by theory and supported by empirical experience, economic growth tends to decelerate as a country develops. In a capital-poor developing economy, initial increases in investment generally have high returns, which then decline as capital accumulates. Likewise, the initial phase of integration with the global economy is typically marked by strong gains in productivity as methods and technologies are adopted from more advanced economies. Over time, the boost to growth from this catch-up in productivity fades. Also, as incomes rise and consumption grows, there is a tendency for a relatively rapid increase in demand for services. The shift of domestic resources toward the production of services, which are typically associated with lower productivity growth, tends to further lower trend growth. The factors that have tended to temper growth as economies develop appear to be at play in China. Following years of exceptionally high investment, the return on capital appears to be moderating, and the ratio of investment to gross domestic product (GDP), after peaking near 50 percent of GDP in 2011, has begun to edge down. As viewed in the context of the Lewis model, China could be reaching the stage at which the supply of labor from the subsistence agricultural sector becomes a constraint on growth. Further, productivity growth, though robust by global standards, has been declining. This decrease is likely due, at least in part, to the rapid growth of services consumption. One of the most noteworthy aspects of China's recent GDP data has been the strength of services, with services now accounting for half of the value added in GDP, up from just over 40 percent in 2008. Next, I would like to discuss the third factor weighing on Asian growth--trade. Global integration and trade growth have played a key role in the Asian economic success story, and the recent slowdown in global trade, over and above what might be expected given the weakness of advanced-economy demand discussed earlier, is likely to affect emerging Asian growth prospects. During the financial crisis, global trade collapsed. After the immediate crisis faded, trade bounced back in many cases. But the bounceback was more limited than the decline, with the increase in the volume of trade since 2012 only matching the pace of global output growth, a considerable deceleration from the previous two decades, when trade increased at twice the pace of global output. While the legacy of the crisis, particularly the continued weakness of traded-good-intensive investment in many economies, has likely contributed to the weakness of global trade, a slowdown in intra-Asian regional trade also appears to be a factor. After increasing at an average rate of about 15 percent a year through the 2000s, nominal intra-Asian trade flows have flattened out considerably over the past couple of years, in part reflecting a slowdown in the growth of production sharing within the region. The outlook for a renewed surge in intra-Asian trade does not appear to be promising. The growth of production-sharing networks in Asia has been tied to the region's export-oriented growth model. In particular, China's integration into the global economy as the hub of this production network provided a significant boost to the development and growth of these networks. As China and the region shift toward domestic demand and away from external demand, it seems unlikely that trade growth in the region will return to its earlier exceptional pace. To the extent that the expansion of these networks was tied to export-led growth that depended partly on preferential treatment of the export sector, more-balanced growth in these economies may also result in a better allocation of production across countries. If growth of trade is lower as a result, that is not necessarily a problem. However, there is a well-established literature indicating that trade encourages greater efficiency, along with the dissemination of technological innovation, and slower growth of trade could reduce this effect. It also bears noting that Asian trade growth has been accompanied by the creation of a variety of intraregional and broader trade agreements--including the 10-nation ASEAN and membership in the World Trade Organization, which China achieved in 2001 and Vietnam in 2007--as well as a host of bilateral agreements, both within and outside the region. I will return briefly to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) at the end of the talk. Finally, demographics are an additional factor likely to lower growth in the region, particularly in Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, Thailand, and China, notwithstanding the recent relaxation of the one-child policy. As shown intable 3, both China and Thailand have a median population age of about 37 years, about the same as the median in the United States. The median age is even higher in Hong Kong, Korea, and Singapore, all of which have medians of 40 years or more. Relatedly, as shown in the second column of the table, China, Thailand, and the relatively developed emerging Asian economies are expected to have a significant percentage of their populations older than 65 years by 2030, with the proportion similar to that in the United States, though still below those in Germany and Japan. In contrast, demographics are less of an issue elsewhere in the region, particularly in India and most of ASEAN, including Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Vietnam, which have medians of 30 years or less. Just as slowing workforce growth is likely to be a drag on growth in many developed countries, trend growth is likely to be held back by demographic developments in relatively elderly emerging Asian economies as well. Up to this point, I have discussed a number of factors that are likely to lower emerging Asia's growth trajectory in the coming years. However, the overall message is not a pessimistic one; rather, for the most part, the slowing of growth is a natural transition and an outcome of Asia's remarkable economic success. As many have noted over the years, maintaining growth sufficiently rapid to meet the development aspirations of the region will require a transition toward an economic paradigm more rooted in domestic demand, particularly consumption. The need for this transition, or rebalancing, is most apparent and also widely acknowledged in China, the current hub of emerging Asia's export-led model. The need for these economies--primarily China, but also those economies that export through China--to switch toward domestic demand largely reflects their having become too big and too important to rely to the extent they have on the export-led models of the past. On growth, the bottom line that should be emphasized is that even with a diminished pace of growth, the region is still expected to significantly outpace the global economy and make by far the largest contribution to global growth in the years ahead. Spillovers from Asia's Economic Transition: Commodity MarketsI will now focus on an area where the spillovers of Asia' economic transition are likely to be substantial--global commodity markets. Emerging Asia has played an outsized role in commodity markets for some time now. Specifically, China, with its investment-heavy growth model, has accounted for a substantial amount of incremental commodity demand over the past two decades. Since 2000, China has accounted for roughly 40 percent of the increase in global demand for oil and 80 percent of the growth in demand for steel. For copper, all of the incremental rise in global demand has come from China, with demand excluding China falling over the period. The strength of emerging Asian demand growth pushed commodity prices up sharply over most of the past decade, at least temporarily reversing what seemed to be an inexorable decline in both commodity prices and the terms of trade of commodity producers in the preceding two decades. Higher prices were a tremendous boon to commodity producers and supported a decade of strong growth in a number of emerging market economies, as well as commodity sectors in certain advanced economies, including Australia and the United States. Since mid-2014, commodity prices have plummeted, with oil prices falling almost 60 percent and a broad index of metals prices losing about one-third of its value, dragging down growth in many commodity producers. Although rapid commodity output growth in recent years, which has reflected in part the response of producers to previous price increases, has certainly contributed to the fall in commodity prices, the slowing of demand growth from China and emerging Asia has also been an important factor. While the path ahead for commodity prices is, as always, uncertain, declining investment rates in emerging Asia, particularly China, present the prospect of a prolonged decline in the growth rate of commodity demand. And prices could remain low for quite some time, which seems particularly true for metals, such as copper and steel, used heavily in construction and investment. However, for oil, the implications of a shift from investment-led growth to a consumption-led model are less certain. On a per capita basis, China's consumption of oil remains far below that of advanced economies, in line with China's lower rate of car ownership. Per capita oil consumption tends to increase with wealth, such that further income growth in China has the potential to provide strong support for the oil market in the coming years. Indeed, more generally, the world stands to benefit from a transition to more consumption-led growth in emerging Asia. Under a successful transition toward more-balanced growth, emerging Asia can be expected to import a broader array of goods and services both from within the region and globally. Whether a country benefits from or is harmed by emerging Asia's transition is likely to be determined by the flexibility of that country's economy in adapting to shifts in Asian demand away from commodities and inputs for assembly into the region's exports and toward services and goods to meet Asian final demand. To recap, the transition to slower growth in the emerging Asian economies, as well as a shift toward domestic demand and consumption and away from external demand and investment in the region, is likely to have profound implications for the global economy. For one, trade growth is unlikely to resume its rapid pace of recent decades, and the long climb in commodity prices, which has benefited commodity producers, appears to have come to an end. Can India Recharge Growth in Emerging Asia?One source of uncertainty in this outlook, as alluded to earlier, is the prospect for India to provide a new growth engine for Asian development. In principle, India has enormous potential to recharge the Asian growth engine. For one, India is relatively unintegrated into global production-sharing networks. For example, machinery and electrical products, which feature heavily in production-sharing and which make up about half of exports in other emerging Asian economies, account for only 15 percent of India's exports. Foreign direct investment into India is about half the size of similar flows into China as a percentage of GDP, and GDP per capita, at $1,600 in 2014, remains considerably below emerging Asia's average. All told, while the export-led growth model that propelled growth in China and other economies in emerging Asia has matured, pushing down growth rates, India remains at a relatively early stage of its development trajectory. Further capital deepening and the potential for further productivity gains suggest that India could maintain rapid economic growth for a number of years. As mentioned previously, India is also a young country, with a relatively low dependency ratio and a growing workforce. By United Nations estimates, India is set to overtake China during the next decade as the world's most populous nation. In the 1960s and 1970s, the Indian economy grew at around 3 to 4 percent. In subsequent decades the growth rate averaged close to 6 percent, and in the early years of this century it rose further, as can be seen in Table 1. In 2015, growth in India is expected to be 7-1/4 percent, the fastest among large economies, and the IMF expects growth to pick up from this already rapid pace through the end of the decade. Growth has been supported by an improved macroeconomic policy framework, including a strengthening of the framework for conducting monetary policy, as well as legal and regulatory reform. And the authorities have embarked on an ambitious program to improve the business environment. That said, significant roadblocks need to be overcome for India to reach its full potential. The economy continues to suffer from a number of infrastructure bottlenecks that will be alleviated only through a pronounced increase in investment rates, a process that would likely be helped by a relaxation of restrictions on foreign direct investment. Likewise, efforts at difficult reform will have to be sustained. There is much hard work ahead if India is to come closer to fulfilling the potential that it so manifestly has. Concluding RemarksThe performance of the Asian economies--notably those of East Asia, particularly China, Japan, and Korea--especially in the past six or seven decades, is an outstanding, if not unique, episode in the history of the global economy. What lies ahead? In the relatively near future probably some major central banks will begin gradually moving away from near-zero interest rates. The question here is whether the emerging market countries of Asia--and, indeed, of the world--are sufficiently prepared for these decisions, to the extent that potential capital flows and market adjustments can take place without major macroeconomic consequences. While we continue to scrutinize incoming data, and no final decisions have been made, we have done everything we can to avoid surprising the markets and governments when we move, to the extent that several emerging market (and other) central bankers have, for some time, been telling the Fed to "just do it." Further ahead lies the answer to the question of whether developments in the global economy will permit the continuation of the export-centered growth strategy that underlies the Asian miracle or whether we will later conclude that this period, the period after the Great Recession and the global financial crisis, marked the beginning of a new phase in the economic history of the modern global economy.7Either way, the question of the economic future of India is of major importance not only to the 18 percent of the world's population that lives in India, but also to the other 82 percent of the global population. At a more structural level are three recent developments whose potential importance is currently difficult to assess: the setting up of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank; the likely inclusion of the Chinese yuan in the Special Drawing Rights basket; and the possible establishment of the TPP, a partnership in which China is not expected to be a founding member.8 These are interesting and potentially important developments. Underlying the answer to the questions of what they portend, is the answer to the basic question of whether the economic center of gravity of the world will continue its shift of recent decades toward Asia--in particular, to China or, perhaps, to China and India. This shift would represent a return in some key respects to the global order of two centuries ago and earlier, before the economic rise of the West. A partial answer to that question is that China is for some time likely to continue to grow faster than the rest of the world and thus to produce an increasing share of global output. Its importance in the global economy is likely to increase, and it is probable that, one way or another, its growth will result in its playing a more decisive role in the international economy and in international economic institutions. Finally, we need to remind ourselves that geopolitical factors will play a critical role in the unfolding of that process. ReferencesBrandt, Loren, and Thomas G. Rawski (2008). "China's Great Economic Transformation," in Loren Brandt and Thomas G. Rawski, eds.,China's Great Economic Transformation.New York: Cambridge University Press. Haltmaier, Jane T., Shaghil Ahmed, Brahima Coulibaly, Ross Knippenberg, Sylvain Leduc, Mario Marazzi, and Beth Anne Wilson (2007). "The Role of China in Asia: Engine, Conduit, or Steamroller? (PDF)" International Finance Discussion Papers 904. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Monetary Authority of Singapore (2007). "Revisiting the US-Asia Decoupling Hypothesis," special feature B,Macroeconomic Review,vol. 6 (October), pp. 72-80. World Bank (1993).The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy. Washington: WB, September. Zheng, Kit Wei, Ong Jia Wern, and Kevin Kwan Tai You (2005). "China's Rise as a Manufacturing Powerhouse: Implications for Asia (PDF)," MAS Staff Paper 42. Singapore: Monetary Authority of Singapore, December. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Joseph Gruber and Jasper Hoek for their contributions to this speech. I also thank Ravi Menon of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and Changyong Rhee, Ratna Sahay, and James Walsh of the International Monetary Fund for their assistance.Return to text 2. With some delay, the Philippines could be added to this group. As production of labor-intensive goods has moved from one group of countries to the next, concerns have been raised about a decrease in "competitiveness" in the relatively more developed Asian economies. These concerns have been particularly pronounced in regard to China, where commentators have questioned whether China's rise has come at the expense of growth in its neighbors or provided an extra impetus to growth. Research studies (see Zheng, Wern, and You (2005) and Haltmaier and others (2007)) have generally found that China's rise has been positive for regional growth, with China's development as an export platform boosting the overall competitiveness of the region's exports.Return to text 3. In addition to integration with the global economy, a number of other factors have also contributed to the East Asian growth miracle. With regard to China, Brandt and Rawski (2008) highlight the importance of incremental reform focused on removing the most binding constraints on economic activity. Of course, reform is not independent of global integration, as the heightened international competition associated with opening an economy likely incentivizes increased reform.Return to text 4. The IMF does not include Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, or Taiwan in its definition of emerging Asia. For the purposes of my discussion, I group these four economies along with China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam as emerging Asia.Return to text 5. In a speech of this length and scope, it is not possible to relate all important developments affecting Asian growth. In particular, I will not address the need for further development of financial systems and infrastructure in Asian emerging economies, which will be important factors in determining future rates of growth.Return to text 6. This point is particularly well made in Monetary Authority of Singapore (2007).Return to text 7. See World Bank (1993) for an early attempt to define the sources of East Asian growth.Return to text 8. At this point, the reader will recall the supposed remark by Chou En-lai that it is too early to assess the importance of the French revolution. The most plausible current version of that story is that Chou was answering a question about the importance of the 1968 student riots in Paris. The countries expected to become members of the TPP are, in alphabetical order, Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the United States, and Vietnam.Return to text
The Federal Reserve today announced plans to conduct its sixth triennial study to determine the current aggregate volume and composition of electronic and check payments in the United States. The study builds upon research begun by the Federal Reserve in 2001 to provide the public and the payments industry with estimates and trend information about the evolving nature of the nation's payments system. A public report containing initial topline estimates is expected to be published in December 2016. "Over the 15-year life of the study, the survey instruments have been adapted and updated to keep pace with the dynamic change in the U.S. payments system," said Mary Kepler, senior vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the study's executive sponsor. "Not surprisingly, the 2016 study will incorporate a number of significant enhancements, including an expansion of fraud-related information and an increase in the number of depository and financial institutions sampled. These improvements will strengthen the value of the trend information and insights to be presented with the study's findings," Kepler said. The 2016 Federal Reserve Payments Study consists of three complimentary survey efforts commissioned to estimate the number, dollar value and composition of retail noncash payments in the United States for calendar year 2015. The study will request full-year 2015 payments data for various payment types from respondents to two of the three survey components; the third component involves a random sampling of checks processed in 2015 to determine distribution of party, counterparty and purpose. Results from all three survey components will be used to estimate current trends in the use of payment instruments by U.S. consumers and businesses. Previous studies have revealed significant changes in the U.S. payments system over time, most recently the increasing preference for debit, credit and stored-value cards among consumers and a leveling in growth of other electronic payment types such as the Automated Clearing House network. The Federal Reserve will work with McKinsey & Company and Blueflame Consulting, LLC to conduct this research study. Additionally, the Federal Reserve plans to supplement its triennial research with two smaller annual research efforts to provide key payments volume and trends estimates in 2017 and 2018. "The industry's participation and willingness to provide the full scope of the data requested is paramount to our ability to publish the timely and relevant results the industry has come to rely on to help objectively evaluate changes in the nation's payments landscape," Kepler said. More information about Federal Reserve Financial Services can be found atwww.frbservices.org. The website also contains links to the five previous Payments Studies. The Financial Services Policy Committee (FSPC) is responsible for the overall direction of financial services and related support functions for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as for providing Federal Reserve leadership in dealing with the evolving U.S. payments system. The FSPC is composed of three Reserve Bank presidents and two Reserve Bank first vice presidents. Laura LaBarbera(312) 322-2387[email protected]
The Federal Reserve plans to continue its previously announced periodic testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) with one operation in December. These test operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. One operation will be conducted on December 3, 2015, for seven-day term deposits. The operation will offer floating-rate term deposits with the maximum individual award amount set at $5 billion, and the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate on excess reserves (currently 25 basis points) plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Term deposits offered in the operation will include an early withdrawal feature and settle on the same day the operation is executed. Complete details will be announced on the day prior to the operation on the Board's website. The schedule and terms for future test operations will be announced at later dates. Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttp://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the annual indexing of two amounts used in determining reserve requirements of depository institutions. These amounts are the reserve requirement exemption amount and the low reserve tranche. All depository institutions must hold a percentage of certain types of deposits as reserves in the form of vault cash, as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or as a deposit in a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). Depository institutions must also regularly submit reports of their deposits and other reservable liabilities. For net transaction accounts in 2016, the first $15.2 million, up from $14.5 million in 2015, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $15.2 million up to and including $110.2 million, up from $103.6 million in 2015. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts in excess of $110.2 million. These annual adjustments, known as the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment, are based on growth in net transaction accounts and total reservable liabilities, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 2014 and June 30, 2015. The new low reserve tranche and reserve requirement exemption amount will apply to the 14-day reserve maintenance period that begins January 21, 2016. For depository institutions that report deposit data weekly, this maintenance period corresponds to the 14-day computation period that begins Tuesday, December 22, 2015. For depository institutions that report deposit data quarterly, this maintenance period corresponds to the seven-day computation period that begins Tuesday, December 15, 2015. The Board also announced changes in two other amounts, the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit, that are used to determine the frequency with which depository institutions must submit deposit reports. The attachedFederal Registernotice contains a description of the new boundaries for deposit reporting that will be effective in 2016. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Baylake Corp., Sturgeon Bay, to merge with NEW Bancshares, Inc., Kewaunee, and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary bank, Union State Bank, Kewaunee, all of Wisconsin. The Board also approved the applications, under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act, by Baylake Bank, Sturgeon Bay, to merge with Union State Bank and to establish and operate branches at the locations of Union State Bank's main office and branches. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application by Community Bank System, Inc., DeWitt, New York, to acquire Oneida Financial Corp., and thereby indirectly acquire Oneida Savings Bank, both of Oneida, New York, and State Bank of Chittenango, Chittenango, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the applications under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Farmers Bank of Northern Missouri, Unionville, Missouri, to merge with Flowers National Bank, Cainsville, Missouri, and to establish branches at the locations of Flowers National Bank. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced a $58 million penalty and consent cease and desist order against Deutsche Bank AG, of Frankfurt, Germany, related to violations of U.S. sanctions. The order requires Deutsche Bank to implement an enhanced program to ensure global compliance with U.S. sanctions administered by the U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control. The actions were taken by the Federal Reserve for unsafe and unsound practices at Deutsche Bank. The firm did not have sufficient policies and procedures to ensure that activities conducted at its offices outside of the United States complied with U.S. sanctions laws and were reported in a timely manner in response to inquiries by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The Federal Reserve's order is being issued in conjunction with an action by the New York State Department of Financial Services for violations of various New York state laws. The total penalty issued by both agencies is $258 million. The Federal Reserve order also prohibits Deutsche Bank from re-employing the individuals involved in the past actions or retaining them as consultants or contractors. Deutsche Bank has agreed to cooperate in the investigations of former individuals who may have been involved in the conduct underlying the enforcement action, but is not the subject of these investigations. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it is implementing several recommendations to enhance the supervision of large and complex banking organizations. The recommendations were developed after an extensive review of Reserve Bank procedures for supporting consistent and sound supervisory decisions as well as methods used by Reserve Banks to resolve differing staff opinions related to the supervision of large and complex firms. While the review found that 95 percent of staff interviewed felt empowered to raise differing opinions, it noted that a formal process for raising divergent views had not been established. To address this, the Federal Reserve System in 2016 will develop policies and practices to encourage the exchange of, and response to, divergent staff views on all supervisory matters. Additionally, the review found that some supervisory teams employed sound practices and produced detailed and thorough analysis. However, the review also identified inconsistencies in documentation produced by supervisory teams and noted instances of inconsistent practices by Reserve Banks. To remedy these inconsistencies, the Operating Committee of the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) will oversee the establishment of minimum operating and documentation standards for all supervisory activities. The Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Richmond have also added new resources to their dedicated supervisory teams to ensure consistency in their supervisory approaches. The LISCC was formed following the financial crisis and is comprised of Federal Reserve Board and Federal Reserve Bank senior staff. It coordinates the supervision of the largest, most systemically important financial institutions in the United States. "The steps we are implementing will further strengthen our robust, multi-disciplinary approach to supervising the largest and most complex financial institutions," said Michael Gibson, Chair of the LISCC and Director of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation. The Federal Reserve System is also developing a curriculum specifically tailored to the supervision of large financial institutions for its examiner commissioning and training program. The Operating Committee of the LISCC will also oversee the development of new training materials for members of the supervisory teams and establish additional expectations for both procedural and substantive elements of the LISCC supervisory program. In November 2014, the Board announced a review to ensure that the examinations of those firms are consistent, sound, and supported by all relevant information. The review analyzed Reserve Bank supervisory team processes for generating the recommended annual ratings of the LISCC firms. The review examined 350 separate work products; 122 current and former staff members and eight senior officers were interviewed. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board of Governors Review of Federal Reserve Banks' Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee Informaton Flows and Communication Channels (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced a plan to redistribute unclaimed funds under the Independent Foreclosure Review Payment Agreement to eligible borrowers who have cashed or deposited checks. The plan covers borrowers of mortgage servicers regulated by the Federal Reserve. The Independent Foreclosure Review Payment Agreement, overseen by the Federal Reserve and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, provided $3.9 billion for borrowers of 14 servicers whose homes were in any stage of the foreclosure process in 2009 or 2010. As of October 2015, more than $3.5 billion had been cashed or deposited by eligible borrowers. Borrowers of servicers regulated by the Federal Reserve have cashed or deposited checks with a value of $798 million as of mid-October, which amounts to approximately 91 percent of the total value of the payments issued to these borrowers. Borrowers of servicers regulated by the Federal Reserve who have not yet cashed or deposited their original check have until December 31, 2015, to request a replacement check. These borrowers must cash or deposit their checks by March 31, 2016. In mid-2016, the Federal Reserve will direct the paying agent, Rust Consulting, Inc., to redistribute any funds remaining after March 31, 2016, to borrowers of these servicers who have previously cashed or deposited their original checks. The Federal Reserve intends to distribute the maximum amount of funds to borrowers affected by deficient servicing and foreclosure practices. Borrowers whose mortgages were serviced by one of the 14 servicers that entered into agreements in 2013 should call Rust Consulting, Inc. with questions at 888-952-9105, Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. EST or Saturday between 11:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. EST or visithttp://www.independentforeclosurereview.com/. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Regent Bancorp, Inc., Davie, FloridaWritten Agreement issued April 25, 2011Terminated November 10, 2015 Jones Bancshares, L.P. and PrimeSouth Bancshares, Inc., both of Waycross, GeorgiaWritten Agreement issued July 12, 2011Terminated November 13, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the approval of fee schedules, effective January 1, 2016, for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to depository institutions (priced services). The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 101.9 percent of their priced services costs in 2016. The Reserve Banks expect to fully recover actual and imputed expenses, and earn a profit that is above their targeted return. Overall, the Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 2.7 percent average price increase. The Reserve Banks estimate that check prices will increase an average of 0.5 percent, FedACH®prices will increase an average of 6.5 percent, and Fedwire®Funds prices will increase an average of 5.8 percent. The FedACH and Fedwire Funds price increases reflect cost increases associated with major technology upgrades. The fees will remain unchanged for the Reserve Banks' National Settlement Service and priced Fedwire Securities Service. The Reserve Banks estimate that FedLine®prices will increase an average of 1.5 percent. The 2016 fee schedule for each of the priced services is available on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial services website atFRBservices.org. Lastly, the Board approved the 2016 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) of $13.1 million for Reserve Bank priced services The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and profits that would have been earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve establish fees to recover the costs of providing priced services, including the PSAF, over the long run, to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector service providers. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Register notice:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday approved a final rule specifying its procedures for emergency lending under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. Since the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010, the Board's authority to engage in emergency lending has been limited to programs and facilities with "broad-based eligibility" that have been established with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury. The Dodd-Frank Act also prohibits lending to entities that are insolvent and imposes certain other limitations. The rule provides greater clarity regarding the Board's implementation of these and other statutory requirements. The final rule incorporates a number of changes from the original proposal made in response to comments received on the proposal. For example, the final rule defines "broad-based" to mean a program or facility that is not designed for the purpose of aiding any number of failing firms and in which at least five entities would be eligible to participate. These additional limitations are consistent with and provide further support to the revisions made by the Dodd-Frank Act that a program should not be for the purpose of aiding specific companies to avoid bankruptcy or resolution. The Dodd-Frank Act requires the Board to establish procedures that prohibit emergency lending to insolvent borrowers. For this purpose, the final rule also broadens the definition of insolvency to cover borrowers who fail to pay undisputed debts as they become due during the 90 days prior to borrowing or who are determined by the Board or lending Reserve Bank to be insolvent. Commenters urged the Board to adopt a broad definition of insolvency that includes situations where a company has not yet entered formal bankruptcy or resolution proceedings, but may be insolvent from an accounting or other perspective. Like the proposal, the final rule incorporates the requirement in the Dodd-Frank Act that all lending programs under 13(3) also be approved by the Secretary of the Treasury. The Board must still find that "unusual and exigent circumstances" exist as a pre-condition to authorizing emergency credit programs. The Board's practice in extending emergency credit has been to set the relevant interest rate at a penalty rate designed to encourage borrowers to repay emergency credit as quickly as possible. The final rule has been changed from the original proposal to incorporate this practice by requiring the interest rate for credit extended under section 13(3) be set at a level that is a premium to the market rate in normal circumstances, affords liquidity in unusual and exigent circumstances, and encourages repayment and discourages use of the program as circumstances normalize. "Emergency lending is a critical tool that can be used in times of crisis to help mitigate extraordinary pressures in financial markets that would otherwise have severe adverse consequences for households, businesses, and the U.S. economy," said Chair Janet L. Yellen. As required by statute, the Board consulted with the Treasury in developing the final rule. The final rule will take effect January 1, 2016. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Board Votes For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Meeting Memoranda Open Board Meeting on November 30, 2015
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved a final rule to modify its capital plan and stress testing rules. The changes would take effect for the 2016 capital plan and stress testing cycle. The final rule is largely similar to the proposed rule and would modify the timing for several regulatory requirements that have yet to be integrated into the capital plan and stress- testing framework. Firms subject to the supplementary leverage ratio would begin to incorporate it into their capital plan and stress testing for the 2017 cycle. For stress-testing exercises, all firms would continue to use the generally applicable risk-based capital framework, but use of the advanced approaches risk-based capital framework--which is generally applicable to firms with at least $250 billion in total consolidated assets or $10 billion in on-balance sheet foreign exposures--would be delayed indefinitely. However, those firms would continue to be subject to the advanced approaches framework for their regulatory capital ratios. The common equity tier 1 capital requirement in the Board's revised regulatory capital rules--which significantly strengthened the quality and quantity of capital held by banking organizations--will be fully phased in over the nine-quarter planning horizon of the 2016 capital plan and stress testing cycles. Generally, this ratio will require firms to hold more regulatory capital than the tier 1 common ratio, which was used before the introduction of the Board's revised regulatory capital rules. The final rule would remove the requirement for firms to calculate a tier 1 common ratio. Additionally, the Board continues to review a broad range of issues related to its capital planning and stress testing rules. Any modifications from that review will be undertaken through a separate rulemaking and would take effect no earlier than the 2017 cycle. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: East West Bank (PDF), Pasadena, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated November 9, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Tri-County Bank (PDF), Brown City, MichiganOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated November 18, 2015 The Bank of Monroe (PDF), Union, West VirginiaOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated November 23, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: The Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto (PDF), Canada and Bank of Nova Scotia New York Agency, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated November 5, 2015 The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the release of the decision on the matter listed below: Roger Schaerer (PDF), Institution-Affiliated Party of Credit Suisse AG, Zurich, SwitzerlandDecision of the Board on Request to Withdraw Notice of Prohibition Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday permanently barred Rohit Bansal, a former investment banker at Goldman Sachs & Co., from participating in the banking industry following his guilty plea for misdemeanor theft of confidential information from the Federal Reserve. Bansal agreed to enter into a consent order with the Federal Reserve Board barring him from the banking industry and requiring him to cooperate in the Board's ongoing investigation. Bansal had obtained confidential information from Jason Gross, a former employee of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On Wednesday, Gross also pled guilty to misdemeanor theft of confidential information of the Federal Reserve. As part of Gross's plea agreement, Gross is barred from participating in the affairs of any insured depository institution. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York terminated Gross in October 2014 and referred the matter for investigation to the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York and has been cooperating with prosecutors during the course of their investigation. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday proposed a rule requiring large banking organizations to publicly disclose several measures of their liquidity profile. These measures will be the first required public disclosure of a quantitative liquidity risk metric for large banking organizations. Under the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) rule adopted by the federal banking agencies last September, large banking organizations (with consolidated assets of $50 billion or more) and certain depository institution subsidiaries are required to hold a minimum amount of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) that can be easily and quickly converted into cash. The amount of HQLA held by each large banking organization must be equal to or greater than its projected net cash outflow during a hypothetical stress scenario lasting for 30 days. The ratio of the firm's HQLA to its net cash outflow is its LCR. Under the proposed rule, large banking organizations would be required to disclose their consolidated LCRs each quarter based on averages over the prior quarter. Firms would also be required to disclose their consolidated HQLA amounts, broken down by HQLA category. Additionally, firms would be required to disclose their projected net cash outflow amounts, including retail inflows and outflows, derivatives inflows and outflows, and several other measures. Comments on the proposal will be accepted through February 2, 2016. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Board Votes Comments on this proposal:View
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meeting on October 26, 2015. The minutes are attached. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on October 27-28, 2015. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 27-28, 2015:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the 2015 Roundtable on Treasury Markets and Debt Management: Evolution of Treasury Market and Its Implications, New York, New York It's been a month since the New York Fed hosted a very successful conference on Treasury market structure, and I'm eager to continue the conversation started there. I thought I'd start by discussing some of the main points I took from the conference. There were certainly different points of view on a variety of issues between broker dealers, proprietary trading firms (PTFs), end users and others, but hearing a range of views was exactly the dynamic we were hoping for. There was broad understanding that electronic and automated trading are here to stay. Indeed, a wide range of firms are engaged in these trading practices today. Participants on the PTF panel viewed their relative speed and efficiency as allowing them to provide tighter spreads and greater liquidity. One expressed the belief that his firm needed to be faster and more sophisticated because, unlike broker-dealers, they have no direct view of customer order flows. For their part, dealers noted that they provide a key service in helping their customers execute larger trades, and defended their internal matching of customer trades as a natural search for trading efficiencies. There were differing views on the significance of what happened in Treasury markets on October 15, 2014. Many attendees voiced concern, but a number also expressed the view that the market worked as it was supposed to, and even that nothing extraordinary occurred that day. Although buy-side participants tended to believe that they were not directly affected given the short duration of the price swings that day, some noted that more frequent episodes of high volatility could lead them to demand larger risk premiums. For my part, I do realize that a single 12-minute roundtrip episode may not mean that much in the end. But it isn't satisfying to me to say that the market worked as it was intended to. The events of October 15 were unusual both in the size and speed of the moves and in the absence of a fundamental driver. The real question is whether there are dynamics at play here that are likely to produce more episodes of sudden, outsized volatility without any obvious cause. Further episodes of this nature could cause more market participants to react in ways that reduce liquidity, and add to pressures for changes in market structure. There were also areas of consensus. First, there was a general desire for more publicly available market data, particularly in the dealer-to-customer segment. It is striking that there is so little information on trading in this segment of our nation's Treasury market. The staff who worked on the October 15 report did a great job, but it took a mammoth effort on their part to gather detailed trade data for just that single day. As Antonio Weiss will discuss today, the agencies involved in the Joint Staff Report on October 15 are assessing the adequacy of publicly available information, and of the data available to the official sector for its own monitoring of these markets.1 A number of participants also expressed interest in continuing to try out a range of potential innovations to current market structures. Presenters at the academic sessions of the conference argued that the combination of a central limit order book and high speed trading can lead to higher liquidity risk and a race for speed. In the current structure, customer trades occur mainly off of public markets, except at times of market stress when dealers may be unable or unwilling to internalize them. That approach does not seem likely to provide good, stable liquidity in changing market conditions. One presenter at the conference outlined his idea that high frequency "batch auctions"--auctions held every millisecond or so rather than trading continuously--would increase market liquidity and limit the race for speed. There are several related ideas that have been proposed. In fact, trading platforms have already tried various innovations. For example, EBS has instituted latency floors and random batching lengths for messaging in its FX trading platform. I hope we will hear more about that today. There may be other adaptations to the current market structure that could provide greater or more stable liquidity. A good way to find out if there are better solutions would be to try some of these ideas, at least on a small scale. Regulators are not necessarily well placed to dictate specific trading structures. I'd much rather see changes emerge from a process of experimentation and seeing what works. We should have strong evidence that any change in structure represents an improvement before implementing it on a wide scale. But we will only be able to evaluate structural innovations if traders actually use them. And the market would need to include both dealers and PTFs. I'd be interested in hearing the panelists' views on this and whether there are things that regulators could do to encourage a cooperative, industry-wide approach. Treasury repo markets are also undergoing structural changes, which brings me to the third area of consensus at the conference. The repo panel I moderated included an asset manager, a broker dealer and one of the triparty clearing banks. There was agreement on the panel that expanded repo clearing would be positive for the market. That said, there was also a consensus that the current private sector initiatives in this area face demanding regulatory requirements related to capital and liquidity. We are carefully considering these proposals and are open to solutions that would satisfy regulatory requirements while bringing the benefits of central clearing. I'd welcome panelists' views on proposals for expanded repo clearing as well. I look forward to the conversations today, and I hope we'll keep having them. Treasury markets are important to all of us. The financial market participants represented here have special reasons to care. As one of the panelists at the conference put it, we've built our entire prudential regulatory framework, indeed our entire financial framework, around the ability to quickly and efficiently transform Treasury securities in to cash liquidity. These markets need to keep functioning at a high level, and we all have a stake in making sure that they do. 1.Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014(PDF).Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Credit risk in the Shared National Credit (SNC) portfolio remained at a high level, according to an annual review of large shared credits released today by federal banking agencies. The SNC review has been conducted by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) since 1977 to assess risk in the largest and most complex credits shared by multiple financial institutions. Leveraged lending, which accounts for approximately one quarter of the SNC portfolio, remained a focus of the agencies. This year's review found that banks are making progress in aligning their underwriting practices with the leveraged lending guidance issued by regulators in 2013. However, the review highlighted continuing gaps between industry practices and the expectations for safe and sound banking. Leveraged transactions originated within the past year continued to exhibit structures that were cited as weak by examiners. The persistent structural deficiencies found in loan underwriting by the agencies warrant continued attention. The review also noted an increase in weakness among credits related to oil and gas exploration, production, and energy services following the decline in energy prices since mid-2014. Aggressive acquisition and exploration strategies from 2010 through 2014 led to increases in leverage, making many borrowers more susceptible to a protracted decline in commodity prices. Oil and gas commitments to the exploration and production sector and the services sector totaled $276.5 billion, or 7.1 percent, of the SNC portfolio. Classified commitments--a credit rated as substandard, doubtful, or loss--among oil and gas borrowers totaled $34.2 billion, or 15.0 percent, of total classified commitments, compared with $6.9 billion, or 3.6 percent, in 2014. Overall, total SNC commitments increased $518.3 billion to $3.9 trillion, a 15.3 percent gain from 2014. Classified commitments as well as credits rated special mention--which exhibit potential weakness and could result in further deterioration if uncorrected--remained elevated at 9.5 percent of total commitments. Classified and special mention commitments increased $31.9 billion from 2014, or 9.4 percent, from $340.6 billion to $372.6 billion. Substandard dollar volume increased 18.5 percent from 2014, primarily because of deterioration in oil and gas commitments, and represented 5.8 percent of the SNC portfolio. Because of the growing volume of special mention and classified commitments, as well as the significant growth in the leveraged lending portfolio, the agencies will continue to monitor in particular the associated underwriting and risk-management processes in the leveraged lending and oil and gas sectors. The distribution of credits across entity types--U.S. bank organizations, foreign bank organizations, and nonbanks--remained relatively unchanged. U.S. bank organizations owned 43.3 percent of total SNC loan commitments, foreign banks owned 33.7 percent, and nonbanks owned 23.0 percent. Nonbanks continued to own a larger share of classified (67.0 percent) and nonaccrual (72.9 percent) commitments than their total share of the SNC portfolio. A SNC includes any loan or formal loan commitment, and asset such as real estate, stocks, notes, bonds, and debentures taken as debts previously contracted, extended to borrowers by a federally supervised institution, its subsidiaries, and affiliates that aggregates to $20 million or more and is shared by three or more unaffiliated supervised institutions. This year's review examined $1.04 trillion in credit commitments covering 26.5 percent of the $3.9 trillion SNC portfolio. The sample, as in past reviews, was weighted toward noninvestment grade, special mention, and classified credits. Results are based on analyses prepared in the second quarter of 2015, using data provided by the institutions as of December 31, 2014, and March 31, 2015. Attachments
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At "The Future of Large and Internationally Active Banks" 18th Annual International Banking Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the World Bank, Chicago, Illinois The regulation of financial institutions is necessarily a dynamic exercise. Growth or innovations in banking may create new risks that prompt regulatory change. The new requirements, in turn, incentivize or disincentivize certain actions by financial institutions, including shifts in activity that may start anew the process of regulatory response. The regulation of international banking reflects this general pattern, but because internationally active banks can quickly transmit financial problems across national boundaries, it also features the question of who should be doing the regulating in a dynamic financial environment. Following the financial crisis, during which some internationally active banks posed special problems for both home and host countries, this issue has commanded attention reminiscent of the aftermaths of the Herstatt failure of the 1970s and the Bank of Commerce and Credit International (BCCI) failure of the early 1990s. Unlike those earlier instances, though, this renewed prominence of the "who does the regulating" question has accompanied a major reconsideration of what regulation is appropriate. Today I would like to address both the "who" and the "what" issues in the regulation of international banking. My theme is hardly an original one--namely, that in the absence of either a global regulator or completely insular national banking systems, we must continue to work toward a system of shared responsibilities to assure both home and host regulators that internationally active banks are subject to adequate oversight and controls. I will begin by reviewing briefly the benefits and risks associated with international banking and then identifying the different models for allocating responsibility for the oversight of international banks. Afternoting the shortcomings of the system for regulating internationally active banks that prevailed before the financial crisis and developments in the intervening years, I will turn to a consideration of the challenges that remain, with a few suggestions on how we might make more progress. Benefits and Risks of International BankingIt is worth at least briefly reminding ourselves of some of the more salient advantages and risks associated with cross-border banking as they help inform development of regulatory options.1 Among the potential advantages are facilitating productive capital flows, diversifying risks associated with growth in host countries, diversifying the earnings and thus the stability of the global bank, offering counter-cyclical lending through support from the parent when host country economic conditions constrain domestic banking operations, enhancing efficiency in financial intermediation in host countries, providing specialized financial services,2and providing price or product competition for banking services in host countries. The magnitude of these benefits obviously differs from country to country, depending on a variety of factors. Some of these benefits can be greater if foreign banks have the freedom to deploy capital and liquidity to whatever markets offer the most attractive opportunities, whereas others are achievable simply through the bank's expertise, existing business relationships, and range of services. On the other side of the ledger are the risks associated with foreign banking that are distinct from risks associated with banking more generally. These risks tend to be related to the parent bank's capacity to support the larger organization. Reversals in the home market or other significant foreign operations may reduce the ability of the parent to support its foreign affiliates with needed capital and liquidity. Even if the foreign affiliate is not itself under great stress, the weakened overall condition of the parent because of problems in other parts of the world may prompt it to retrench--often rather abruptly--by reducing activity in foreign markets in which it is active. This response may be driven either by bank management itself or at the instance of home country officials who want the bank to continue to lend in its home market. Especially in countries where foreign banks account for a significant part of financial intermediation and where the underlying problems are not idiosyncratic to a specific bank, the result may be a significant diminution in intermediation beyond what would have taken place because of macroeconomic developments. Even more serious is the risk that the foreign bank will fail, and that the home country will lack the resources or the will to ensure either that it is recapitalized and continues to function or that it fails in an orderly fashion. If the foreign operation has been thinly capitalized and is lacking in liquidity, host country officials may face an unpleasant choice between supporting a foreign bank (including operations for which they have not had consolidated supervisory responsibility) or allowing it to fail in a disorderly fashion, with potentially serious knock-on effects in the host country's financial system. Thus, what might have been economic advantages for host countries from foreign banks in reasonably good times can turn into substantial disadvantages in periods of idiosyncratic or generalized stress. As with the benefits of foreign banking, the risks vary considerably among host countries. Obviously, countries without well-developed domestic banking systems will both benefit more and be at greater risk. Yet even the most sophisticated domestic financial systems can be affected significantly. For example, the risks can be exacerbated by funding patterns and currency mismatches, as happened in the United States during the financial crisis. Foreign banks that had been using their U.S. branches to raise dollars in short-term markets for lending around the world were suddenly left without access to this funding and, as a result, made substantial and--relative to their assets--disproportionate use of the Federal Reserve's discount window. Approaches to the Regulation of Internationally Active BanksAs I mentioned at the outset, international banking raises the question of who should do the regulating, as well as the question of what regulation is appropriate. The two questions are related, of course. As I will explain shortly, the nature of regulations in part depends upon the perspective and aims of the regulator. There are essentially four models, each of which has benefits and shortcomings. First, the home jurisdiction can have dominant or exclusive regulatory responsibility for all of its banks' global operations through application of consolidated regulation and supervision. Second, host jurisdictions can have dominant regulatory responsibility for all foreign banking operations within their borders. This approach requires foreign banks to charter locally and to meet the same regulatory and supervisory standards applicable to domestic banks. Third, there can be shared authority between home and host jurisdictions, whereby host countries do some regulating and supervising of foreign banks within their borders but do not require all foreign banking activities to be locally chartered and subject to regulation identical to that of home banks. Finally, there could be one global regulator to oversee all the operations of internationally active banks around the world. There is an almost unlimited number of variations on the shared approach and, in fact, one or another variants on that approach have been adopted by most jurisdictions during the modern banking era (though there have been instances of countries severely limiting or prohibiting foreign banking altogether). Before turning to a discussion of how the shared approach has evolved and may be further modified, I think it useful to identify both the appeal and the problems with the other three, conceptually purer, approaches. Both the attraction and limitations of the host country model are fairly apparent. On the one hand, the host country is most likely to be attentive to the risks posed to its financial system by foreign banks. More generally, the host jurisdiction is at least presumptively best positioned to craft a regulatory and supervisory framework to protect its financial system from the particular risks engendered by economic and financial conditions. Having all foreign banking operations meet local capital and other standards helps achieve that end. The risks of abrupt shifts of capital and liquidity out of the country can be minimized, and depositors can be better protected. On the other hand, a fully local regulatory system would make the costs of entry very high. For example, if no foreign branches were allowed, or were required to operate as if they were separately chartered and capitalized, the commitment of resources needed to enter a foreign market would be considerably higher than those typically associated with opening a branch. In addition, even complete local subsidiarization might not protect a foreign banking operation from suffering some contagion if its parent is under stress. Thus, the quality of home country regulation may have some bearing even under the host country model. Not surprisingly, the home country model presents essentially the obverse set of advantages and limitations. Having a consolidated set of capital requirements and a single supervisor allows for the quickest deployment of capital and liquidity where it is most in demand, or most needed to relieve stress, and minimizes compliance costs. However, as has often been pointed out, the home country regulator will be most responsive to the impact of both regulation and distress of its banks on its own market. In its regulatory and resolution activities, it is likely to undervalue the potential risks and costs for host countries. In periods of stress, the home country regulator, accountable primarily to home country legislators or government officials, may concentrate on stabilizing its own financial markets and be more inclined to allow, or even demand, a sharp reduction in activity abroad. The result would, at a minimum, be an abrupt decrease in intermediation at particularly sensitive times. At worst, foreign operations could default on obligations and exacerbate financial stress.3 At first glance, it might seem that the home country and global regulatory approaches would yield similar substantive results, since in each case, there would be consolidated regulation and supervision. A global regulator, however, would at least in theory take the interests of all jurisdictions into account in regulating, supervising, and resolving a global bank. Of course, how to balance those interests--particularly in the face of unanticipated circumstances--would be a difficult, and almost invariably political, judgment. This reality raises the thorny issue of the accountability of a global regulator. The political factor is one of many reasons why jurisdictions are likely to remain unwilling to cede much authority to global, as opposed to international, financial institutions. Indeed, quite apart from political considerations, there may be good reasons not to do so. For one, a single global regulator of internationally active banks would presumably be something close to a regulatory monopolist, whose policies and practices could be inappropriately uniform across quite different national markets and slow to adapt to changing conditions. Also, as with dominant or exclusive reliance on home country consolidated supervision, it seems unlikely that a global regulator--no matter how well-staffed--would be fully informed on the varieties of financial risks posed to regulated institutions across national markets. A limited exception to the general disinclination to cede financial sovereignty, as in various other areas, lies within the European Union or, more precisely, the euro zone. With the creation of a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in the European Central Bank and a freestanding Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), there have been important transfers of authority, though national regulators continue to play a supporting role. Interesting and important as this regional initiative is, however, the unique European arrangement of shared sovereignty makes it less a model for the world as a whole than an extension of the single currency project, responding to some of the difficulties encountered during the financial crisis. The Shared Model and Lessons of the CrisisThe shortcomings of each conceptually "pure" model explains why some version of a shared home/host model has prevailed over time. Given the range of variations in this model, however, it is useful to bear in mind the relative advantages and disadvantages of the cleaner models in choosing the elements of a specific shared approach. In considering recent developments, as well as what remains to be done, it is also useful to begin by recalling the situation that prevailed at the onset of the financial crisis. In its early years, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's work focused on elaborating the responsibilities of home and host regulators of internationally active banks. The principle of consolidated supervision was developed in the early 1980s, and reinforced following the failure of the BCCI in the early 1990s, in an effort to ensure that some regulatory authority had an overview of a global bank's consolidated assets and liabilities. At the same time, though, the Basel Committee set out expectations for host country prudential oversight of foreign banks that would be similar to that for domestic banks.4 The financial crisis painfully demonstrated the inadequacy of both home and host country regulation. Home country regulators of some large, internationally active banks clearly did not appreciate the risks those firms were assuming overseas. Host country regulators, including those in the United States, had not exercised prudential oversight of some foreign bank activities and had not sufficiently appreciated the risks associated with the funding models and other activities of some foreign banks that were subject to consolidated prudential regulation. And there were indeed instances of international bank failures in which the home country authorities seemed to focus on domestic interests to the possible detriment of the interests of host countries.5 Of course, regulatory failures were far more pervasive than inattention to the specifically cross-border activities of banks. The substantive rules governing capital and other requirements for all banks were woefully inadequate, although the fact that most very large banks around the world have significant cross-border operations exacerbated the shortcomings. While banks were growing in size, integrating traditional lending and capital markets in ever more complicated ways and relying increasingly on vulnerable short-term wholesale funding models, many regulators around the world were at best failing to keep up with these changes. At worst, they removed older prudential limitations without substituting new measures designed to address the new realities of banking. The Basel Committee spent most of the decade before the crisis dominantly focused on the Basel II framework, which was intended toreducesomewhat effective regulatory capital levels for large banks in return for their transition to an internal-models-based approach to capital requirements. This was a choice made by national regulators, led by those in the United States, and not a byproduct of the structure of the Basel Committee itself. Adding the lessons of the 2007-09 financial crisis to those of earlier episodes of financial stress, I think we can infer some guidelines on host and home responsibilities to help shape expectations for practice. For host countries, the overarching guideline is that each jurisdiction should take responsibility for protecting the financial stability of its own markets as its contribution to achieving global financial stability. The extent of this responsibility obviously increases with the size and significance of the jurisdiction's financial markets. Thus the United States and the United Kingdom--which currently have the greatest concentrations of capital markets activities--have a particular obligation to oversee the local activities of both domestic and foreign banks that could pose particular risks to financial stability and are likely to be especially difficult to observe for a home country supervisor less familiar with those markets. A corollary of this general guideline is that the scope of host country regulation might sensibly vary with the size and systemic importance of foreign banks. This notion is consistent with the principle embodied in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act that prudential regulation should be progressively more stringent as banks pose greater risks to financial stability. As I will discuss in a moment, this principle also lies behind some of the post-crisis frameworks developed by the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board (FSB). For home countries, the relatively longstanding principle that regulators should exercise effective consolidated supervision remains critical, though I would emphasize that the regulation imposed by home jurisdictions is of equal--if not greater--importance. It is important to emphasize that this obligation is not a substitute for host country regulation and supervision of foreign banking organizations. The home jurisdiction regulatory structure must ensure that the banks are fundamentally safe and sound, and that the parent will generally be able to support its operations around the world. Here, of course, a major shortcoming of the pre-crisis regime becomes apparent, in that capital and other regulatory requirements for internationally active banks were simply not strong enough. Consolidated supervision must contain the risks to the financial system created by banking activity that is not fully captured by regulations. It must also ensure that banks do not hide problems by shifting assets or liabilities around their global operations and, more generally, that the banks are fundamentally safe and sound so as to forestall possible contagion risk to foreign operations. Within these admittedly broad guidelines, there is obviously room for host countries to balance the benefits and risks presented by foreign banking organizations in a number of different ways. Their choices will be affected by policy preferences, the characteristics of their domestic financial systems, and the relative importance of foreign banks in those systems. The host country choices will also inevitably be affected by how home countries are carrying out their regulatory and supervisory roles. This consideration includes, of course, not just regulations that are nominally applicable, but the manner in which those regulations are enforced. Branching presents a particularly instructive example of the tension between assuring financial stability and permitting foreign banking operations that may carry economic benefits. Because branches are not separately chartered and capitalized, a bank can relatively easily enter a foreign market by opening a branch, through which it can make loans--often initially to companies from its home country--using funds from the home bank. Particularly where (as in the United States) foreign branches are forbidden by local law from accepting retail deposits, it might seem that there are minimal risks to the host country if the parent bank (and thus the local branch) fails. However, U.S. experience with foreign branches in the decade prior to the crisis shows the very real risks that can arise when a branch is used to raise funds in the host country (in the United States, in dollars) through short-term wholesale borrowing, and then directs those funds out of the host country for loans or asset purchases by other parts of the bank. As noted earlier, when short-term funding dried up, many foreign branches were left seriously short of liquidity and had to turn to the discount window. A shared feature of the U.S. and European Union regulatory systems for foreign banks is that branching is permitted without requiring separate capitalization. Many other jurisdictions have similar policies. Thus opportunities for foreign bank entry and market access are provided. In the United States, larger branches do have to meet some liquidity requirements, though they are less restrictive than the standards applicable to domestic banks and intermediate holding companies. This requirement is an important example of a prudential measure that balances financial stability and the benefits of international banking. The degree to which we or, I presume, other jurisdictions will remain comfortable with this balance will depend on two factors. The first factor is the degree to which local branches are used by foreign banks as significant sources of unstable funding or for other risky purposes. While this has been a significant issue in the United States, it is less clear that other jurisdictions face similar risks. The second is the confidence host jurisdiction regulators have that the parent banks are subject to effective regulatory and supervisory oversight. Developments since the CrisisThe profound shift in political and policy environments as a result of the financial crisis has led to considerable strengthening of minimum international standards for internationally active banks, at both national and international levels. Basel III enhanced the quantity and quality of capital requirements and introduced, for the first time, quantitative liquidity standards. Following completion of Basel III, the Basel Committee developed a structure of slightly misleadingly named capital "surcharges," which requires global systemically important banks (GSIBs) to maintain higher capital levels.6 The Federal Reserve supported all these measures but was a particularly strong advocate of the capital surcharges, which established the new principle that some international prudential standards should be progressively more stringent as the systemic importance of a bank increases. In meeting its responsibility to promote domestic financial stability, the Federal Reserve last year followed the lead set by the European Union some years previously and adopted a regulation requiring subsidiaries of GSIBs engaged in traditional banking as well as those engaged in capital markets activities be covered by local capital requirements consistent with Basel III. But neither in the United States nor the European Union do the GSIB capital surcharges imposed at the consolidated level apply to foreign banking operations in their jurisdictions.7So even if the global bank has local capital requirements for most or all of its foreign operations, the parent still has some flexibility as to where the additional capital buffer can be maintained. More generally, our requirements for other prudential regulations applicable to foreign banking organizations (FBOs) are calibrated to the relative importance of the FBOs in the U.S. financial system. Thus the structure of surcharges also help to create a good mechanism for balancing host country interests in assuring financial stability and in realizing the benefits that can come from global banking. Even with good standards, regulators in host jurisdictions will want assurance that these standards are being rigorously implemented and enforced. The relative opaqueness of bank balance sheets makes capital, liquidity, and other common banking regulations difficult to monitor effectively. This argues for complementing fairly complex regulation that seeks to track the often-complex activities of large banks with simpler regulations, such as the leverage ratio and a standardized risk-weighted capital floor. But it also argues for existing international fora such as the Basel Committee and the FSB to provide effective monitoring mechanisms. Even with higher standards in place, supervisors in home and host jurisdictions will still face challenges in assessing cross-jurisdiction vulnerabilities. More regular sharing of information and assessments among home and key host jurisdictions both formally and informally should be high on our shared agenda. At present, both those groups have useful processes for overseeing the implementation of agreed upon international standards. But they tend to be a bit formalistic, concentrating on comparing the language of domestic implementation to that of the international standards, rather than examining whether domestic practice in fact ensures substantive compliance or gaining a shared understanding of the unique risks in each market. It would, I believe, be counterproductive to establish in either the Basel Committee or the FSB the kind of adversarial dispute settlement process associated, for example, with the World Trade Organization. It is in the interest of all members of those bodies to cooperate in the shared task of overseeing internationally active banks. Thus, the better approach to compliance would be one that simultaneously provides regulators with a way to work with one another and to gain deeper insight into how their counterparts in other jurisdictions are applying prudential standards. For example, there has been considerable documentation of the interjurisdictional divergence in risk weights for similar exposures under the internal models-based capital approaches of Basel II.8While the Basel Committee has been working on this issue,9I suspect that one of the most effective ways of promoting broadly comparable risk weighting would be to have technically competent supervisory staff from other jurisdictions participate with home regulators in the actual bank model validations, oversight, and related supervisory functions. Similarly, as stress testing becomes a more important global financial stability tool, it will be useful to have staff experienced in stress testing at home participating in the stress testing exercises of other jurisdictions. These kinds of interactions, along with the more traditional device of supervisory colleges, can help foster confidence among host jurisdictions in both the regulatory and supervisory activities of home country authorities. Another useful practice for furthering mutual confidence would be a program for regular contact among the very top officials of key regulators. The original Basel Committee brought together these officials for what were usually relatively informal meetings. As one of the early participants in those meetings once told me, the relationships he built with his counterparts through these regular contacts served everyone well when issues concerning international banks arose. But with the concentration of the Basel Committee on sometimes highly technical standards, participation has generally drifted down to the senior staff level. The FSB was created in part to compensate for this change in the Basel Committee. And the FSB usually does garner higher levels of participation. However, other features of the FSB--such as including market regulators and finance ministries in order to provide a broader range of views on financial stability issues--mean that the FSB cannot serve the original Basel Committee purpose either. Moreover, even when the right member agencies are represented, the actual individuals participating may not be the most senior officials in the supervisory function of those agencies. Finally, the near doubling in size of both the Basel Committee and the FSB, while again critical for ensuring a representative group to consider financial stability issues, further complicates the matter. Thus, while a regular, high-level interaction among all key regulators would be optimal, for the foreseeable future, we will probably have to live with something less than optimal. Ad hoc meetings around the fringes of various Basel convocations and bilateral interactions may have to suffice. In this regard, I note the importance of the creation of the SSM within the European Central Bank as the supervisor for all larger banks in the euro zone. The Federal Reserve has already established instructive and productive relationships with the experienced and committed group of supervisors that have been brought in to lead the SSM. The Limits of Shared ResponsibilityIt is important to recognize, though, that even with the best of intentions and actions in home country regulatory and supervisory regimes, there will be limits to how much responsibility can appropriately be shared for international banking activities. These limits are most apparent in the context of the possible insolvency of a major foreign banking organization.10The work of the FSB in promoting effective resolution regimes around the world and in seeking an international framework for building the total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) of GSIBs are very good examples of cooperative efforts that promote the aim of ensuring that even the largest banks can fail without either causing financial disorder or requiring injection of public capital. My expectation is that the FSB's framework for TLAC will incorporate the principle of an extra buffer of loss absorbing capacity at the consolidated level beyond what may be required in the aggregate at local levels.11But the margin may be a little thinner here, precisely because of the circumstances in which the loss absorption capacity may be needed. With respect to going concern prudential requirements such as capital levels, host countries have a continuing opportunity to observe how home country officials are regulating and supervising their banks. Particularly if effective monitoring mechanisms are developed, host countries may become comfortable with limited oversight of some or all domestic operations of foreign banks. If they see the rigor of home consolidated oversight waning, they will have a chance to intensify their own supervision. But with the prospect of a failed bank, there will be no time for such adjustments or, as a practical matter, the capacity to impose new requirements may become limited by the time the prospect of failure is looming. The imposition of requirements in the midst of a crisis would in any event likely exacerbate stress. Even with the best of intentions, today's home country regulators cannot effectively bind their successors' response to the insolvency of one of their globally important banks when political and economic pressures are likely to be high. The gone-concern loss absorbency requirement for FBO intermediate holding companies proposed by the Federal Reserve Board on October 30 should enhance the prospects for an orderly firmwide global resolution of an FBO by its home country resolution authority through increasing confidence that the U.S. operations of the FBO will obtain their appropriate share of the loss absorbency capacity of the consolidated foreign bank. Past experience suggests that host supervisors are most likely to ringfence assets when there is doubt that the local customers and counterparties of foreign banks will be adequately taken into account. Yet if, for any reason, the home jurisdiction resolution is unsuccessful, the internal long-term debt will be available to U.S. authorities for orderly resolution and recapitalization of the intermediate holding companies. We have calibrated our proposed internal TLAC requirements slightly below our proposed external TLAC requirements for U.S. GSIBs. This slightly lower calibration for internal TLAC recalls the difference between local going-concern capital requirements and the GSIB surcharge, but the gap is somewhat smaller, reflecting the concerns I mentioned a moment ago. The proposal thus balances support for the preferred resolution strategy of the home resolution authority of the foreign GSIB with assurance of U.S. financial stability if that strategy cannot be executed successfully.12 ConclusionMy view of shared responsibility for overseeing international banks emphasizes the importance of financial stability even as it allows for benefits specific to international banking. For the reasons I have explained, in the end host countries need to make the judgments on the tradeoffs between these goals. But I have also explained how a strong set of international prudential standards and good institutional relationships among regulators could help tilt this balance toward greater flexibility for internationally active banks. In response to positions akin to what I have presented today, one often hears complaints that the emphasis on financial stability will result in the balkanization of international banking. I would note first that it is not at all clear that developments since the crisis have on net balkanized banking, so much as shifted some international banking assets from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries whose banks were disproportionately affected by the financial crisis to banks from some emerging market and developing countries.13This development probably reflects both needed changes in some of the OECD nation banks and a logical reflection of the increasing economic importance of the non-OECD countries. Second, I wonder how these critics can think that the pre-crisis situation of supposedly consolidated oversight and substantial bank flexibility was a desirable one. At least some of the flexibility enjoyed by banks in shifting capital and liquidity around the globe was deployed in pursuit of unsustainable activity that eventually ran badly aground. Third, as I suggested earlier, even where concerns about "trapped" capital or liquidity are more sensibly based, reasonable ex ante constraints by host country authorities in pursuit of a sound and stable domestic financial system are likely to be far preferable to ex post constraints--for example, ringfencing--that are imposed when the foreign bank is under the greatest pressure. 1.By "cross-border banking," I mean to refer broadly to activities carried on outside of a bank's home country through subsidiaries and branches. I do not include direct lending or other financial transactions across national borders, whether or not facilitated by an agency in the country of the bank's customer or counterparty. While such activities can raise concerns pertaining to investor protection, the volatility of financial flows, or foreign exchange policies, relevant prudential considerations will generally be limited to the country(ies) from which the bank is initiating the transaction and raising any funds needed to fund it.Return to text For references to many individual studies examining one or more the advantages or risks, see Stijn Claessens and Neeltje van Horen (2014), "The Impact of the Global Financial Crisis on Banking Globalization," IMF Working Papers 14/197 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, October). 2.For an example, see Stijn Claessens, Omar Hassib, and Neeltje van Horen (2015), "The Role of Foreign Banks in Trade," mimeo, (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and De Nederlandsche Bank, March).Return to text 3.Mindful of the considerations lying behind the limitations of both models, Dirk Schoenmaker has offered his theory of the "financial trilemma," which states that a jurisdiction can only have two of the three objectives of a stable financial system, international banking, and national regulatory policies. Professor Schoenmaker introduced his theory at a conference in 2008 and subsequently formalized it in Dirk Schoenmaker (2011), "The Financial Trilemma,"Economics Letters,vol. 111 (April), pp. 57-59; and Dirk Schoenmaker (2013),Governance of International Banking: The Financial Trilemma(Oxford: Oxford University Press). See also Richard J. Herring (2007), "Conflicts between Home and Host Country Prudential Supervisors," in Douglas D. Evanoff, George G. Kaufman, and John R. LaBrosse, eds.,International Financial Stability:Global Banking and National Regulation, (Hackensack, N.J: World Scientific), pp. 201-20.Return to text 4.The current version of this obligation is set forth in Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2012), "Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision" (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, September). I have addressed the issue of host state responsibility at somewhat greater length elsewhere. Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Regulating Large Foreign Banking Organizations," speech delivered at the Harvard Law School Symposium on Building the Financial System of the Twenty-first Century, Armonk, New York, March 27.Return to text 5.For a review of these instances, see Schoenmaker,Governance of International Banking,pp. 72-87.Return to text 6.I say "misleadingly" called capital surcharges because that term implies the banks are faced with a "charge" that has to be paid to someone. In fact, of course, the requirement is that the bank retain higher capital buffers in order to increase its resiliency.Return to text 7.See 79 FR 17240 (March 27, 2014); and Tarullo, "Regulating Large Foreign Banking Organizations."Return to text 8.See generally Vanessa Le Leslé and Sofiya Avramova (2012), "Revisiting Risk-Weighted Assets," IMF Working Paper 12/90 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, March).Return to text 9.See Stefan Ingves (2014), "Finishing the Job: Next Steps for the Basel Committee," keynote address to the Ninth BCBS-FSI High-Level Meeting on "Strengthening financial sector supervision and current regulatory priorities," Cape Town, South Africa, January 30.Return to text 10.Indeed, Dirk Schoenmaker developed his notion of the financial trilemma around the conflicts of interest that arise in the context of the insolvency of a global bank.Return to text 11.The TLAC proposal of the FSB contemplates that host authorities will set internal TLAC requirements at 75 to 90 percent of applicable external TLAC requirements.Return to text 12.Our internal TLAC proposal effects this balance principally by not including parent GSIB surcharges in the calibration for FBO intermediate holding companies but also by lowering the baseline TLAC requirement for U.S. intermediate holding company subsidiaries of single-point-of-entry strategy FBOs from 18 percent of risk-weighted assets to 16 percent of risk-weighted assets.Return to text 13.For a discussion of these points, see Claessens and van Horen, "The Impact of the Global Financial Crisis on Banking Globalization."Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the Post-Crisis Period," a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good evening. My discussion tonight will focus on a key transmission channel in an open economy--the exchange rate.1The exchange rate is a primary focus of central bankers in small open economies as well as a prime concern of the broader public in those economies--and, to a lesser extent, in even the largest of economies. When I was governor of the Bank of Israel prior to joining the Federal Reserve, my markets screen was continuously open at a chart of the exchange rate of the shekel against the dollar. For small open economies, the exchange rate may well matter as much for output and inflation as do interest rates.2 Given that the U.S. economy is much less open than Israel's, it is not surprising that fluctuations in the dollar typically receive somewhat less attention here in the United States. Indeed, much of the focus on dollar fluctuations in the recent research literature is on transmission to foreign economies, including through balance sheet channels, as in the Bank for International Settlements paper (Hofmann, Shim, and Shin, forthcoming) that will be presented tomorrow. Nevertheless, the exchange value of the dollar also plays a significant role in the U.S. economy, a role that has increased over time given growing global trade and financial linkages. My remarks will focus on the consequences of the dollar's ascent since last summer for U.S. output and inflation--and thus for monetary policy. Size of Dollar's Appreciation and Its CausesAs seen infigure 1, the roughly 15 percent appreciation of the broad real dollar since July 2014 is large, though not unprecedented by historical standards.3Two related factors appear to have played key roles in the dollar's rise. First, while the U.S. economy has performed relatively well--as is visible especially in our steady progress toward full employment--major foreign economies have generally experienced weak growth, along with persistently low inflation. Because foreign central banks responded appropriately by providing additional monetary accommodation, foreign interest rates have declined relative to U.S. interest rates, encouraging investors to shift into dollar-denominated assets and in turn boosting the dollar. But widening interest rate differentials can explain only part of the dollar's large ascent. A second factor has been heightened concern about the global outlook and an associated decrease in investor risk tolerance--factors that tend to increase investment in dollar assets. In recent months, investors have been particularly focused on the possibility of a sharp slowdown in China and other emerging market economies, with commodity exporters seen as particularly vulnerable in the wake of the dramatic drop in oil and non-oil commodity prices since the summer of 2014. Effects of a Stronger Dollar on U.S. Activity and InflationIn considering the transmission of changes in the dollar's value to U.S. output and inflation, it will be convenient for illustrative purposes to focus on the effects of a 10 percent appreciation that is assumed to be permanent--and then to draw on this analysis to provide some guidance on how the dollar's rise since mid-2014 has played out. Because the main way in which a stronger dollar affects U.S. output is through causing real exports to decline, I will begin by focusing on the factors determining the export response. Broadly speaking, an appreciation of the dollar reduces U.S. exports because it causes the relative price of U.S. goods to rise in foreign markets; for example, the price in yen of a U.S.-made pair of jeans will rise. To gauge the quantitative effects on exports, the thick blue line infigure 2shows the response of U.S. real exports to a 10 percent dollar appreciation that is derived from a large econometric model of U.S. trade maintained by the Federal Reserve Board staff.4Real exports fall about 3 percent after a year and more than 7 percent after three years.5The gradual response of exports reflects that it takes some time for households and firms in foreign countries to substitute away from the now more expensive U.S.-made goods. A stronger dollar makes foreign goods cheaper for U.S. consumers and hence boosts U.S. real imports. Nevertheless, an extensive literature has found that the degree of pass-through of exchange rate changes to U.S. import prices is low, as foreign exporters prefer to keep the dollar price of the goods they sell in the U.S. market relatively constant. For example, a typical estimate is that an appreciation of the dollar of 10 percent causes U.S. non-oil import prices to fall only about 3 percent after a year and only slightly more thereafter.6The low exchange rate pass-through helps account for the more modest estimated response of U.S. real imports to a 10 percent exchange rate appreciation shown by the thin red line in figure 2, which indicates that real imports rise only about 3-3/4 percent after three years.7 Figure 3uses these results to gauge how a 10 percent dollar appreciation would reduce U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) through the net export channels we have just discussed. The staff's model indicates that the direct effects on GDP through net exports are large, with GDP falling over 1-1/2 percent below baseline after three years. Moreover, the effects materialize quite gradually, with over half of the adverse effects on GDP occurring at a horizon of more than a year. In interpreting these estimated effects on GDP, it is important to underscore that the estimates do not take account of any offset due to monetary policy easing--a key consideration that I will discuss shortly. Even so, recalling that the dollar's actual appreciation has been about 15 percent, the model estimates suggest that the cumulative reduction in U.S. aggregate demand from the dollar's appreciation is likely to total almost 2-1/2 percent of GDP after three years--in the absence of policy action to boost private demand or government spending. Given these perhaps surprisingly large effects, an obvious question is, how well has the model done so far in accounting for the actual behavior of U.S. real net exports? While trade flows are affected by many factors that are difficult to capture in models--such as the labor disputes at major ports that occurred earlier this year--the drag from net exports over the past year does appear to be relatively close to the estimated effect implied by the staff's econometric trade model, with net exports reducing GDP by almost 3/4 percentage point in the data, compared with an estimated fall of 1 percentage point in the model. Looking forward, given that the effects of the stronger dollar play through gradually to the economy, there is good reason to expect that the drag on GDP growth from the stronger dollar will persist well into next year and likely spell continued weakness in the traded-goods-producing sectors of the economy that are especially exposed to the exchange rate. Indeed, the more export-oriented manufacturing sector has already taken a hit during the past year and has experienced weaker growth than the broader economy. Turning now to inflation, consumer price inflation has been running well below the Federal Reserve's 2 percent target, and the strong dollar has played an appreciable role in this shortfall. One way in which the stronger dollar depresses inflation is by putting downward pressure on import prices.Figure 4uses an econometric model discussed in a recent speech by Chair Yellen to illustrate how a 10 percent appreciation of the dollar might play through to core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation, which excludes the more volatile food and energy components.8This particular model implies that core PCE inflation dips about 0.5 percent in the two quarters following the appreciation before gradually returning to baseline, which is consistent with a four-quarter decline in core PCE inflation of about 0.3 percent in the first year following the shock. While the Board staff uses a range of models to gauge the effect of shocks, the model employed in figure 4--as well as other models used by staff--suggests that the dollar's large appreciation will probably depress core PCE inflation between 1/4 and 1/2 percentage point this year through this import price channel. Thus, given that core PCE inflation is running around 1-1/4 percent on a four-quarter-change basis, the stronger dollar has played a material role in holding core PCE inflation below 2 percent. A second channel through which dollar appreciation reduces inflation is by increasing economic slack. Greater slack amplifies the downward pressure on inflation, although the quantitative effect is probably fairly modest given the flat slope of the Phillips curve. Because the pass-through of dollar appreciation to oil and food commodity prices is much higher than for most imports, dollar appreciation tends to depress overall PCE inflation by even more than it depresses core inflation. An important difference between the transmission of dollar appreciation to inflation compared with output is that the effects on inflation are probably more transient. In particular, given that most of the effect on inflation occurs through changes in import prices--and import prices respond quickly to the exchange rate--the peak effect on inflation probably occurs within a few quarters. From the standpoint of the outlook, this transience means that some of the forces holding down inflation in 2015--particularly those due to a stronger dollar and lower energy prices--will begin to fade next year. Consequently, overall PCE inflation is likely on this account alone to rebound next year to around 1-1/2 percent. And as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored, both core and overall inflation are likely to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate. U.S. Monetary Policy and the DollarThe stronger dollar and some of the factors causing it, including weaker foreign demand, have played an important role in accounting for revisions to the expected path of U.S. policy rates compared with what was expected in the summer of last year. The forecasts made by Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants on a quarterly basis, which are published in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), provide a good indication of the extent to which forecasts for inflation, output growth, and the federal funds rate have changed since the summer of 2014. The June 2014 SEP showed U.S. GDP growth centered at roughly 3 percent in 2015 and core inflation running around 1-3/4 percent, and the median participant projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 would be 1-1/4 percent before rising to 2-1/2 percent at the end of 2016.9But in the most recent SEP following the September 2015 FOMC meeting, the median participant saw GDP growth at only 2 percent this year, core inflation at 1-1/2 percent, and the federal funds rate below 1/2 percent at the end of 2015 before rising to only 1-1/2 percent at the end of 2016.10 This greater degree of monetary accommodation seems appropriate given the adverse effects on U.S. aggregate demand coming from the rise in the dollar, an associated weakening of foreign economic prospects, and other developments that have restrained spending and kept inflation undesirably low. Monetary policy easing helps through "crowding in" domestic demand, which in turn helps boost price inflation and makes it less likely that inflation expectations drift below our 2 percent target. The Board staff's general-equilibrium models that take explicit account of the ability of monetary policy to crowd in domestic demand--including the staff's FRB/US and multicountry SIGMA models--suggest that monetary policy easing can substantially mitigate the effects of adverse shocks on GDP, including from the recent run-up in the dollar. In the case of the dollar shock considered previously, these models suggest that the all-in effects of the stronger dollar on GDP are only about one-half to two-thirds as large as implied by the trade model that abstracts from a monetary policy response--still substantial, to be sure, but much less significant for the economy than if monetary policy failed to play an active role. ConclusionTo wrap up, while the dollar's appreciation and foreign weakness have been a sizable shock, the U.S. economy appears to be weathering them reasonably well, notwithstanding their large effects on certain sectors of the economy heavily exposed to international trade. Monetary policy has played a key role in achieving these outcomes through deferring liftoff relative to what was expected a little over a year ago. The October 2015 FOMC statement indicated that it may be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at the next meeting in December, though the outcome will depend on the Committee's assessment of the progress--realized and expected--that has been made toward meeting our goals of maximum employment and price stability.11Of course, as policymakers, we must always be vigilant to events unfolding differently than we expect, and we must be ready to react accordingly. ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 17-18, 2014," press release, July 9. -------- (2015a). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, October 28. -------- (2015b). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 16-17, 2015," press release, October 8. Bussière, Matthieu, Simona Delle Chiaie, and Tuomas A. Peltonen (2014). "Exchange Rate Pass-Through in the Global Economy: The Role of Emerging Market Economies,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 62 (1), pp. 146-78. Gopinath, Gita (2015). "The International Price System," NBER Working Paper Series 21646. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Hofmann, Boris, Ilhyock Shim, and Hyun Song Shin (forthcoming). "The Risk Taking Channel of Currency Appreciation," BIS Working Paper. Loretan, Mico (2005). "Indexes of the Foreign Exchange Value of the Dollar (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 91 (Winter), pp. 1-8. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Christopher Erceg, Joseph Gruber, and Deborah Lindner for their contributions to this speech and to William English and David Skidmore for comments.Return to text 2. At times, starting in the 1990s, several central banks--most prominently, the Bank of Canada--have used amonetary conditions index, generally a weighted average of changes in a short-term interest rate and a multilateral exchange rate from some baseline, as a policy indicator.Return to text 3. The broad dollar is a weighted average of the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of a broad group of major U.S. trading partners. More information on the construction of the index can be found in Loretan (2005).Return to text 4. The results presented here are taken from the staff's U.S. International Transactions (USIT) model of the U.S. external sector. A forthcoming article in the Federal Reserve Board's International Finance Discussion Papers, or IFDP, Notes series will provide further detail on the structure and estimation of the trade block of the USIT model that is used in these computations.Return to text 5. It may be useful to note that exports in 2014 amounted to about 13-1/2 percent of GDP and imports to 16-1/2 percent of gross domestic product.Return to text 6. These estimates are consistent with recent analysis by Gopinath (2015) and Bussière, Delle Chiaie, and Peltonen (2014).Return to text 7. In the staff's trade model, imports are specified to depend on GDP in addition to the exchange rate. The estimates shown in figure 2 simply show the effects arising through the latter channel. Similarly for exports, the staff's model also controls for changes in a trade-weighted aggregate of foreign GDP, with the estimates in figure 2 showing only the effects from a change in the value of the dollar.Return to text 8. This econometric model is described in the appendix to Yellen (2015).Return to text 9. The SEP is an addendum to the FOMC minutes. For the June 2014 SEP, see Board of Governors (2014).Return to text 10. The September 2015 SEP is available in Board of Governors (2015b).Return to text 11. For the October 2015 FOMC statement, see Board of Governors (2015a).Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Watch live The financial crisis highlighted two major vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system. First was the magnitude of the too-big-to-fail problem. Second was the size and fragility of the so-called shadow banking system and the extent to which shadow banking activities not subject to prudential regulation were integrated with the regulated banking sector. In the intervening years, much has been done to address too-big-to-fail. With regard to shadow banking concerns, the specific forms related to mortgage lending that linked the regulated and unregulated sectors, such as the notorious structured investment vehicles (SIVs), collapsed during the crisis. Changes in capital, accounting, and other regulatory standards make these arrangements very unlikely to reappear. Moreover, the kind of very large nonbank financial firms whose failures deepened the crisis are now subject to consolidated prudential regulation and supervision. So, in a quite direct sense, the answer to the question posed by this conference of whether we are safer than before the crisis is easy to answer in the affirmative. Of course, "safer" does not necessarily mean safe enough. With respect to the largest banks, we continue to pursue the aim of promoting orderly resolution through evaluation of their resolution plans and through a long-term debt requirement, as proposed a few weeks ago. In addition, the banking agencies will be proposing a net stable funding ratio rule, aimed at assuring adequate medium-term liquidity, in the next few months. And the Federal Reserve is currently engaged in a review of its annual stress testing and capital planning exercises, one goal of which is to reflect better the range of risks confronted by these institutions. With respect to shadow banking, the subject of my remarks today, the circumstances are somewhat different. While the specific pre-crisis linkages to the regulated sector have been removed or better regulated, the possibility of other connections remains. More generally, risks to financial stability may arise anew from activities mostly or completely outside the ambit of prudentially regulated firms. Shadow banking is not a single, identifiable "system," but a constantly changing and largely unrelated set of intermediation activities pursued by very different types of financial market actors. Indeed, the very rigor of post-crisis reforms to prudential regulation may create new opportunities for such activities. The aphoristic warning to avoid too much emphasis on fighting the last war, since wholly new risks may have arisen, seems particularly applicable in this area. Yet there is simultaneously the opposite danger that the regulatory response to shadow banking will be too broad and too unidimensional. Indeed, the very term "shadow banking" tilts in that direction. This afternoon, I will try to identify some of the considerations that could help navigate between the perils of underappreciating the risks to financial stability arising from, and the costs from overreacting to, new forms of nonbank financial intermediation. Along the way I will make a few points. One is that, analytically, it is essential to disaggregate the various activities that fall under the loose term shadow banking and to assess the risks and benefits they present on a discrete basis. A second is that, notwithstanding the manifold nature of nonbank intermediation, it remains useful to identify the relationship of specific activities to the prudentially regulated sector. A third is that institutional considerations will be important in defining the potential, and actual, regulatory responses to nonbank intermediation. The Legacy of Shadow BankingAs you have probably noticed already, I have some misgivings about the continued use of the term shadow banking as a shorthand for various forms of nonbank financial intermediation that may need a regulatory response. The term conjures up a picture of lending and borrowing that resembles activity associated with, but not conducted by, commercial banks which is both over- and under-inclusive of actual risks to financial stability. Before elaborating on this point, though, let me review how the phrase does capture well the activities that played such a large part in precipitating and exacerbating the financial crisis.1 Before 2007, large banks provided credit and liquidity support, whether explicit or implicit, for a range of intermediation entities, including finance companies, nonbank mortgage lenders, SIVs, and asset-backed commercial paper conduits. All of these entities engaged in maturity and liquidity transformation, frequently accompanied by significant leverage. Many created, through securitization or otherwise, assets that were viewed as cash equivalents--safe, short-term, and liquid. That is, at least in normal times, they were seen as comparable to demand deposits created by the traditional banking sector. Thus, what we might refer to as the prototypical form of shadow banking presented the kind of risk associated with traditional banking prior to the creation of deposit insurance--that of destabilizing short-term creditor runs that lead to defaults and asset fire sales. Bank sponsorship contributed to the illusion that the shadow banks' short-term liabilities were virtually as good as cash. Large banks also relied on short-term wholesale funding provided by the shadow banking sector as a source of cheap financing. Then, questions arose about the quality of the mortgage loans and other assets underlying the liabilities of SIVs and asset-backed commercial paper conduits and, simultaneously, about the continued willingness and capacity of their sponsors to support them. Suddenly, asset-backed commercial paper was no longer seen as a cash equivalent, and a run ensued. Large investment banks also experienced dramatic runs on their short-term, secured wholesale funding. Another powerful run occurred, this time on money market mutual funds, after Lehman Brothers' shadow banking activities caused it to fail and the Reserve Primary Fund broke the buck. As noted earlier, some key elements of pre-crisis shadow banking such as SIVs have vanished, and some key actors of that earlier period have been brought within the bounds of prudential regulation. Today, the shadow banking sector is smaller and the traditional banking sector is more resilient. Nonetheless, abundant global liquidity continues to seek out safe assets, and some financial market participants will continue to accept maturity and liquidity mismatches in order to earn incrementally higher yields. The risks associated with short-term wholesale funding in particular have more receded than disappeared. Accordingly, the prototype of the precarious shadow banking model can generate new variants that should command regulatory attention. Before returning to this issue, though, I want to speak more directly to why and how we should analyze the risks and benefits associated with specific forms of nonbank financial intermediation, rather than make regulatory decisions based upon the fact that a particular form of intermediation bears some resemblance to the borrowing or lending activities traditionally associated with commercial banks. Analyzing Nonbank IntermediationSwitching from a focus on "shadow banking" to a consideration of the varieties of nonbank intermediation reinforces the importance of assessing specific risks rather than merely categorizing activities as either shadow banking or something else. In this way, the potential over-inclusiveness for financial stability purposes of the tag "shadow banking" can be better avoided. Even nonbank intermediaries that engage in lending to consumers or small businesses are not monolithic, insofar as the sources of their funding--and thus attendant run risks--may differ markedly. On the other hand, financial stability risks are not limited to entities or activities that seem to replicate the kind of lending conventionally associated with commercial banks. This is where the potential under-inclusiveness of the shadow banking category arises. Here again, though, it is important not to leap to the conclusion that where some risks do exist, they should be addressed in a uniform manner. For example, some classes of asset managers, such as bond funds that hold relatively illiquid assets while offering their investors the right to withdraw funds on very short notice,maypose redemption risks. But intermediaries such as many conventional mutual funds do not pose bank-like risks, since they generally are not leveraged. So, if further analysis supports the conclusion that redemption risks are real, the optimal regulatory response would surely not be one that treats all asset managers as quasi-banks that need to have capital and similar bank regulatory constraints.2 An emphasis on actual risks can lead to the conclusion that some nonbank financial entities or activities do not pose material threats to financial stability at all. Pension funds, for example, are surely an important form of intermediation. If, over time, they do not have assets sufficient to meet their promises to plan participants, whether because they have been underfunded in the traditional sense or because they have lost money through ill-considered investments, hardship will undoubtedly follow. If enough pension plans fell short of expectations, there might be macroeconomic consequences. And if they provide short-term funding in order to increase returns on the assets they need to keep liquid, they might contribute to the risks assumed by other kinds of intermediaries. But, in themselves, they are unlikely to pose financial stability risks. Similar reasoning would apply to traditional insurance activities. Even as the risks associated with specific forms of nonbank intermediation are evaluated, it is important also to bear in mind the specific economic benefits of those activities. Nonbank intermediaries can increase the diversity of the economy's capital providers. For example, the creation and eventual proliferation of equity mutual funds offered a variety of savings options to American households for which ownership of a diversified portfolio of equities is either practically burdensome or financially impossible. This development posed a challenge for the liability side of banks' balance sheets, as households reduced the share of their savings in traditional bank deposits. But it is hard to argue that this challenge would have merited limiting the availability of mutual funds. Nonbank intermediaries can also provide credit to borrowers that are underserved or unserved by traditional banks. It could be argued that one example of such nonbank activity is online marketplace lending that uses new sources of data and new technologies to lower the fixed costs of making credit decisions, rendering lending to some individuals and small businesses more cost-effective. Of course, it matters a great deal whether this competition to traditional banks arises because risks are genuinely lower or useful new products have been created, on the one hand, or because well-grounded prudential or consumer regulations have been successfully avoided, on the other.3 A key implication of the fact that the activities often grouped under the heading shadow banking are not monolithic is that the level of a particular activity is less important than the degree of vulnerability that it creates. Not all of what some might call shadow banking activity represents a market failure that creates excessive risk to financial stability, and so it would be wrong to assume that all shadow banking ought to be regulated to safeguard financial stability. This view is reflected in theGlobal Shadow Banking Monitoring Report for 2015, which has just been issued by the Financial Stability Board. The report begins by including all activities that could arguably be included in the very broad category of shadow banking, but then classifies these activities by economic function and risks. The result is about a 70 percent decrease in the amount of intermediation otherwise captured by the broader definition.4 Thus, assessing whether regulation is appropriate for specific forms of nonbank intermediation requires a balancing of the resulting increase in socially beneficial credit, capital, or savings options against any associated increase in risks to the safety and stability of the financial system as a whole. The chief relevant factors to consider include the extent of reliance on maturity or liquidity transformation, the creation of cash equivalent assets, the use of leverage, and the degree of interconnection with the traditional banking sector. When growth in nonbank intermediation reflects a migration of traditional banking activities to less-regulated entities, a number of similar considerations are relevant to an evaluation of the costs and benefits of the migration and the potential need for a regulatory response. Here, where the activity is probably quite bank-like, I am going to revert to the use of the term shadow bank. First, to what extent does the activity, as practiced by shadow banks, entail reliance on leverage or on maturity or liquidity transformation that could lead to a bank-like creditor run dynamic? Bank regulation is primarily aimed at preventing the occurrence of such destabilizing runs or minimizing their ill effects, and so the need for bank-like regulation is greater in the presence of material run risk. Second, are banks still informally or indirectly at risk despite the migration to nonbank entities? This could be the case if banks sponsor the shadow banks and implicitly or explicitly provide them with a liquidity backstop or credit support, and it would call for greater regulatory attention either to the shadow banks conducting the activity or to the banks' connection with those shadow banks. Third, is the activity at issue primarily migrating out of the most systemic banks--global systemically important banking organizations (GSIBs)--or smaller banks? Migration of activity out of GSIBs might on net be beneficial for financial stability because it would leave the GSIBs less systemic, even if the activity migrates to less-regulated shadow banks, though I would caution that an especially careful analysis would be needed before reaching this conclusion. In this regard, I would note that one way to limit the growth of shadow banking that simply arbitrages bank regulation is to make sure that the regulated sector itself is not unnecessarily burdened. This aim lies behind our efforts to tailor banking regulation by reference to the risks posed to the economy and the financial system by banks of different sizes, scopes, and business activities. In addition, it suggests a couple of additional considerations for evaluating specific forms of shadow banking. Here, though, the relevance of these considerations is for determining whether to adjust banking regulation, as much as it is for determining whether regulation of the shadow banks would be warranted. One such consideration is whether the activity is high-risk, and whether banks have a good track record in addressing the attendant risks. Migration may be of less concern where banks historically have done a poor job of managing the risks of the activity. Another salient consideration is whether the activity at issue has significant synergies with core banking activities. If so, then migration out of the traditional banking sector could damage the efficiency of banks and increase their vulnerability. Short-Term Wholesale FundingWhile I favor assessment of the specific risks and costs associated with a particular form of nonbank intermediation, I also believe that the greatest risks to financial stability are the funding runs and asset fire sales associated with reliance on short-term wholesale funding, and thus I place particular emphasis on this factor. If there is one lesson to be drawn from the financial crisis, it is that the rapid withdrawal of funding by short-term credit providers can lead to systemic problems as consequential as those associated with classic runs on traditional banks.5When financial intermediaries must rapidly liquidate a substantial amount of longer-term assets that they can no longer fund, the impact can reverberate throughout the financial system. The resulting declines in asset prices can trigger margin calls on other investors, who themselves may need to de-lever by selling their own holdings, adding to the fire sale-induced price impact on these, and potentially other, assets. In the worst case, the result can be the kind of generalized asset price decline and liquidity freeze observed at the height of the financial crisis. The total amount of short-term wholesale funding within the financial system is lower today than immediately before the crisis, but volumes are still large relative to the size of the financial system. For example, nearly half of the liabilities of broker-dealers consist of short-term wholesale funding, an amount that is nearly the same as it was during the crisis.6Numerous regulatory reforms have addressed the use of short-term wholesale funding by prudentially regulated institutions. The Board has finalized the liquidity coverage ratio7and is developing the net stable funding ratio to diminish large banks' vulnerability to abrupt changes in short-term wholesale markets. The Board's annual Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review provides an opportunity for supervisors to assess and, where necessary to contain risks, require changes to the specific funding practices of large banking organizations.8Finally, in order to increase the resilience of firms that continue to use significant amounts of such funding, we have also incorporated a measure of a firm's reliance on short-term wholesale funding into the calibration of both the capital surcharge for U.S. GSIBs and our proposed long-term debt requirement for those firms.9 These measures, applicable as they are only to prudentially regulated banking organizations, do nothing to address the risks of short-term wholesale funding by nonbank intermediaries. Indeed, constraints imposed on banking organizations may prompt more short-term wholesale funding to migrate outside the regulated sector. In the past, bank backstops were generally needed for shadow banks to obtain substantial amounts of such funding. But it is not so far-fetched to think that, with time and sufficient economic incentive, the financial, technological, and regulatory barriers to the disintermediation of prudentially regulated banking firms could be overcome. Indeed, we have observed some investment funds exploring the possibility of disintermediating dealers by lending cash against securities collateral to other market participants. While it would be inadvisable to apply bank-style regulation to all entities that make use of short-term wholesale funding, a degree of consistent regulatory treatment is desirable to address bank-like risks in the shadow banking sector and to forestall regulatory arbitrage. The Board has advocated for international measures to forestall the development of highly volatile funding structures outside the regulated sector. Consistent with this position, we will be developing a regulation that would establish minimum haircuts for securities financing transactions (SFTs) on a market-wide basis, rather than just for specific classes of market participants. SFTs include repo, reverse repo, securities lending and borrowing, and securities margin lending--transactions that are the lifeblood of many kinds of shadow banks. SFTs are a key component of the healthy functioning of the securities market. But, in the absence of sensible regulation, they also carry the potential for prompting the fire sale dynamic described earlier. While the haircuts and other conditions associated with SFTs today are considerably more conservative than during the period leading up to the crisis, there is good reason to believe that this conservatism could be eroded as economic conditions continue to improve and credit growth accelerates. A system of numerical haircut floors for SFTs would require any entity that wants to borrow against a security to post a minimum amount of excess margin to its lender, with the amount varying depending on the asset class of the collateral. Like the minimum margin requirements that U.S. regulators have imposed on derivatives contracts, numerical floors for SFT haircuts would serve as a mechanism for limiting the build-up of leverage in the financial system. They could also mitigate the risk to financial stability posed by pro-cyclical margin calls during times of financial stress, since putting a regulatory floor under SFT haircuts during good times would reduce the amount by which they would increase during periods of stress. Institutional ConsiderationsWhile the analytics of shadow banking, or nonbank intermediation more generally, lean toward a case-by-case balancing of risks and economic benefits, significant institutional issues also need to be addressed. Today I will mention only two. First is the issue of what form of regulation is appropriate once analysis suggests that a response is needed. By authorizing the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) to designate nonbanks as systemically important institutions, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act fills the gap that existed in the pre-crisis period, when firms like Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and AIG largely escaped the perimeter of prudential regulation. Designation by FSOC places firms under the regulation and supervision of the Federal Reserve Board. While the Board can shape the particulars of its oversight to the nature of each designated firm, the statute requires liquidity standards, risk management standards, resolution plans, and concentration limits, with the additional strong presumption of capital standards. As important as the designation authority is to preclude the Lehmans or AIGs of the future, it is almost surely not the optimal regulatory approach for most activities that can be characterized as shadow banking or that are conducted by nonbank intermediaries so as to raise financial stability concerns. The vast majority of firms engaged in such activities will not satisfy the statutory test for designation. In any case, it is unclear that all of the statutory prudential requirements for designated firms would be necessary or appropriate in dealing with the risks to financial stability posed by the activities of these firms. In many instances, and especially where funding vulnerabilities are at the heart of a business model, it is the activity itself that needs to be regulated in some way, whether there are a few large firms involved or many smaller ones. A tool that might be better targeted to actual risks, while avoiding unnecessary "bank-like" regulation would be what I have previously termed "prudential market regulation"--that is, a policy framework that builds on the traditional investor-protection and market-functioning aims of market regulation by incorporating a system-wide financial stability perspective. This approach would take into account such considerations as system-wide demands on liquidity during stress periods and correlated risks that could exacerbate liquidity, redemption, or fire sale pressures. The specific policies associated with prudential market regulation might be transaction-specific or apply to certain kinds of business models. One example of such a measure is the SFT minimum haircut idea I mentioned earlier. Generally, though, prudential market regulation would be a tool more available to market regulators, since it would apply to activities on a market or transactional basis. In her important speech last year, Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Chair Mary Jo White provided a roadmap for just such a regulatory approach for the asset management industry.10The SEC has since begun to develop that approach.11 The second institutional issue is the question of which regulators would make the assessment and policy tradeoffs that I contemplate in addressing financial stability risks associated with nonbank financial intermediation. The natural answer would be the regulator with authority to act. While this may well be the best answer from a policy perspective, it does raise some potential issues on its own. For example, if regulators with responsibility for one sector believe that the failure of regulators with responsibility for another sector to act on financial stability concerns is creating debilitating disadvantages for firms in the first sector, they might be tempted to relax regulation on their firms, even though they might agree that the best outcome would be to retain their existing regulations but have the other sector subject to some constraints as well. This seems to me not a bad description of what happened in banking for a good part of the three decades beginning in the mid-1970s, when the banking agencies pursued a variety of deregulatory measures in part because they believed that the franchise of commercial banking was being eroded by various capital market activities that were not subject to appropriate prudential requirements. ConclusionThe Financial Stability Board study to which I referred earlier notes that the growth of shadow banking in the United States in recent years has been relatively modest. With the regulated financial sector so much more resilient than in pre-crisis days, the financial system as a whole is obviously safer. Moreover, much of the innovation occurring in lending and payments arenas today carries the promise of genuinely increased efficiency, and does not appear to be just an arbitrage against the stronger post-crisis regulatory regime. But if history is any guide, the grace period we are now experiencing will not last forever. New forms of intermediation may carry new risks, or older forms may acquire new risks as they expand and adapt to new circumstances. If we are to pursue a policy of case-by-case assessment that permits healthy forms of nonbank intermediation while protecting the financial system, financial regulators will need to develop effective and supple mechanisms for what I have termed prudential market regulation. 1. For a fuller discussion, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), "Shadow Banking after the Financial Crisis," remarks delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Conference on Challenges in Global Finance, San Francisco, California, June 12.Return to text 2. Some mutual funds may in fact use a form of synthetic leveraging that could complicate an assessment of financial stability implications. See 80 Fed. Reg. 62279 (October 15, 2015), footnote 35.Return to text 3. For a discussion of potential concerns with marketplace lending, see Antonio Weiss (2015),remarks delivered at the Information Management Network Conference on Marketplace Lenders, New York, New York, October 29.Return to text 4. Financial Stability Board,Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2015(Basel, Switzerland: Financial Stability Board, November 12).Return to text 5. See, for example, Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick (2010), "Regulating the Shadow Banking System," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Washington: Brookings Institution, Fall).Return to text 6. See Stanley Fischer (2015), "Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the 59th Annual Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 2, Table 1.Return to text 7. 79 Fed. Reg. 61440 (October 10, 2014).Return to text 8. For a fuller description, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Liquidity Regulation," remarks delivered at the Clearing House 2014 Annual Conference, New York, New York, November 20.Return to text 9. See 80 Fed. Reg. 49082 (August 14, 2015) (GSIB risk-based capital surcharge final rule); andwww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20151030a1.pdf(long-term debt proposal).Return to text 10. See Mary Jo White (2014), "Enhancing Risk Monitoring and Regulatory Safeguards for the Asset Management Industry," speech delivered at the New York Times DealBook Opportunities for Tomorrow Conference, New York, New York, December 11.Return to text 11. See 80 Fed. Reg. 62274 (October 15, 2015).Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the "Unconventional Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies," 16th International Monetary Fund Jacques Polak Research Conference, Washington, D.C. Watch live Among students of central banking, the Great Recession will be remembered in part for the monetary policy innovation it prompted. Since 2008, we have seen several episodes of extreme financial conditions in major economies. In many countries, monetary policy has shouldered a large share of the policy response. Debt-deleveraging dynamics and disinflationary pressures have confronted policymakers in several economies with the classic challenge of providing accommodation when constrained by the zero lower bound. In contrast to the Great Depression, a number of central banks have found the "courage to act," which has led to important policy innovation. While it will take many years for rigorous research to distill the lessons from this period, I will offer a few preliminary observations.1 The Effectiveness of Unconventional Monetary PolicyFor much of the period since 2008, many economies, including the United States, the United Kingdom, Switzerland, the euro area, and Japan, have been at or near the zero lower bound. Many economies have experienced depressed aggregate demand and large and persistent gaps between output and potential, which have led to significant reductions in the level of policy rates in order to achieve full employment and target inflation. Moreover, the neutral level of short-term risk-free rates looks to be much lower now in many countries than it had been previously. A lower neutral rate raises the likelihood that the requisite monetary accommodation when using conventional tools alone implies setting the nominal policy rate below zero. With constraints on moving nominal interest rates significantly below zero, central banks have looked to unconventional policy, such as asset purchases. The evidence suggests that unconventional monetary policy can be effective at overcoming the limitations on policy at the zero lower bound by operating through channels broadly similar to conventional monetary policy. A number of studies have suggested that the forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases conducted by the Federal Reserve boosted the levels of employment and inflation at a time when the level of short-term interest rates was constrained by the zero lower bound. For example, Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider estimate that the Federal Reserve's forward guidance and asset purchase programs may have lowered the unemployment rate by as much as 1-1/4 percentage points and increased the level of inflation by 50 basis points.2 While conventional policy operates directly on the current and expected future path of overnight interest rates, and thereby indirectly influences longer-term interest rates, asset purchases are directly targeted at lowering yields on longer-term securities, which continue to have positive interest rates. In the so-called portfolio balance effect, the asset purchases reduce the supply of long-term Treasury and agency securities available in the market, which leads investors to bid up the price of remaining securities, thus lowering yields across a range of financial assets. Despite this difference, the channels through which asset purchases affect the economy appear similar to those of conventional monetary policy. The resulting reduction in interest rates spurs investment and purchases of consumer durables, lowers the exchange rate, and increases the prices of risky assets, such as equities. In addition, many have also emphasized an indirect effect through a "signaling channel." By helping to shape expectations about the expected future path of the federal funds rate, asset purchases help reinforce forward guidance. Thus, asset purchases can affect longer-run interest rates by lowering the expected path of short-term rates as well as by reducing the term premium of long-duration securities.3 Spillovers from Unconventional Monetary PolicyTurning to the cross-border effects, just as unconventional policy appears similar to conventional policy in its domestic effects, the analysis so far suggests that spillovers from unconventional monetary policy work through the same three channels as conventional monetary policy does.4First, when monetary policy in one country responds to a negative economic shock by easing, this action helps support domestic demand, which in turn will likely lead to greater demand for the exports of foreign countries. Second, monetary policy easing can also lead to a depreciation of the country's foreign exchange rate, which switches domestic expenditures away from foreign exports. Finally, it eases conditions across financial markets in that country, which can lead to financial easing in foreign markets when global financial markets are tightly integrated. The spillovers are likely to be more positive the greater the expansion of domestic demand relative to the expenditure switching effect through the exchange rate and the greater is the easing of financial conditions. The magnitude of the relative cross-border effects from each of these three channels will depend on the size of the country that is easing monetary policy as well as its relative weight in international financial markets. Since 2008, changes in the stance of monetary policy in major economies have often elicited strong reactions in other economies. Whether the global spillovers from changes in monetary policy were viewed as benign or challenging depends on the relative strength of the three transmission effects described earlier, the relative divergence of conditions in foreign economies, and the flexibility of their monetary policy tools to offset divergent spillovers. To illustrate this point, let's start with a case where the effect of easing through unconventional means was broadly welcomed. From 2008 through 2009, the Federal Reserve eased policy through cuts in its policy rate and through large-scale asset purchases. That easing came in the context of a widespread global slump and severe strains in global financial markets, and in these circumstances it had significant positive international spillovers. The boost to domestic demand likely outweighed any effect via the exchange rate and contributed to an easing of U.S. and global financial conditions. Those positive spillovers were reinforced by widespread easing of conventional monetary policies by central banks across the globe in response to the depressed state of their economies. In contrast, in 2010 and 2011, when the Federal Reserve undertook its second round of large-scale asset purchases, the global reaction was mixed. By that time, several emerging market economies were experiencing economic conditions close to full employment and strong credit growth. For many of the countries with divergent economic conditions, the combination of a market-based exchange rate and a firmly anchored monetary policy framework oriented around domestic objectives was sufficient to offset spillovers. Others, however, saw the increased capital inflows associated with the divergence of conditions as presenting problems for the management of their own economies. One country in this category was China, which was experiencing an investment-led expansion accompanied by credit expansion. Separately, several emerging market economies with relatively flexible exchange rates, particularly those experiencing expansions because of strong commodity prices, saw risks from the combination of capital inflows and upward pressure on exchange rates. Elevated inflows of foreign capital can present challenges in circumstances where prudential oversight and control of financial markets are not fully developed. Thus, countries such as Brazil worried that heavy capital inflows could lead to an undesirable loosening of credit conditions and leave the economy vulnerable to rapid reversals. In the past two years, we have seen these concerns play out in reverse. During the "taper tantrum" in 2013 and again in recent months, an increase in expectations of policy divergence in the United States confronted economic policymakers in emerging markets with capital outflows and financial tightening against a backdrop of weakening economic growth and financial imbalances. For these economies, while exchange rate depreciation can help offset weaker demand for exports and tighter financial conditions, it also puts upward pressure on inflation and may create problems for corporations with considerable foreign-currency denominated debt. In the case of China, a previously set course of tying the renminbi to the U.S. dollar led to an appreciation of the currency from mid-2014 to mid-2015 in an economy that was already slowing. Attempts to offset the effects of this undesired appreciation have had mixed results. Discontinuity around the Zero Lower BoundIf the research is correct in concluding that the channels for spillovers do not differ, these episodes should have played out little differently for conventional policy changes than they did for unconventional policy. That raises the question of why announcements of new policy actions around the zero lower bound have elicited such intense reactions. The launch of the Federal Reserve's second asset purchase program in November 2010, for instance, sparked a blistering response from several foreign policymakers. One foreign finance ministry official was famously quoted as denouncing it as "clueless," while others dubbed it the start of a "currency war." Officials from emerging markets with managed exchange rates argued that the United States "has not fully taken into consideration the shock of excessive capital flows to the financial stability of emerging markets."5 The reaction was just as striking--albeit in the opposite direction--when the Federal Reserve first announced its intention to taper asset purchases in 2013. The taper talk coincided with a broad reassessment of prospects in several large emerging markets in which some combination of financial, fiscal, and external imbalances had been building for some time. Spillovers through financial channels were immediate despite the fact that the anticipated reduction in asset purchases in the United States was expected to take place gradually sometime in the future. My conjecture is that the widespread perception that unconventional monetary policy has large and disruptive spillovers may be a reflection of the discontinuity associated with discrete policy changes at the zero lower bound, along with greater uncertainty about the policy reaction function, rather than differences in the underlying channels of transmission. When policy rates are in a range comfortably above the lower bound, most of the major central banks confront a relatively narrow range of options in a relatively familiar framework of decisionmaking and communications. By contrast, over the past six years, decisions by major central banks to initiate asset purchases have neither been seen nor communicated as incremental adjustments, but instead as bold new initiatives whose cumulative intended scale, duration, or objective were announced at the outset, often against the backdrop of a public debate about the efficacy and appropriateness of various policy options. For example, in its first two asset purchase programs the Federal Reserve committed to buying $1.7 trillion and $600 billion of assets, respectively, while in the subsequent flows-based program it committed to continuing monthly asset purchases until the outlook for the labor market had met a target for substantial improvement. Cumulative asset purchases averaged a little over $1 trillion per program, which econometric estimates suggest contributed to sizable reductions in term premiums embedded in long-term yields and a downward shift in the expected path of the federal funds rate. Similarly, in 2013, the Bank of Japan announced asset purchases at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen and committed to continuing these purchases until inflation had moved up to 2 percent. The European Central Bank, at the beginning of this year, committed to buying 60 billion euros of assets each month at least through September of next year, or until inflation is on a path to get to close to 2 percent. In all of these cases, the policy actions themselves were large and designed to generate a significant easing in overall financial conditions, and the announcement effect likely was amplified because the policy reaction function around the zero lower bound was not well known and hence was difficult to anticipate. International Coordination of Unconventional Monetary PolicyThe intense debates over cross-border spillovers of unconventional monetary policy during the crisis naturally elicited calls for global coordination of monetary policy to avoid beggar-thy-neighbor actions that could undermine growth globally. Recognizing the practical limitations of such proposals, in 2013, the Group of Seven (G-7) instead adopted a more circumscribed but achievable set of commitments. Each member committed that its monetary policy settings--unconventional as well as conventional--would be oriented to meeting its "respective domestic objectives using domestic instruments," and "not target[ing] exchange rates."6This agreement ensured that actions in the major advanced economies would be designed to provide accommodation targeted to supporting domestic demand, which would in turn support global demand--in contrast to classical demand-sapping beggar-thy-neighbor policies designed to shift demand by weakening the exchange rate. The agreement to use domestic policy instruments to support domestic output and inflation objectives is likely, on net, to be an important constraint against beggar-thy-neighbor policies, especially in the less charted territory of unconventional policy. Implications for the United StatesFinally, it is worth considering what this implies for the United States. While traditionally the United States is viewed more as a source than a recipient of cross-border spillovers, recent events have demonstrated that U.S. economic and financial conditions can be sensitive to spillovers from advanced economies as well as from major emerging market economies. Over the past two years, we have seen divergences emerge among major economies in domestic growth prospects and the expected direction of monetary policy. Earlier in this period, the focus was on heightened deflationary risks in Japan and the euro area. The policy response to these pressures and the anticipated divergence between the policy trajectories in these economies and the United States contributed to a 10 percent real appreciation in the dollar against a basket of currencies through the spring of this year. More recently, growth projections have been marked down for emerging market economies, which previously had been an important source of global growth. Increased recognition of the risks to the outlook for major emerging market economies pushed the dollar up further to 15 percent above its level last summer and contributed to a more general tightening of financial conditions over the summer. Much of the focus of investors and policymakers around the world has been on China, where the buildup of past property bubbles, and more-recent stock market, bubbles, together with a steep run-up in business debt levels and questions about the policy framework, have raised concerns. In turn, growth has slowed both in many commodity-exporting countries whose exports are sensitive to Chinese demand as well as many non-commodity-producing East Asian economies that are tied to China through trade and investment and are important destinations for U.S. exports. The feedback loop between market expectations of divergence between the United States and our major trade partners and financial tightening in the United States means that material restraint to U.S. conditions is already in place. Looking ahead, a further weakening of foreign growth could pose downside risks to the U.S. outlook. Under normal circumstances, policy in the United States could adjust to signs that spillovers from developments abroad were affecting activity in the United States. But with policy rates in the United States at the lower bound, the ability to offset spillovers from adverse developments in foreign economies with conventional policy is constrained, suggesting greater caution than normal. In conclusion, the Great Recession has sparked innovative actions in a number of countries that have helped monetary policy escape the constraints of the zero lower bound. Just as it appears that unconventional monetary policy can provide accommodation domestically similar to conventional monetary policy, so too it appears that cross-borders spillovers work through the same channels. Nonetheless, the discontinuity of discrete policy changes around the zero lower bound can amplify the effects. In response to heightened sensitivity around these spillovers, countries that have deployed unconventional policy have committed to do so in a way that targets domestic objectives using domestic instruments, thereby helping to ensure their actions would support rather than sap global demand. I am grateful to Andrew Figura and Paul Wood for their assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Eric M. Engen, Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015), "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System).Return to text 3. A number of observers have suggested that the market and macroeconomic effects of the initial asset purchase programs announced at the most intense period of the financial crisis may have been larger than the programs announced later in the recovery. The initial programs were important in bolstering confidence broadly and supporting liquidity in financial markets. The later asset purchase programs, particularly the flow-based program whose duration was tied to a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market, were important in signaling that the Federal Reserve was committed to taking all actions necessary to achieve its mandated objectives.Return to text 4. For example, see David Bowman, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza (2014), "U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1109 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June); John H. Rogers, Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright (2014), "Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Comparison (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1101 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March); Joshua Hausman and Jon Wongswan (2011), "Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements,"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 30 (April), pp. 547-71; and Reuven Glick and Sylvain Leduc (2013), "The Effects of Unconventional and Conventional U.S. Monetary Policy on the Dollar (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2013-11 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May).Return to text 5. See, for instance, Steven Hill (2010), “Germany Speaks Out,” Op-Ed, New York Times, November 13, www.nytimes.com/2010/11/13/opinion/13iht-edhill.html?_r=0; Jonathan Wheatley and Peter Garnham (2010), “Brazil in ‘Currency War’ Alert,” Financial Times, September 15; and Newsmax Finance (2010), “China: Fed Easing May Flood World Economy With ‘Hot Money’,” Newsmax Media, November 8, www.newsmax.com/Finance/StreetTalk/China-Fed-Easing-Flood/2010/11/08/id/376288.Return to text 6. HM Treasury (2013), "Statement by the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors," February 12.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the "Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the Post-Crisis Period," a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. It is my pleasure to welcome you to the Federal Reserve Board's conference on "Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the Post-Crisis Period." The conference aims to bring together academic and central bank economists, financial market practitioners, and policymakers to stimulate debate and research on a topic that is critically important to the Federal Reserve's mission of conducting monetary policy in the pursuit of maximum employment and stable prices. The global financial crisis had profound effects on our economy, and it altered the way many think about monetary policy. At the peak of the crisis and during its immediate aftermath, unconventional monetary policy measures were designed and implemented by the Federal Reserve and other central banks around the world. The post-crisis period has offered policymakers an opportunity to assess a range of novel policy and operational issues associated with the conduct of monetary policy and the effectiveness of different policy options. Specifically, policymakers have to carefully weigh the advantages and disadvantages of alternative monetary implementation frameworks in the presence of new policy tools. Moreover, policymakers should be mindful of new channels for monetary policy transmission that may have emerged from the intricate economic and financial linkages in our global economy that were revealed by the crisis. Finally, it is crucial to understand the effect of regulations and possible changes in financial intermediation on monetary policy implementation and transmission. The impressive conference program covers the following topics in three sessions: monetary policy implementation, the transmission of monetary policy, and the effect of regulation and financial intermediation on monetary policy implementation and transmission. The presentations and discussions of the 12 academic papers on the conference program will surely provide a foundation for what I expect will be a stimulating discussion of important topics over the next two days. Looking ahead to later today, I am delighted that Vice Chairman Fischer will deliver keynote remarks on the exchange rate mechanism in the transmission of monetary policy. Tomorrow the conference concludes with two interesting policy panels on the effect of regulations on monetary policy and the "optimal design" of monetary policy in the post-crisis world. Let me also say that I consider the topics covered during this conference highly relevant for the Federal Reserve System's ongoing efforts to evaluate potential long-run monetary policy implementation frameworks and to assess a number of issues related to the consideration of alternative frameworks. I hope the work and ideas presented and discussed over the next two days will spur subsequent research on these issues and promote further collaboration among all of you. As I have often stressed before, in addition to its responsibilities for monetary policy and financial regulation and supervision, the Federal Reserve takes very seriously its role as a research institution. I want to thank our research conference committee for putting together this high-caliber research conference, which has gathered distinguished speakers and guests from around the world and, I am sure, will add to our understanding of the implementation and transmission of monetary policy. Welcome to the Federal Reserve Board. I hope you all have enjoyable and productive discussions over the next two days.
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, District of Columbia Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's regulation and supervision of financial institutions. One of our most fundamental goals is to promote a financial system that is strong, resilient, and able to serve a healthy and growing economy. We work to ensure the safety and soundness of the firms we supervise and also to ensure that they comply with applicable consumer protection laws, so that they may, even when faced with stressful financial conditions, continue serving consumers, businesses, and communities. At today's hearing, I would like to discuss the lessons of the financial crisis and how we have transformed our regulatory and supervisory approach. Before the crisis, our primary goal was to ensure the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions. A key shortcoming of that approach was that we did not focus sufficiently on shared vulnerabilities across firms or the systemic consequences of the distress or failure of the largest, most complex firms. In the fall of 2008, the failure or near-failure of several of these firms--many of which we did not supervise at the time--sparked a panic that engulfed the financial system and much of the economy. Today we aim to regulate and supervise financial firms in a manner that promotes the stability of the financial system as a whole. This shift in focus has led to a comprehensive change in our regulation and supervision of large financial institutions. As I will discuss in more detail, we have introduced a series of requirements for large banking organizations that reduce the risks to the system and our economy that could result from the failure or distress of these institutions. In addition, we have made changes in our supervision that now allow us to supervise large financial institutions on a more coordinated, forward-looking basis. At the same time, we have been careful to make more-measured changes in our approach to regulating and supervising firms at the other end of the spectrum. Smaller institutions did not emerge from the financial crisis unscathed, and we have identified several areas in which the supervision of these institutions can be strengthened. At the same time, we are well aware that regulatory and compliance costs can impose a burden that is disproportionate to the risks these institutions pose to taxpayers and financial stability. We are committed to ensuring that the supervision of smaller institutions is tailored appropriately to their risk. Strengthening the Regulation and Supervision of the Largest Financial InstitutionsRegulatory FrameworkThe regulatory reforms we have adopted since the crisis have been designed to address the risks posed by large financial institutions in one of two ways. First, our reforms are designed to reduce the probability that large financial institutions will fail by requiring those institutions to make themselves more resilient to stress. However, we recognize that we cannot eliminate the possibility of a large financial institution's failure. Therefore, a second aim of our post-crisis reforms has been to limit the systemic damage that would result if a large financial institution does fail. This effort has involved taking steps to help ensure that authorities would have the ability to resolve a failed firm in an orderly manner while its critical operations continue to function. To reduce the probability of a large financial institution's failure, we and the other federal banking agencies have implemented a series of reforms that strengthen the firms we regulate. We have implemented capital rules that require large banking organizations to hold substantially larger amounts of high-quality capital. Working with the other federal banking agencies, we also have adopted a liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) rule that requires large banking organizations to hold a buffer of high-quality liquid assets sufficient to meet net liquidity outflows during a period of severe stress. In addition, the Board has established a broader set of enhanced prudential standards for large domestic and foreign banking organizations pursuant to section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), which includes risk-based and leverage capital requirements, liquidity standards, risk-management requirements, and stress testing.1 We have also adopted risk-based and leverage capital surcharges for the handful of U.S. firms that we have identified as global systemically important banking organizations (GSIBs), which require these firms to hold larger amounts of loss-absorbing capital than other firms.2The U.S. GSIBs are central intermediaries in U.S. financial markets, and their failure or distress would thus likely cause the most harm to the financial system. Under the framework that the Board adopted this summer, a GSIB's risk-based capital surcharge would reflect the effect that its failure would have on the financial system. In effect, the risk-based capital surcharge confronts each U.S. GSIB with a choice: It can hold more capital, or it can reduce its systemic footprint. Although similar to the international risk-based capital surcharge framework that we helped design, the rule adopted by the Board is calibrated at a level that requires U.S. GSIBs to hold significantly more capital than would be required under the international framework. A second important difference between the Board's rule and the international framework is that the Board's rule incorporates a measure of each GSIB's use of short-term wholesale funding, which is a key determinant of a GSIB's systemic footprint. To limit the systemic effect of a large financial institution's failure, the Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) have adopted a resolution plan rule that requires large banking organizations to show how they could be resolved in an orderly manner under the bankruptcy code. Last week the Board proposed another reform that would establish long-term debt and total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) requirements for U.S. GSIBs. We see these requirements as critical to avoiding the choice that authorities faced in the most recent crisis between bailing out large financial firms and allowing those firms to fail in a manner that would impose large costs on the broader economy. With the new requirements, if losses were to wipe out a firm's capital and push a firm into resolution, a sufficient amount of long-term unsecured debt would provide a mechanism for absorbing additional losses and recapitalizing the firm without generating contagion across the financial system and damaging the economy. In effect, this requirement provides a means for "bailing in" a firm's long-term debt holders so that a taxpayer bailout will be unnecessary. These requirements also should improve market discipline by ensuring that each GSIB has a class of creditors with clear incentive to monitor the firm's risk-taking. Supervisory ApproachIn addition to strengthening the regulation of the largest, most complex financial institutions, we have also transformed our supervision of these firms. Our work is now more forward looking and multidisciplinary, drawing on a wide range of staff expertise. We put this new approach into operation with the creation of the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC). The LISCC is charged with the supervision of the firms that pose elevated risk to U.S. financial stability. Those firms include the eight U.S. banking organizations that have been identified as GSIBs, four foreign banking organizations with large and complex U.S. operations, and the four nonbank financial institutions that have been designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC).3The supervisory approach embodied in the LISCC differs from our more traditional approach to supervision in that it is oriented toward both the safety and soundness of the individual firms, and the stability of the financial system as a whole.4 The LISCC program is distinguished by several characteristics. First, the LISCC, led by the Board's director of the Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, has implemented a more centralized, multidisciplinary supervisory approach by bringing together experts from around the Federal Reserve System in the areas of supervision, research, legal counsel, financial markets, and payments systems. Second, the LISCC takes a forward-looking approach by focusing on capital and liquidity resiliency under normal and potentially adverse conditions in the future as well as governance and recovery and resolution preparedness. And, third, the LISCC complements traditional, firm-specific supervisory work with annual "horizontal" programs that examine the same firms at the same time and on the same set of issues in order to promote better monitoring of trends and consistency of assessments across all of the LISCC firms. The Federal Reserve conducts three major horizontal reviews of the LISCC banking firms each year that are focused on capital adequacy, liquidity resiliency, and preparedness for recovery and resolution. With regard to capital adequacy, the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) is designed to ensure that large U.S. bank holding companies, including the LISCC firms, have rigorous, forward-looking capital planning processes and have sufficient levels of capital to operate through times of stress, as defined by the Federal Reserve's supervisory stress scenario. The program enables us to make a quantitative and qualitative assessment of the resilience and capital planning abilities of the largest banking firms on an annual basis and to limit capital distributions for firms that exhibit weaknesses. With regard to liquidity resiliency, under the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review (CLAR), LISCC firms are subject to a comprehensive review of their liquidity positions and liquidity risk management, including internal stress-testing practices. Firms with weak liquidity positions or practices are directed to improve those practices and augment their liquidity positions as needed. Similar to CCAR, CLAR is designed to ensure that LISCC firms have rigorous, forward-looking liquidity stress testing and risk-management practices that account for unique risks, and that the LISCC firms maintain sufficient liquidity to continue to operate through a period of acute stress. The program allows the Federal Reserve to compare the range of practices across firms and form a view on liquidity vulnerabilities and funding concentrations in the system as a whole. Unlike CCAR, which currently applies to all firms with $50 billion or more in total assets, only firms within the LISCC portfolio are required to participate in CLAR. LISCC firms are also subject to an annual review of their recovery and resolution preparedness. The program evaluates progress in implementing operational capabilities and legal entity rationalization that would facilitate recovery or resolution under a range of scenarios and provides the Federal Reserve with the ability to compare progress on recovery and resolution planning across firms. We are working with the FDIC to evaluate the GSIBs' most recent resolution plans, which were submitted in July. As I noted, the LISCC is also responsible for the supervision of nonbank financial companies that have been designated by the FSOC. The Federal Reserve currently conducts active, on-site supervision of all four of the designated firms. We are tailoring our supervisory framework to the specific business lines, risk profiles, and systemic footprints of these firms. Our supervisory efforts to date have focused on strengthening the firms' risk identification, measurement, and management; internal controls; and corporate governance. Our objectives for the designated holding companies are to ensure that the consolidated firms operate safely and soundly and to mitigate risks to financial stability. We coordinate our consolidated supervision of the three designated insurance companies, as well as the other insurance holding companies we supervise, with state insurance regulators, who continue their established oversight of insurance legal entities within the consolidated firms. We do not regulate the manner in which insurance is provided by these companies or the types of insurance they provide. Those important aspects of the firms' activities are the province of state insurance supervisors. Regulation and Supervision of Large and Regional CompaniesIn supervising banking organizations with more than $50 billion in assets but outside the LISCC program, the Board focuses on ensuring that companies are well managed, appropriately capitalized, and prepared to withstand potential adverse developments in the business environment. However, because the distress or failure of a non-LISCC firm is unlikely to have the same effect on financial stability as that of a LISCC firm, we do not apply the full range of rules that we apply to those in the LISCC portfolio. For example, the Board's risk-based and leverage capital surcharges, as well as the recently proposed long-term debt and TLAC requirements, only apply to GSIBs. Similarly, the advanced approaches capital rules, countercyclical capital buffer, supplementary leverage ratio, and full LCR only apply to internationally active banking organizations.5We also scale our examination procedures to reflect the lower level of systemic risk presented by non-LISCC companies. Regulatory and supervisory requirements are further tailored for regional banking organizations, defined as those with total assets between $10 billion and $50 billion. For example, while regional banking organizations must comply with recently implemented changes that strengthened the risk-based capital rules, they are not subject to a supervisory stress test or CCAR. Rather, as required by the Dodd-Frank Act, regional banking organizations perform their own stress tests. Similarly, these companies are not subject to enhanced prudential standards established under section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, the LCR, or other related requirements. Instead, we conduct regular inspections and evaluate their safety and soundness based on each company's individual circumstances. Because many regional banking organizations concentrate their assets and activities in banking subsidiaries that are supervised by other federal banking agencies, we coordinate supervisory activities closely with our regulatory colleagues and rely significantly on the results of their examinations, focusing our own inspections on the parent company and its ability to serve as a source of strength to the banks. Community Bank SupervisionI know that community banks play a vital role in many of your districts. Let me say that the experiences and challenges of community banking are not new to me. Before I became Chair of the Board of Governors and Vice Chair before that, I spent six years as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. In that role, I was responsible for the supervision of a substantial number of community banking organizations in the nine states of the San Francisco District. Among the lessons that experience reinforced is that when it comes to bank regulation and supervision, one size does not fit all. To effectively promote safety and soundness and ensure consumer compliance without creating undue regulatory burden, rules and supervisory approaches should be tailored to different types of institutions such as community banks. The Federal Reserve supervises more than 830 community banks and more than 4,000 holding companies that control small depository institutions. These are banking organizations with total assets of $10 billion or less. In supervising these institutions, we follow a risk-focused approach that aims to target examination resources to higher-risk areas of each bank's operations and to ensure that banks maintain risk-management capabilities appropriate to their size and complexity. In the wake of the crisis, we are taking steps to refine this process by using the financial data we collect from banks to calibrate our examination procedures based on risk. We believe this will help us to be more forward looking in addressing emerging risks and to ensure that community bank examiners with specialized expertise and experience are allocated to the institutions exhibiting the highest risks. We have also implemented a new risk-focused consumer compliance examination framework that is intended to allow examiners to spend less time on low-risk compliance issues so that issues more likely to result in harm to consumers get more attention. And we continue to improve our examiner commissioning training program to ensure that it fully reflects the lessons of the recent crisis. With the Congress's support, we have also taken action to relieve small holding companies of certain requirements by raising the asset threshold for the Board's Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement from $500 million to $1 billion, and by applying this statement to small savings and loan holding companies. The Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement promotes local control of community banking organizations by acknowledging that smaller companies have less access to the capital markets and allowing them to fund acquisitions with a higher level of debt than would otherwise be allowed. We also relieved small holding companies of requirements to comply with consolidated capital requirements, recognizing that their bank subsidiaries make up most of their assets and are already subject to capital rules. In addition, in conjunction with this change, we eliminated quarterly and more detailed consolidated financial reporting requirements for holding companies with less than $1 billion in assets, and instead require parent-only financial statements on a semiannual basis.6 Consistent with the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA), the Board is also working with the other federal banking agencies to identify banking regulations that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome. As part of the EGRPRA review, the agencies have held several public outreach meetings with bankers, consumer groups, and other stakeholders.7Several themes have emerged during the discussions. For example, community bankers in rural areas have noted that it can be difficult to find an appraiser with knowledge about the local housing market at a reasonable fee. Bankers have asked the agencies to consider increasing the dollar threshold for requiring appraisals, which could allow them to use a less formal valuation of collateral for a larger number of mortgage loans. In addition, bankers have raised concerns about the extent of the financial reporting requirements established by the banking agencies. In response, the banking agencies have already taken steps under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council to consider options to eliminate or revise Call Report data items and to develop a streamlined reporting form for community banks.8 Bankers have also asked whether the agencies could review the statutorily mandated safety-and-soundness examination frequency for banks, which varies based on a bank's asset size and condition, as a way to ease the burden of frequent on-site examinations. Other bankers have commented on the burden associated with recently implemented changes to the capital guidelines and have encouraged the agencies to consider simplifying requirements for community banking organizations. The Federal Reserve is giving all of these suggestions careful consideration and will be working closely with the other banking agencies in developing a report to the Congress at the conclusion of the EGRPRA review. Given the important role that community banks play in their communities and the economic support they provide across the country, we recognize that our supervision of community banks must be balanced and avoid unnecessarily constraining their activities. Current ConditionsHaving reviewed the major changes we have made to our regulatory and supervisory programs, let me offer a few brief remarks about the current state of the firms we regulate. The financial condition of the firms in the LISCC portfolio has strengthened considerably since the crisis. Common equity capital at the eight U.S. GSIBs alone has more than doubled since 2008, representing an increase of almost $500 billion. Moreover, these firms generally have much more stable funding positions: The amount of high-quality liquid assets held by the eight U.S. GSIBs has increased by roughly two-thirds since 2012, and their reliance on short-term wholesale funding has dropped considerably. Our new regulatory and supervisory approaches are aimed at helping ensure these firms remain strong. Requiring these firms to plan for an orderly resolution has forced them to think more carefully about the sustainability of their business models and corporate structures. Nevertheless, while we have seen some evidence of improved risk management, internal controls, and governance at the LISCC firms, they continue to have substantial compliance and risk-management issues. Compliance breakdowns in recent years have undermined confidence in the LISCC firms' risk management and controls and could have implications for financial stability, given the firms' size, complexity, and interconnectedness. The LISCC firms must address these issues directly and comprehensively. Our examinations have found large and regional banks to be well capitalized. Both large and regional banking organizations experienced dramatic improvements in profitability since the financial crisis, although these banks have also faced challenges in recent years due to weak growth in interest and noninterest income. Both large and regional institutions have seen robust growth in commercial and industrial lending. Finally, community banks are significantly healthier. More than 95 percent are now profitable, and capital lost during the crisis has been largely replenished. Loan growth is picking up, and problem loans are now at levels last seen early in the financial crisis. ConclusionWhile more work remains to be done, I hope you will take away from my testimony just how much has changed. Taken as a whole, the reforms we have adopted since the crisis, including those mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act, represent a substantial strengthening of the regulatory framework for the largest financial institutions and should help ensure that the U.S. financial system remains able to fulfill its vital role of supporting the economy. Our supervisory approach is more comprehensive and forward looking while also tailored to fit the level of oversight to the risks and scope of the institution. We know our work is not complete. In the coming year we anticipate moving forward on other rulemaking initiatives that will complement the steps we have already taken. The Federal Reserve is committed to remaining vigilant, diligent, and forward looking as a regulator and supervisor of the financial institutions that serve our economy. We will do everything we can to fulfill the responsibility that has been entrusted to us by the Congress and the American public. Thank you. I would be pleased to respond to your questions. 1.The enhanced prudential standards we have established require foreign banking organizations with large U.S. operations to organize their U.S. subsidiaries under an intermediate holding company. This intermediate holding company requirement provides a basis for regulating and supervising the U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations on a more robust and consistent basis.Return to text 2.The firms currently identified as U.S. GSIBs are Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; Citigroup, Inc.; The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; Morgan Stanley; State Street Corporation; and Wells Fargo & Company.Return to text 3.The foreign banking organizations whose U.S. operations are currently supervised as part of the LISCC program are Barclays PLC, Credit Suisse Group AG, Deutsche Bank AG, and UBS AG. The firms designated by the FSOC for supervision by the Federal Reserve are American International Group, Inc.; General Electric Capital Corporation, Inc.; MetLife, Inc.; and Prudential Financial, Inc.Return to text 4.Further information on the LISCC, including a full list of the supervised firms, is available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm.Return to text 5.An "internationally active banking organization" is defined as a banking organization with more than $250 billion in total assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign exposure.Return to text 6.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Rule to Expand Applicability of Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and Apply It to Certain Savings and Loan Holding Companies," press release, April 9.Return to text 7.An additional EGRPRA outreach meeting is scheduled to be held in Washington, D.C., on December 2, 2015.Return to text 8.See Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (2015), "FFIEC Announces Initiative to Streamline Reporting Requirements for Community Banks," press release, September 8.Return to text