Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies on Friday approved a notice requesting comment on a third set of regulatory categories as part of their review to identify outdated or unnecessary regulations applied to insured depository institutions. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA) requires the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to review their regulations at least every 10 years. The agencies also are required to categorize and publish the regulations for comment, and submit a report to Congress that summarizes any significant issues raised by the comments and the relative merits of such issues. The agencies have divided their regulations into 12 categories and requested comments for six sets of categories. The third notice, published today, seeks comment on regulations in three additional categories: consumer protection; directors, officers, and employees; and money laundering. Comments will be accepted within 90 days after publication in theFederal Register. The agencies will jointly publish an additionalFederal Registernotice, with the remaining three categories. Although each notice seeks comment on three specific categories, comments on any of the 12 categories will be accepted by the agencies. Additionally, as previously announced by the agencies, the agencies have expanded the scope of the EGRPRA review to cover newly issued regulations. Comments will be accepted on all rules that have been finalized before the publication of the last EGRPRA notice which is expected by year-end. The agencies also are holding a series of outreach meetings with financial institutions and interested parties to gather additional views. Information about these meetings is available on the EGRPRA website. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Comment:Submit|View Media Contacts:
The Federal Open Market Committee on Monday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2016: January 26-27 (Tuesday-Wednesday) March 15-16 (Tuesday-Wednesday) April 26-27 (Tuesday-Wednesday) June 14-15 (Tuesday-Wednesday) July 26-27 (Tuesday-Wednesday) September 20-21 (Tuesday-Wednesday) November 1-2 (Tuesday-Wednesday) December 13-14 (Tuesday-Wednesday) January 31-February 1, 2017 (Tuesday-Wednesday) The Chair's quarterly news conferences will take place following the March, June, September, and December meetings. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday announced it will impose fines totaling more than $1.8 billion against six major banking organizations for their unsafe and unsound practices in the foreign exchange (FX) markets. The fines, among the largest ever assessed by the Federal Reserve, include: $342 million each for UBS AG, Barclays Bank PLC, Citigroup Inc., and JPMorgan Chase & Co.; $274 million for Royal Bank of Scotland PLC (RBS); and $205 million for Bank of America Corporation. The Federal Reserve also issued cease and desist orders requiring the firms to improve their policies and procedures for oversight and controls over activities in the wholesale FX and similar types of markets. The Federal Reserve is requiring the firms to correct deficiencies in their oversight and internal controls over traders who buy and sell U.S. dollars and foreign currencies for the organizations' own accounts and for customers. As a result of these deficient policies and procedures, the organizations engaged in unsafe and unsound conduct by failing to detect and address improper actions by their traders. These actions included the disclosure in electronic chatrooms of confidential customer information to traders at other organizations. Five of the banks failed to detect and address illegal agreements among traders to manipulate benchmark currency prices. Bank of America failed to detect and address conduct by traders who discussed the possibility of entering into similar agreements to manipulate prices. In addition, the Federal Reserve found UBS, Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, and Barclays engaged in unsafe and unsound conduct in FX sales, including conduct relating to how the organizations disclosed to customers the methods for determining price quotes. The Federal Reserve is requiring the six organizations to improve their senior management oversight, internal controls, risk management, and internal audit policies and procedures for their FX activities and for similar kinds of trading activities and is requiring four of the organizations to improve controls over their sales practices. The Federal Reserve is also requiring all six organizations to cooperate in its investigation of the individuals involved in the conduct underlying these enforcement actions and is prohibiting the organizations from re-employing or otherwise engaging individuals who were involved in unsafe and unsound conduct. The Federal Reserve is taking action against UBS, Barclays, Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, and RBS concurrently with the Department of Justice's criminal charges against these five organizations related to misconduct in the FX markets. Bank of America was not part of the actions taken by the Department of Justice and has not been charged by the Department of Justice in this matter. The Connecticut Department of Banking has joined the cease and desist provisions of the Federal Reserve's action against UBS, which has a branch located in Stamford, Connecticut. The New York Department of Financial Services has taken a separate action against Barclays and its New York branch based on FX-related conduct. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 UBS AG (PDF) Barclays Bank PLC (PDF) Citigroup Inc. (PDF) JPMorgan Chase & Co. (PDF) Royal Bank of Scotland PLC (PDF) Bank of America Corporation (PDF)
The Federal Reserve plans to continue periodic testing of Term Deposit Facility (TDF) operations, beginning with two operations this month. These operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. The first two operations will be conducted on May 21 and May 28 and will offer 14-day and 7-day term deposits, respectively. These operations will each offer floating-rate term deposits with the maximum individual award amount set at $5 billion, and the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate on excess reserves (currently 25 basis points) plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Term deposits offered in these two operations will include an early withdrawal feature and settle on the same day each operation is executed. Complete details will be announced on the day prior to each operation on the Board's website. The Federal Reserve plans to conduct similar routine TDF test operations in the coming months. The schedule and terms for future operations will be announced at later dates. Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttp://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On May 21, 2015, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered 14-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on May 21, 2015, and will mature on June 4, 2015. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On May 28, 2015, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on May 28, 2015, and will mature on June 4, 2015. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by The Bank of Versailles, Versailles, Missouri, to establish a branch at the location of 76 Grand Point Boulevard, Sunrise Beach, Missouri. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcementaction listed below: Truxton Trust Company (PDF), Nashville, TennesseeOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated April 29, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced it was barring five former private bankers and senior managers of Credit Suisse, AG, Zurich, Switzerland from employment in the banking industry. The Board announced last May that it would investigate individuals in connection with a civil money penalty and cease and desist order issued by the Board for Credit Suisse's failure to comply with several federal banking laws. The five individuals named in today's enforcement actions--Markus Walder, Marco Parenti Adami, Susanne Ruegg Meier, Michele Bergantino, and Roger Schaerer--were previously indicted for conspiracy to defraud the U.S government by assisting U.S. citizens' evasion of federal income taxes through the creation and maintenance of bank accounts that were not declared to U.S. tax authorities. According to the indictment, Walder was the head of Credit Suisse's North American Offshore Banking business and was responsible for the bank's undeclared U.S. cross-border banking business. As a Director within Credit Suisse, Walder supervised teams of private bankers in Switzerland as well as Credit Suisse's Representative Office in New York. Adami, Meier, and Bergantino were private bankers who provided banking and investment advice to U.S. customers who maintained undeclared Swiss bank accounts. Schaerer ran the New York Representative Office of Credit Suisse and was the bank's Senior Representative in the United States. According to the indictment, Walder, Adami, Meier, Bergantino, and Schaerer assisted clients in evading U.S. taxes through the use of undeclared Swiss accounts. In issuing today's enforcement actions, the Board found that the continued participation by Walder, Adami, Meier, Bergantino, and Schaerer in the affairs of a depository institution would impair public confidence in the institution. The prohibition is effective indefinitely, unless the criminal charges against Walder, Adami, Meier, Bergantino, and Schaerer are dismissed. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Discover Financial Services (PDF), Riverwoods, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated May 26, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: The Freedom Bank of Virginia, Fairfax, VirginiaOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated May 11, 2015Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board's latest survey of the financial and economic conditions of American households released Wednesday finds that individuals' overall perceptions of financial well-being improved modestly between 2013 and 2014 but their optimism about future financial prospects increased significantly. The 2014Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking,provides new insight into Americans' economic security, housing and living arrangements, banking and credit access, education and student loan debt, savings behavior, and retirement preparedness. Sixty-five percent of adult respondents consider their families to be either "doing okay" or "living comfortably" financially--an increase of 3 percentage points from the 2013 survey. Looking forward, households are increasingly optimistic. Twenty-nine percent of survey respondents say they expect their income to be higher in the year following the survey, compared to 21 percent of 2013 respondents. The survey results reveal a lack of economic preparedness among many adults. Only 53 percent of respondents indicate that they could cover a hypothetical emergency expense costing $400 without selling something or borrowing money. Thirty-one percent of respondents report going without some form of medical care in the past year because they could not afford it. The outlook for the housing market among surveyed homeowners remained generally positive, as 43 percent believe that their house increased in value over the past year and 39 percent expect home values in their neighborhood to rise in the coming year. Many renters also express an interest in buying but report financial barriers to homeownership, with half of all renters listing an inability to afford a down payment as a reason why they rent rather than own and 31 percent citing an inability to qualify for a mortgage as a reason for renting. Twenty-three percent of the adult population has some form of education debt, according to the survey. However, this debt is not exclusively student loans. Fourteen percent of those with education debt say that some of that debt is on credit cards. Individuals who did not complete an associate or bachelor's degree, first generation students, blacks and Hispanics, and those who attended for-profit institutions, are all disproportionately likely to be behind on repaying their student loan debt. Recognizing the importance of degree completion to many outcomes, the survey explores why some individuals leave college without a degree. Family responsibilities is the most common reason, and was cited by 38 percent of all respondents who dropped out and by just less than half of women younger than 45. The survey results also suggest that many individuals are not adequately prepared for retirement. Thirty-one percent of non-retirees have no retirement savings or pension, including nearly a quarter of those older than 45. Even among individuals who are saving, fewer than half of adults with self-directed retirement savings are mostly or very confident in their ability to make the right investment decisions when managing their retirement savings. Consistent with a lack of preparedness for retirement, 38 percent of non-retired respondents say that they either do not plan to retire or plan to keep working as long as possible. Among lower-income respondents, whose household income is less than $40,000 per year, 55 percent plan to keep working as long as possible or never plan to retire. The survey was conducted on behalf of the Board in October and November 2014. More than 5,800 respondents completed the survey. The report summarizing the survey's key findings may be found at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/shed.htm Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2014 (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Meta Financial Group, Inc., Sioux Falls, South DakotaCease and Desist Order issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated July 15, 2011Terminated May 21, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested comment on enhancements that the Federal Reserve Banks are considering to their current same-day automated clearing house (ACH) service in order to correspond torecently adopted amendmentsto NACHA's ACH operating rules. On May 19, NACHA, the electronic payments association that establishes rules for the ACH network, announced that its voting members had approved amendments to the ACH operating rules to allow originating depository financial institutions (ODFIs) to send same-day ACH transactions to accounts held at any receiving depository financial institutions (RDFIs). Unlike the Reserve Banks' current optional FedACH®SameDay Service, NACHA's amended ACH operating rules require all RDFIs to participate in the same-day service, and ODFIs to pay a fee to RDFIs for each same-day ACH forward transaction. The Reserve Banks propose to adopt this enhanced same-day ACH service by incorporating NACHA's amended ACH operating rules into Operating Circular 4, which governs Reserve Banks' ACH service. The Board is requesting comment on the Reserve Banks' adoption of an enhanced same-day ACH service with mandatory participation of RDFIs and an interbank fee. A copy of the Board's request for comment delivered to theFederal Registeris attached. Comments must be submitted by July 2, 2015. Federal Registernotice Comments:Submit|View For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Board Votes
Federal Reserve Names Payments Strategy Director to Lead Payment System Improvement The Federal Reserve today named Gordon Werkema as Payments Strategy Director with responsibility for leading major payment system improvement initiatives described in its recently published "Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System" paper. Werkema currently serves as First Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and Product Director for the Federal Reserve System's National Customer Relations and Support Office. "With his extensive background in payments and his leadership of the Federal Reserve's customer relationship management office for the past 15 years, Gordon was the clear choice to lead these payment system improvement efforts, which center on stakeholder collaboration," said Esther George, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and senior sponsor of the payments improvement strategies for the Federal Reserve System. Werkema's 34-year career at the Federal Reserve began in the San Francisco District where he ultimately served as Executive Vice President before moving to Chicago to assume his role as Chief Operating Officer, with responsibility for the financial management, information technology services, payments, legal, human resources and corporate development functions of the Federal Reserve's Seventh District. As a Federal Reserve System Product Director, he has overseen electronic access product development and services, customer support, and national sales and marketing activities for the Federal Reserve Banks. He holds an undergraduate degree in Political Science and Economics from Seattle Pacific University and a master's degree with honors from The Johns Hopkins University. Werkema served on the executive team that developed the strategies paper, in addition to establishing and overseeing an industry relations program to support stakeholder engagement in development and implementation of the strategies. As Payments Strategy Director, Werkema will lead the Federal Reserve's strategies related to faster payments, payments security and stakeholder engagement, collaborating with the Federal Reserve's current financial services product leaders to execute the full complement of strategies outlined in the paper. "I'm honored to lead these initiatives for the Federal Reserve System and excited to work closely with industry leaders and payments stakeholders to achieve our desired outcomes for a secure, faster, more efficient U.S. payment system," noted Werkema. "This collaboration begins in earnest next week with the convening of the faster and secure payments task force efforts that are designed to deliver real benefits to end users of the payment system."
On May 21, 2015, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer 14-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves (currently 25 basis points) plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $5,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. ET to 12:30 p.m. ET, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's May 14, 2015,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On May 28, 2015, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves (currently 25 basis points) plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $5,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. ET to 12:30 p.m. ET, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's May 14, 2015,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday proposed adding certain general obligation state and municipal bonds to the range of assets a banking organization may use to satisfy regulatory requirements designed to ensure that large banking organizations have the capacity to meet their liquidity needs during a period of financial stress. Under the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) requirement adopted by the federal banking agencies last September, large banking organizations are required to hold high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) that can be easily and quickly converted into cash within 30 days during a period of financial stress. Subsequent study by the Federal Reserve suggests that certain general obligation U.S. state and municipal bonds should qualify under the LCR as HQLA because they have liquidity characteristics sufficiently similar to investment grade corporate bonds and other HQLA asset classes. The proposed rule would allow investment grade, general obligation U.S. state and municipal bonds to be counted as HQLA up to certain levels if they meet the same liquidity criteria that currently apply to corporate debt securities. The limits on the amount of a state or municipality's bonds that could qualify are based on the specific liquidity characteristics of the bonds. The proposed rule would apply only to entities subject to the LCR and supervised by the Federal Reserve: No bank that is a subsidiary of a holding company with less than $50 billion in assets is required to meet any LCR requirement. The recent financial crisis highlighted the need for enhanced liquidity risk-management practices at the largest financial institutions. Financial institutions with sufficient liquidity reserves are better able to mitigate the risks of creditor and counterparty runs. The proposed rule released Thursday would maintain the strong liquidity standards of the LCR while providing banks with the flexibility to hold a wider range of HQLA. Comments on the proposed rule will be accepted until July 24, 2015. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal RegisterNotice:PDF|HTML Comments:Submit|View
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the "Finance and Society," a conference sponsored by Institute for New Economic Thinking, Washington, D.C. Let me begin by thanking the organizers for inviting me to participate in this important dialogue on the role of finance in society. The financial sector is vital to the economy. A well-functioning financial sector promotes job creation, innovation, and inclusive economic growth. But when the incentives facing financial firms are distorted, these firms may act in ways that can harm society. Appropriate regulation, coupled with vigilant supervision, is essential to address these issues. Unfortunately, in the years preceding the financial crisis, all too many firms took on risks they could neither measure nor manage. Leverage, interconnectedness, and maturity and liquidity transformation escalated to dangerous levels across the financial system. The result was the most severe financial crisis and economic downturn since the Great Depression. Almost 9 million Americans lost their jobs, roughly twice as many lost their homes, and all too many households ended up underwater on their mortgages and overburdened with debt. To be sure, some individuals and families borrowed unwisely, but too often financial institutions encouraged the behavior that resulted in such excessive debt. In my remarks today I will discuss some important reasons why the incentives facing financial institutions were distorted and the steps that regulators are taking to realign those incentives. The Important Role of the Financial SectorBefore discussing the incentives that contributed to the buildup of risk at financial institutions, I would like to highlight the important contributions that the financial sector makes to the economy and society. First and foremost, financial institutions channel society's scarce savings to productive investments, thereby promoting business formation and job creation. Access to capital is important for all firms, but it is particularly vital for startups and young firms, which often lack a sufficient stream of earnings to increase employment and internally finance capital spending. Indeed, research shows that more highly developed financial systems disproportionately benefit entrepreneurship.1 The financial sector also helps households save for retirement, purchase homes and cars, and weather unexpected developments. Many financial innovations, such as the increased availability of low-cost mutual funds, have improved opportunities for households to participate in asset markets and diversify their holdings.2Expanded credit access has helped households maintain living standards when suffering job loss, illness, or other unexpected contingencies.3Technological innovations have increased the ease and convenience with which individuals make and receive payments.4 The contribution of the financial sector to household risk management and business investment, as well as the significant contribution of financial-sector development to economic growth, has been documented in many studies.5Such research shows that, across countries and over time, financial development, up to a point, has disproportionately benefited the poor and served to alleviate economic inequality.6 Distorted Incentives in the Financial SectorDespite these benefits, as we have seen, actions by financial institutions have the potential to inflict harm on society. Instead of promoting financial security through prudent mortgage underwriting, the financial sector prior to the crisis facilitated a bubble in the housing market and too often encouraged households to take on mortgages they neither understood nor could afford. Recent research has raised important questions about the benefits and costs of the rapid growth of the financial services industry in the United States over the past 40 years.7 A combination of responses to distorted incentives by players throughout the financial system created an environment conducive to a crisis. Excessive leverage placed institutions at great risk of insolvency in the event that severe, albeit low-probability, problems materialized. Overreliance on fragile short-term funding by many institutions left the system vulnerable to runs. And excessive risk-taking increased the probability that severe problems would, in fact, materialize. Moreover, regulators--and the structure of the regulatory system itself--did not keep up with changes in the financial sector and were insufficiently attuned to systemic risks. Once concerns began to develop about escalating losses at large firms, insufficient liquidity and capital interacted in an adverse feedback loop. Funding pressures contributed to "fire sales" of financial assets and losses, reducing capital levels and heightening liquidity pressures--culminating in the near collapse of the financial system in late 2008. Capital and liquiditySeveral factors encouraged excessive leverage, including market perceptions that some institutions were "too big to fail."8Financial institutions also had an incentive to engage in regulatory arbitrage, moving assets to undercapitalized off-balance-sheet vehicles. The complexity of the largest banking organizations also may have impeded market discipline. In addition, financial intermediation outside of the traditional banking sector grew rapidly in the years up to 2007, leaving gaps in the regulatory umbrella. And conflicts in the incentives facing managers, shareholders, and creditors may have induced banks to increase leverage.9 To strengthen banks' resilience, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies have substantially increased capital requirements. Regulatory minimums for capital relative to risk-weighted assets are significantly higher, and capital requirements now focus on the highest-quality capital, such as common equity. In addition to risk-based standards, bank holding companies and depositories face a leverage ratio requirement. Also, significantly higher capital standards--both risk-weighted and leverage ratios--are being applied to the most systemically important banking organizations. Such surcharges are appropriate because of the substantial harm that the failure of a systemic institution would inflict on the financial system and the economy. Higher capital standards provide large, complex institutions with an incentive to reduce their systemic footprint. We are also employing annual stress tests to gauge large institutions' ability to weather a very severe downturn and distress of counterparties and, importantly, continue lending to households and businesses. Firms that do not meet these standards face restrictions on dividends and share buybacks. As a result of these changes, for the largest banks, Tier 1 common equity--the highest-quality form of capital‑‑has more than doubled since the financial crisis. New liquidity regulations will also improve incentives in the financial system. Prior to the crisis, institutions' incentives to rely on short-term borrowing to fund investments in riskier or less liquid instruments were distorted in two important ways. First, many investors were willing to accept a very low interest rate on short-term liabilities of financial institutions or on securitizations without demanding adequate compensation for severe-but-unlikely risks, such as a temporary loss of market liquidity. Perhaps these firms expected government support or simply considered illiquidity a very remote possibility. Second, institutions' attempts to shift their holdings once concerns about credit or liquidity risk arose created a fire-sale dynamic that amplified declines in market values, causing unanticipated spillovers onto other institutions and across markets.10 Recently implemented regulations aim to strengthen liquidity. For example, a new liquidity coverage ratio requires internationally active banking organizations to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to meet their projected net cash outflows during a 30-day stress period. A new process--the Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review--sets supervisory expectations for liquidity-risk management and evaluates institutions' practices against these benchmarks. A proposal for a net stable funding ratio would require better liquidity management at horizons beyond that covered by the liquidity coverage ratio. A proposed capital surcharge for the largest firms would discourage overreliance on short-term wholesale funding. Also, the Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted changes in regulations that may help avoid future runs on prime money market mutual funds (that is, money funds that invest primarily in corporate debt securities). And reforms in the triparty repo market have reduced risks associated with intraday exposures. Large, complex institutions and too big to failIn the aftermath of the crisis, the Congress tasked the banking regulators with challenging and changing the perception that any financial institution is too big to fail by ensuring that even very large banking organizations can be resolved without harming financial stability. Steps are under way to achieve this objective. In particular, banking organizations are required to prepare "living wills"--plans for their rapid and orderly resolution in the event of insolvency. Regulators are considering requiring that bank holding companies have sufficient total loss-absorbing capacity, including long-term debt, to enable them to be wound down without government support.11In addition, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has designed a strategy that it could deploy (known as Single Point of Entry) to resolve a systemically important institution in an orderly manner. The crisis also revealed that risk management at large, complex financial institutions was insufficient to handle the risks that some firms had taken. Compensation systems all too frequently failed to appropriately account for longer-term risks undertaken by employees. And lax controls in some cases contributed to unethical and illegal behavior by banking organizations and their employees. The Federal Reserve has made improving risk management and internal controls a top priority. For example, the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, which includes the stress tests that I mentioned, also involves an evaluation to ensure firms have a sound process in place for measuring and monitoring the risks they are taking and for matching their capital levels to those risks. Also, supervisors from the Fed and other agencies have pressed firms to improve their internal controls and to make their boards of directors more directly responsible for compensation decisions and employee conduct. Changes to Regulatory and Supervisory FocusAs I noted, the financial crisis revealed weaknesses in our nation's system for supervising and regulating the financial industry. Prior to the crisis, regulatory agencies, including the Federal Reserve, focused on the safety and soundness of individual firms--as required by their legislative mandate at the time--rather than the stability of the financial system as a whole. Our regulatory system did not provide any supervisory watchdog with responsibility for identifying and addressing risks associated with activities and institutions that were outside the regulatory perimeter. The rapid growth of the "shadow" nonbank financial sector left significant gaps in regulation. In response, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act) expanded the mandate and authority of the Federal Reserve to allow it to consider risks to financial stability in supervising financial firms under its charge. Within the Federal Reserve System, we have reorganized our supervision of the most systemically important institutions to emphasize what we call a "horizontal perspective," which examines institutions as a group and in comparative terms, focusing on their interaction with the broader financial system. We also created a new office within the Fed to identify emerging risks to stability in the broader financial system--both the bank and nonbank financial sectors--and to develop policies to mitigate systemic risk. The Dodd-Frank Act created the interagency Financial Stability Oversight Council, chaired by the Treasury Secretary, and the Federal Reserve is a member. It is charged with identifying systemically important financial institutions and systemically risky activities that are not subject to consolidated supervision and designating those institutions and activities for appropriate supervision. And it is charged with encouraging greater information sharing and policy coordination across financial regulatory agencies. Where We StandMy topic is broad, and my time is short. Let me end with three thoughts. First, I believe that we and other supervisory agencies have made significant progress in addressing incentive problems within the financial sector, especially within the banking sector. Second, policymakers, including those of us at the Federal Reserve, remain watchful for areas in need of further action or in which the steps taken to date need to be adjusted. And, third, engagement with the broader public is crucial to ensuring that any future steps move our financial system closer to where it should be. Active debate and discussion of these issues at this conference and in other forums is important to improve our understanding of the challenges that remain. ReferencesAdmati, Anat R., Peter M. DeMarzo, Martin F. Hellwig, and Paul Pfleiderer (2013a). "Fallacies, Irrelevant Facts, and Myths in the Discussion of Capital Regulation: Why Bank Equity Is Not Socially Expensive," Working Paper 2065. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Graduate School of Business, October 22. ------ (2013b). "The Leverage Ratchet Effect," Working Paper 3029. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Graduate School of Business, December 2. Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2007). "Finance, Inequality and the Poor,"Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 12 (March), pp. 27-49. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015). "Federal Reserve Survey Provides Information on Mobile Financial Services," press release, March 26. Cecchetti, Stephen G., and Enisse Kharroubi (2012). "Reassessing the Impact of Finance on Growth," BIS Working Papers 381. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, July. Financial Stability Board (2014). "Adequacy of Loss-Absorbing Capacity of Global Systemically Important Banks in Resolution." Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November 10. Fort, Teresa C., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2013). "How Firms Respond to Business Cycles: The Role of Firm Age and Firm Size,"IMF Economic Review, vol. 61 (August), pp. 520-59. Goldsmith, Raymond W. (1969).Financial Structure and Development. New Haven: Yale University Press. Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordoñez (2014). "Collateral Crises,"American Economic Review, vol. 104 (February), pp. 343-78. Gorton, Gary, Stefan Lewellen, and Andrew Metrick (2012). "The Safe-Asset Share,"American Economic Review, vol. 102 (May), pp. 101-6. Greenwood, Robin, and David Scharfstein (2013). "The Growth of Finance,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 27 (Spring), pp. 3-28. Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2004). "Does Local Financial Development Matter?"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119 (August), pp. 929-69. Hanson, Samuel G., Anil K. Kashyap, and Jeremy C. Stein (2011). "A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 3-28. King, Robert G., and Ross Levine (1993). "Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108 (August), pp. 717-37. Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri (2006). "Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? Evidence and Theory,"Review of Economic Studies, vol. 73 (January), pp. 163-93. Levine, Ross (2005). "Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence," in Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth.Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V., pp. 865-934. Malkiel, Burton G. (2013). "Asset Management Fees and the Growth of Finance,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 27 (Spring), pp. 97-108. Myers, Stewart C. (1977). "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 5 (2), pp. 147-75. Philippon, Thomas, and Ariell Reshef (2012). "Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Financial Industry: 1909-2006,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 127 (November), pp. 1551-609. ------ (2013). "An International Look at the Growth of Modern Finance,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 27 (Spring), pp. 73-96. Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales (1998). "Financial Dependence and Growth,"American Economic Review, vol. 88 (June), pp. 559-86. Stein, Jeremy C. (2012). "Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 127 (February), pp. 57-95. Zingales, Luigi (2015). "Does Finance Benefit Society?" NBER Working Paper Series 20894. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. 1.Recent reviews have highlighted potential costs of a distorted financial sector, but such reviews also emphasize the range of both theoretical and empirical work that has documented the many ways in which the financial sector can support economic efficiency; see, for example, Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013) and Zingales (2015). Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) discuss evidence that financial development supports entrepreneurship, and Fort and others (2013) examine the importance of financing for business formation and young firms.Return to text 2.Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013) discuss how an important fraction of growth in the U.S. financial sector reflects the greater demand of households for asset management services and credit. Malkiel (2013) considers similar issues and reviews how improved access to low-cost investment options has benefited households.Return to text 3.Krueger and Perri (2006) analyze how an increase in access to credit contributed to households' ability to smooth spending despite substantial income volatility.Return to text 4.Changes in payment technologies have been rapid, and an area of particular interest is the fast growth of mobile payment and financial service technologies. The Federal Reserve has conducted several surveys to understand these developments, and the most recent results are discussed in Board of Governors (2015).Return to text 5.A substantial body of research finds that financial development supports economic growth, including Goldsmith (1969), King and Levine (1993), Rajan and Zingales (1998), and Levine (2005). It is noteworthy that this research emphasizes differences across countries, and that the United States is among the most financially developed countries in the world.Return to text 6.Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2007) show that financial development reduces poverty and inequality in a study examining evidence across countries.Return to text 7.Zingales (2015) raises a number of questions regarding ways in which distortions in the financial sector may contribute to "rent seeking" activity that may promote inefficiency. Philippon and Reshef (2012) examine trends in compensation in the financial sector and the contribution of such trends to the increase in income inequality in the United States in recent decades. Philippon and Reshef (2013) and Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012) revisit the links between financial development and economic growth, focusing particularly on these relationships around periods of rapid growth in the financial sector or among economies with a large financial sector.Return to text 8.For a review of many factors that may have contributed to leverage in the financial sector and a discussion of how, in some cases, these factors reflect distortions that imply leverage was excessive, see Admati and others (2013a).Return to text 9.The notion that "agency problems"--that is, conflicts in the interests of managers and various stakeholders in firms--may contribute to excessive debt has a long history, most notably following the notion of "debt overhangs" from Myers (1977). Hanson, Kashyap, and Stein (2011) emphasize the potential importance of this issue for the financial sector. Admati and others (2013b) present a related mechanism.Return to text 10.The notion that securities issued by financial institutions may provide liquidity services in a manner that potentially contributes to fragility because such securities do not have the safety and liquidity of publicly issued securities is examined in, for example, Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick (2012); Stein (2012); and Gorton and Ordoñez (2014).Return to text 11.For a discussion of total loss-absorbing capacity, see Financial Stability Board (2014), a consultative document on a proposal for a common international standard on total loss-absorbing capacity for global systemic banks. The comment period on this FSB proposal ended in February of this year.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from March 30 through April 27, 2015. The minutes are attached. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on April 28-29, 2015. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeApril 28-29, 2015:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act Outreach Meeting, Boston, Massachusetts On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, I want to thank you for attending this third in a series of outreach meetings being held as part of the interagency review process under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). I would also like to extend my thanks to President Rosengren and the staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston for hosting today's meeting. As you know, EGRPRA requires that regulations applicable to insured depository institutions be reviewed every 10 years. Our outreach meetings are designed to hear your comments and suggestions for reducing regulatory burden on insured depository institutions. While the EGRPRA review aims to identify outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome regulations as they apply to all insured depository institutions, we are especially focused on the burden imposed on smaller depository institutions. I look forward to hearing your views both on issues that have been prominent in the first two EGRPRA meetings--including capital regulation, reporting requirements, appraisal rules, and examination frequency--and on matters that have not yet received significant attention. In our joint rulemakings, the federal banking agencies have tried, wherever possible, to tailor our rules for different sizes of depository institutions and to reduce unnecessary burden on community banks. We hope to use the information gained during these meetings and other outreach efforts to, among other things, make this tiering of regulations more comprehensive. Having just inherited the chairmanship of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) from Comptroller Curry, I hope to help make the decennial EGRPRA review a productive one. All of us on the FFIEC are committed to ensuring that this is not a formalistic bureaucratic exercise. To me, a productive EGRPRA exercise will be one that results in changes in regulations and supervisory practices that yields significant reduction in regulatory burden, especially for smaller banks while still promoting the safety and soundness of insured depository institutions, and protecting both the federal deposit insurance fund and financial stability.
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the ECB Forum on Central Banking conference "Inflation and Unemployment in Europe", Sintra, Portugal It is an honor and a pleasure to participate in the ECB Forum on Central Banking, and I thank you, President Draghi, and other members of the ECB Board, for inviting me to take part.1Although the topic of the conference is inflation and unemployment, I will take another perspective by discussing some of the past, present, and future challenges that have and may in future confront the ECB and the euro area. My theme is taken from Jean Monnet, who in 1976 wrote: "Europe will be forged in crises, and will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those crises."2This quote is discussed in the interesting recent paper by Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, whose view of Monnet's contention can be deduced from the title of their paper: "Monnet's Error?"3There are similar quotes from others, among them Jacques Chirac in 2003 and the former chief economist of the ECB, Ottmar Issing, in 2010.4I first heard a statement to this effect from Jean-Claude Trichet at the 2011 Jackson Hole conference.5 An extended 2015 version of the Monnet contention would take the form: "The first step on the road to European union was the creation of the Coal and Steel Community in 1951. At the start, we did not have a road map, but we had the goal of ensuring that the countries of Europe would never again go to war, and to that end, we had to build an institutional structure that would make another European war impossible. From time to time we encountered obstacles in that process. These obstacles often led to crises, but the crises were overcome, and from each crisis, the prospects for a united, prosperous, and peaceful Europe emerged stronger. And that is what will happen this time too." This leaves us with three questions: Has modern Europe developed primarily through crises? Will it be stronger when this crisis is over? And what challenges or crises is Europe likely to have to deal with in future? Despite the fact that political and economic aspects of the structure of the European economy have inherently been closely intertwined throughout history--and saying this, one thinks of the Romans and later of Charlemagne--I will focus on the economic aspects of the European project, and primarily on its monetary and financial aspects.6 Intra-European monetary and exchange rate problems have for centuries bedeviled European countries and intra-European trade, and led to the desire for greater exchange rate stability--perhaps through some form of treaty or agreement, or even through a monetary union. Of course, the desire for greater exchange rate stability is true also of almost the entire world, and is reflected in the original Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund. The first modern international attempt to regularize monetary relations among independent European states was that of the Latin Monetary Union (LMU), which came into force in 1866. The original members were France, Belgium, Switzerland, and Italy. The Papal States joined later in the same year, and Greece and Rumania joined in 1867.7The members agreed to fix exchange rates among them by setting the amounts of silver and gold (weights and fineness) in the national coinage, with a specified exchange rate (15.5) between silver and gold. In addition, a limit of 6 francs per inhabitant was set on the value of smaller coins issued by each country, "because of their substantial seigniorage."8 The LMU fixed exchange rates within a bimetallic international system. Kindleberger notes that in setting up the Union, the Swiss, Belgians, and Italians were in favor of moving to the gold standard, but that "French resistance dominated" (p. 68). "Then came a series of blows to silver" (p. 68), the most important occurring after the establishment of the Reichsbank, when Germany in 1873 shifted from bimetallism to the gold standard, and the Reichsbank started selling its silver. In practice this moved the LMU to a gold standard, a change that was formally recognized in 1878--the year of the International Monetary Conference called by the United States to maintain bimetallism, an effort which failed. The exchange rates established by the LMU became ineffective during and after World War I, and the Union was formally ended in 1927.9Kindleberger writes consolingly that "from 1865 to 1867, ... the Latin Monetary Union worked reasonably well, and its success suggested the desirability of expanding it to arrive at a 'universal money'" (p. 69). Now to post-World War II Europe, and the question of whether Europe has emerged stronger through crises. The Treaty of Rome, establishing the European Economic Community (EEC), was signed in 1957 by the six original members: Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and West Germany, the same group that had set up the Coal and Steel Community. The aim was economic integration among the six members, including a common market and a customs union. At that time, the Bretton Woods agreement and capital controls were still producing reasonable stability in exchange rates. However, as Bretton Woods began to unravel in the 1960s, exchange rates became more unstable, and appreciations and depreciations against the dollar led to sizable shifts in bilateral rates among European currencies. Yet the EEC continued to work within the Bretton Woods framework, even as the Bretton Woods approach began to be modified at the end of the decade and the beginning of the 1970s. Of particular difficulty to members of the EEC, under some circumstances the exchange rate bands specified in the Smithsonian agreement permitted movements of up to 9 percent between any pair of currencies. In response to these pressures, members of the EEC agreed in 1972 to the so-called "snake"--or "the snake in the tunnel"--that attempted to limit exchange rate fluctuations of each currency relative to the dollar.10However, this system was soon tested, notably by the oil crises of the 1970s, as both the effects of the oil price increases themselves and the policies adopted in response differed across countries. Denmark and the United Kingdom exited the snake soon after entering, Italy dropped out in 1973, and France participated intermittently during the mid-1970s, first dropping out in 1974. The snake was a failure, a failure that created problems, though not clearly a crisis. If exchange rates among members of the EEC were to be stabilized in the new world of floating rates, the Community had to invent a substitute. In 1978, the members of the EEC created the European Monetary System, which started with an Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM I) that limited currency fluctuations relative to a basket of national currencies.11All members except the United Kingdom participated in ERM I. The arrangement also committed central banks to intervene to support the resulting bilateral rates as they approached the limits of the permissible bands. Countries in the ERM also adopted policies that lowered inflation, bringing interest rates into closer alignment. The initial success of the ERM encouraged European leaders to lift capital controls and built momentum toward monetary union, which was reflected in the Maastricht Treaty (the Treaty on European Union), agreed to in 1991 and signed in 1992. However, strains also emerged under the ERM, in an environment in which the Bundesbank emerged as the dominant central bank in Europe, and the Deutschmark as the dominant European currency. This led other countries in the ERM to follow German monetary policy. In part as a consequence of German reunification, the pressures generated by diverging fiscal policies and tightening German monetary policy contributed to the ERM crisis of 1992. Moreover, the earlier lifting of capital controls and the promises to intervene to support rates that were ultimately not credible put tremendous pressure on the pegged rates--and on relations among some members of the EEC. The crisis forced the United Kingdom and Italy out of the ERM and forced others (Portugal and Spain) to devalue their currencies. The ERM crisis was an apt illustration of the difficulties of trying to manage exchange rates among countries operating under markedly different economic conditions. However, rather than dissuading policymakers from trying to limit exchange rate fluctuations within a system that would nonetheless preserve the possibility of some exchange rate flexibility, the experience seemed to encourage them to continue with the plan of the Maastricht Treaty to introduce a single currency and a common monetary policy at the beginning of 1999. Here indeed was an example of a crisis leading to a strengthening of the European system--though the process to create EMU--the Economic and Monetary Union,notthe European Monetary Union--began well before the ERM crisis. The exchange rate and central banking provisions of the Maastricht Treaty were introduced on the schedule set out in 1991, with the ECB coming into existence in 1999. Until about 2009, the monetary aspects of the plans for the development of the European Union (EU) seemed to be a major success--but not a sufficient success to persuade all members of the Union to become members of the ECB and adopt the euro, with the most notable standout being the United Kingdom. The ERM crisis also drove home the need for greater coordination of fiscal policies in the run-up to monetary union. Members of the EU agreed to the Stability and Growth Pact in 1996. Although, as we all know, the conditions of the pact have not always been observed, nor enforced by Brussels, the acknowledgment of the need for a coordinated fiscal policy to complement monetary union was still a step forward--one which may be drawn on in future. What lessons can we draw from this history of the region's economic and monetary responses to earlier crises? Do the results bear out the spirit of the statements by Monnet and others about each crisis leading to greater strength? Certainly, each setback and each crisis spurred policymakers to take steps that they might not otherwise have taken at that time, and the end result of those steps has been a more unified European monetary union. Successive crises have not deterred policymakers from the goal of economic integration, but rather seemed to strengthen their belief in the need for it--and that integration is stronger today than it ever was in the past. Looking back, the progress in this project from its earliest days after World War II until today has been impressive. Trade integration has led to the free flow of goods within the EU, and this has brought economic gains. Greater trade integration has in turn generated a continued desire for greater monetary integration, which was put in place in 1999, and until recently seemed to be a major success. That success in turn made crystal clear the need for more fiscal integration--a challenge for the future, to which we will return. What about the present crisis of the euro area? Two or three years ago, there was widespread skepticism on the western shores of the Atlantic and the English Channel about the viability of the monetary union, and there was much discussion of what would happen after the breakup of the present euro area--whether there would be one or two euro areas, one for the stronger countries, one for the weaker, and if so, how well each of the two blocs would fare. With one sentence--the sentence that included the words "whatever it takes"-- that skepticism was largely, though not totally, erased. With one decision--the decision to implement QE--it became clear that the ECB has the capacity both to decide to implement monetary policy at the zero lower bound--indeed below the zero lower bound--and to succeed in implementing that policy. There can be no one whose Bayesian priors have not moved in favor of the survival of essentially the present euro area, even though we still await the outcome of the Greek crisis, and even though we know that the present crisis is not yet over. Is this an example of the success of the Monnet approach? Absolutely. European monetary policy in the earlier part of the Great Financial Crisis was innovative, particularly in the invention of full-allotment outright monetary transactions. That policy was inspired by crisis, as were the innovative policies undertaken by the Fed in the United States. More important than that: It is hard to believe that a European banking union would have been put in place by 2014 if it had not been for the crisis. And it is no less difficult to believe that a Single Supervisory Mechanism would have been set up absent the crisis. Of course, one may say that the ability to make these difficult decisions depended on the skills of the leadership of the ECB--and that is true, and will always be true. But the fact is that, when needed, Europe produced the monetary policy leadership it needed. What of the future? What crises, what extremely difficult decisions, await the EU? Some are already visible. The decision to use the single currency to drive the European project forward was a risky one, and at some stage or probably in several stages, it will be necessary to put the missing fiscal framework into place. And that, if it happens, will be another example of a crisis--the present crisis, one hopes--whose solution will have strengthened the European enterprise. For success in this area must be one of the most difficult economic challenges facing the EU after the present crisis is over. Also awaiting the EU are the possibilities of major difficulties associated with the current Greek crisis and, later, with a potential British exit. One can of course imagine many different types of future crises, including crises that could develop out of the worsening geopolitical situation in which the Western world finds itself. And one could go on. Experience tells us that the best way to deal with future crises is to strengthen the economic framework in which they will be confronted. That will require a great deal of thought about how to deal with future crises that could most easily be solved by an exchange rate adjustment, and it will also require developing a better mechanism to ensure that member states run responsible financial and budgetary policies. It means also seeking solutions to the difficult demographics now confronting many European countries. And it means the continuation of a courageous and effective monetary policy, and courageous and effective regulation and supervision of the financial system--albeit a monetary policy that could do even better if accompanied by an expansionary fiscal policy. All that has been done so far makes it very likely that EMU--the Economic and Monetary Union--will survive this crisis. But in the longer run, EMU will not survive unless it also brings prosperity to its members. That means that the most important challenge of the future will require an increase in productivity growth in Europe--and that is a challenge that faces the entire developed world. Let me conclude by congratulating you, the management and staff of the ECB, on what you have achieved in your short history, and especially in the last few years. And best wishes for future success in continuing to do your share in contributing to the building of Europe--preferably without having to face too many future crises, useful as Monnet's approach suggests such crises could be. Thank you--and good luck. 1.I am grateful to Brian Doyle, Jane Haltmaier, Stacey Tevlin and Paul Wood of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2.See Jean Monnet (1976),Memoires(Paris: Fayard).Return to text 3.See Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2015), "Monnet's Error?" NBER Working Paper Series 21121 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April).Return to text 4.In a 2003 TV interview, Chirac said, "And whenever there's been a crisis, we've emerged from it with a stronger Europe." See TF1 and France2 (2003), "Excerpts of TV Interview by President Chirac to TF1 and France2," March 10. In November 2010, Prof. Issing (then chief economist and member of the Board of the ECB) gave an address at the Faculty of Economics of the University of Pavia for thehonoris causadegree in international economic integration. He said, "After all, ‘Europe,' to use this term, has been through many crises and all in all has emerged stronger from each one." See Otmar Issing (2010), "Professor Otmar Issing Address," in "Otmar Issing: An Economist and Architect of Supranational Institutions (PDF)," introduction by Guido Montani,Il Politico(University of Pavia, Italy), no. 1, p. 22.Return to text 5.A year later, at the 2012 Jackson Hole conference, I quoted Jean-Claude as having said, "[T]he European project is a project in process. It was not set up with this particular aim of getting to a monetary union. We've had crisis after crisis since we started. At every stage of the process, we have heard the same story from Americans .... 'You Europeans don't know how to make decisions. You're always slow. What phone number should I call if I want to speak to Europe? This dream is bound to collapse.' We have heard that every time, and we have been slow. But in the end we have emerged stronger from every crisis." I spoke to Jean-Claude recently to check that this is what he said in 2011. He replied that he had, but that he doubted that he had said "we have been slow," since he generally states "we have been bold."Return to text 6.See Charles P. Kindleberger (1993),A Financial History of Western Europe, 2nd ed. (New York: Oxford University Press). The book presents four chronologies in its chapter 1: "I: Wars"; "II: Monetary Events"; "III: Banking Landmarks"; and "IV: Financial Events." The earliest entry is in "Banking Landmarks," 12th and 13th c.: Fairs of Champagne.Return to text 7.Later many other countries accepted the coinage standards set by the LMU but did not formally join the Union.Return to text 8.See Kindleberger,Financial History of Western Europe,p. 68, in note 5.Return to text 9.Greece was suspended from the LMU in 1908 for debasing its gold coinage, and readmitted in 1910.Return to text 10.The snake agreement was made among the six original countries of the EEC plus another three about to join: Denmark, Ireland, and the United Kingdom.Return to text 11.By 1978, the original six members of the EEC had been joined by Denmark, Ireland, and the United Kingdom.Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Annual Community Bankers Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York Good morning. I am delighted to join you here today to discuss the state of community banking and issues of importance to community banks like yours.1New York may be home to Wall Street, but, just like the rest of the country, most of the banks in the Second District are community banks. There are more than 170 banking organizations here with less than $10 billion in assets, serving millions of customers. Community banks play an essential role in our financial system, supporting the economic health and vitality of the communities you serve. Unlike many of your larger competitors, community banks offer customers face-to-face interaction with a local banker who has the authority to make the final decision on a loan--a banker with a long-term investment in the community who will not be moving to another branch in a new town within a few years. Community bankers benefit from local knowledge and relationships that often lead to more successful and efficient lending decisions. These advantages have enabled many community banks in the Second District and around the country to maintain or increase their local market shares while competing with larger regional and money center banks, and I expect that they will continue to do so. Nonetheless, community banks face significant challenges today. The number of community banks has declined significantly over the past decade. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's "Problem List" of at-risk banks has declined from 888 at the peak of the financial crisis to 291 at the end of 2014, but that is still well above typical pre-crisis levels of fewer than 100. There are several factors driving consolidation and elevating the number of problem banks, beyond the lasting effects of the recession. For starters, community banks have been challenged in some of your traditional product lines by competition from larger financial institutions that can achieve lower costs through economies of scale. At the same time, historically thin net interest margins have constrained profitability, and, although not aimed at community banks, new post-crisis regulations meant to strengthen the financial system are coming into place that require additional management attention. The Federal Reserve recognizes the importance of a healthy community banking sector for our nation's prosperity, and we are committed to understanding the challenges faced by community banks and to carefully considering the effects of new regulations on these institutions. Our mandate is to protect the safety and soundness of the nation's financial system, and we aim to do so in a manner that promotes a level playing field for all institutions while taking into account the risks those institutions could pose to our financial system. As you know, the Federal Reserve tiers its regulations to be commensurate with the risks presented by different institutions. The risks presented by an institution with $300 million in assets are very different from those presented by an institution with $300 billion in assets. Although the credit that a community bank extends to households and businesses within its local area may be difficult to replace, the failure of a community bank would not cause a widespread contraction in credit or have any other systemic consequences. For that reason, community banks are not subject to the same regulations that are applied to the most systemically important banking organizations. The Federal Reserve's 2013 capital guidelines are a good example of how we have taken into account the effect of our regulations on community banks. The recession made it clear that strong capital positions are essential for banks of all sizes, including community banks. After issuing our proposed guidelines, we received considerable input from community bankers helping us to identify which portions of our original proposal were, and were not, appropriate for community banks. Based on this input, we made some significant adjustments to the proposal to alter, for example, the risk-weighting of mortgage loans and the regulatory capital treatment of certain unrealized gains and losses and trust preferred securities for community banking organizations. Regulators also developed a community bank guide, which outlined the relevant provisions for smaller, noncomplex institutions and compared the new requirements to the previous standards.2 In addition, the Federal Reserve Board recently issued a final rule raising the limit on the maximum size of banks covered by our Small Bank Holding Company Statement.3This policy statement, originally issued in 1980, fosters local ownership of small community banks. While the Board generally discourages the use of debt by bank holding companies to finance acquisitions, it recognizes that the limited access small institutions have to equity funding means that such firms often must rely on acquisition debt to accomplish a transfer of ownership. The policy statement allows small, noncomplex bank holding companies to temporarily operate with higher levels of debt than would otherwise be permitted. It also exempts them from the Board's risk-based and leverage capital guidelines and eliminates some regulatory reporting requirements. Of course, regulatory capital requirements will continue to apply to the depository institution subsidiaries of these companies. The policy statement originally applied only to qualifying holding companies with no more than $150 million in total consolidated assets. In 2006, the maximum asset size was raised to $500 million. Significant changes in the structure of the banking industry since 2006 led Board members to believe that a further increase in the limit to $1 billion in assets should be considered. However, because of limitations imposed by the Collins Amendment to the Dodd-Frank Act, the Board could not raise the limit without further statutory action. We are very pleased that the Congress passed legislation in December 2014 that enabled the Board to raise the limit. The policy statement now covers nearly 90 percent of bank holding companies. The Volcker rule and incentive compensation are two additional areas where I believe relief for smaller institutions would be helpful. The risks identified by the Dodd-Frank Act in these areas apply almost exclusively to larger financial institutions. Community banks rarely engage in any of the activities prohibited by the Volcker rule, and community banks generally do not face the adverse incentives of compensation agreements that may encourage executives and loan officers to maximize lending volume at the expense of safety and soundness. I believe community banks should not face significant burdens from complying with these requirements, so I support raising the asset threshold for both the Volcker rule and incentive compensation rules, perhaps to $10billion. In the event where the actions of a community bank might raise concerns in either of these areas, that could be addressed through our normal examination process. The Board has undertaken substantial efforts to tailor its supervisory practices to the size of the bank examined. We supervise banks in four tiers, with requirements that are lowest for smaller, local institutions and increase with the size, complexity, and geographic reach of firms. This system helps community banks by eliminating requirements that are relevant only to large, geographically diversified banks. This tiered approach allows us to account for the differences in business models and risk levels among different types of banks. Our goal is not to develop one state-of-the-art approach to regulation and supervision, but instead multiple state-of-the-art approaches that are appropriate for each type of institution we oversee. Supervision of community banks is not a watered-down version of supervision of larger banks, but a significantly different process tailored to the business model of smaller banks. For community banks, the primary purpose of prudential regulation is to ensure the safety and soundness of each individual institution, thereby protecting the deposit insurance fund. The crisis showed that such a focus on individual institutions was inadequate to account for and contain the systemic threats posed by risks at larger, more complex institutions, and much of the improvement in oversight has been directed at systemic risk. The Board is committed to making sure that new supervisory standards do not trickle down to community banks when they may only be appropriate for larger institutions, whether they be systemically important institutions overseen by the Large Institution Supervision Coordination Committee, other large banking organizations with more than $50 billion in assets, or regional banking organizations with between $10 billion and $50 billion in assets.4 For example, the Board has made it clear that capital stress tests and other aspects of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review requirements do not apply to community banks, either explicitly or implicitly. In addition to Board members making this point in public speeches and in meetings with bankers, the Federal Reserve's examiner training emphasizes that these requirements, which were established under the Dodd-Frank Act, will apply only to large banking organizations. The Fed also made changes in 2014 to better tailor our program of consumer compliance supervision of smaller institutions. Under the new approach, the intensity of bank examinations is based on our assessment of the risk profile of individual community banks, including how each identifies and manages consumer compliance risk. Risk assessment begins before examiners arrive at the bank, allowing examiners to focus on higher-risk concerns at the banks they supervise. We have also directed examiners to spend less time on those areas of consumer compliance where problems are uncommon, although we are ready to ramp up that scrutiny if we have concerns about practices at a particular institution. Since making these changes 16 months ago, the average length of time for examinations has dropped, and the feedback we have heard from you is mostly positive. Bankers have told us that the examiners seem to have a better grasp of the key issues and that exams are, as we intended, more closely tailored to the business characteristics and risk profile of individual institutions. Examiners also tell us they sometimes see increased consumer compliance risk at community banks that are expanding beyond their traditional product offerings, often using outside vendors to introduce new products such as prepaid cards or credit card add-ons. These products are often complex, and community banks may not always be familiar with the risks the products pose. Banks may not have sufficient expertise to thoroughly check out a vendor and monitor its performance. Beyond consumer compliance supervision, the Federal Reserve has expanded our ability to conduct more of the work of bank examinations off site. If banks have electronic loan records, it is possible for examiners to assess loan quality and underwriting practices remotely, spending much less time on site. This approach has the potential to improve examination efficiency and to reduce the examination-related disruption to banking operations. However, if banks prefer more face-to-face interaction with examiners--and there are banks that do--we will continue the traditional on-site review. Our efforts to further tailor bank supervision at community banks continue. Staff members from the Federal Reserve, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation are working through a major review of regulations called for in the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). We are still in the midst of this effort, which is being conducted with a broad mandate to identify and revise where possible outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome regulations, including those that apply to community banks. The agencies are carefully considering public comments. Although some burden-reducing measures may require congressional action, the agencies will act to implement regulatory relief when possible before the end of the EGRPRA review period. The results of our EGRPRA review will be included in the agencies' joint report to the Congress. In addition, the Federal Reserve System has expanded our economic research into issues of consequence to community banks and has worked to encourage similar research efforts at academic institutions. Several years ago, a group of economists from across the System formed an informal working group to share ongoing research related to community banking. Encouraging results from this internal forum led, in 2013, to an inaugural research and policy conference titled "Community Banking in the 21st Century," sponsored jointly by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. The conference provided a unique opportunity for researchers, community bankers, and bank supervisors to come together to hear some of the latest research on topics related to community banking and discuss the practical implications of this research. The 2013 conference was so successful that we decided to make it an annual event. The third annual conference will take place this coming fall at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and Chair Yellen is scheduled to provide opening remarks. I had the pleasure of participating in the first two conferences and found the presentations and conversations to be extremely enlightening. Many of the researchers who presented at these conferences said that the feedback they received from bankers and bank supervisors was valuable in helping them shape their future research endeavors. The conference organizing committee has launched a new website with the URL "www.communitybanking.org," which they hope will become a focal point for all who are interested in community banking research. The website provides links to the papers and presentations from the previous conferences, news about future conference plans, and other information that might be of interest to community banking researchers. Although research is an important avenue for improving our understanding of the community bank business model and the effects of changing market and regulatory conditions on the viability of that model, understanding is further enhanced through direct interactions between regulators and community bankers. For this reason, the Federal Reserve System has taken a number of steps to expand its outreach to community banks. As you probably know, in 2010 the Board created the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, which includes representatives from community banks, credit unions, and savings associations from each Federal Reserve District.5The Board of Governors meets twice each year to hear the council's valuable insights into the most pressing concerns of community bankers from across the country. There is also a council for each of the 12 Reserve Banks, which meets regularly with its Reserve Bank leadership. We have taken other steps to improve communications with community bankers so that we may better explain our supervisory expectations for community banks and hear your concerns as well. Our Reserve Banks have together developed a number of channels of communication with community banks over the years, and some of the most promising of those initiatives have been expanded nationwide. Two programs, Ask the Fed and Outlook Live, have become quite popular with community bankers who are interested in learning more about timely financial or regulatory topics of interest to both bankers and supervisors. Ask the Fed is a program for officials of state member banks, holding companies, and state bank commissioners. Outlook Live is a webinar series led by Federal Reserve staff that serves as a companion to our quarterly publication,Consumer Compliance Outlook.6Last year I participated in a webinar hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and very much enjoyed hearing directly from community bankers.7 Another effort to improve communication with community bankers is our new Community Banking Connections website and quarterly newsletter. These sources of information focus on safety-and-soundness issues that are of practical interest to community bankers and bank board members. We have also launched a series of special-purpose publications calledFed Linksthat highlight key elements of specific supervisory topics and discuss how examiners typically address the topic.8The common goal of all of these outreach efforts is building and sustaining an ongoing dialogue with community bankers. Despite the challenges that you face, I firmly believe that community banks are here to stay. Banks of different sizes serve different functions, and both large and small banks are needed to meet the funding needs of a healthy economy. The Federal Reserve does not use a one-size-fits-all approach to regulation and supervision and is committed to continually reevaluating and improving oversight to meet the complementary goals of bank soundness, financial stability, and economic growth. The risks and vulnerabilities of community banks differ substantially from those of larger banks, and an explicit tailoring of regulation and supervision for community banks is appropriate. I look forward to our discussion. 1.The views I express here today are my own, and not necessarily those of any other person in the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2.The documentNew Capital Rule: Community Bank Guide (PDF),issued July 2013 bythe Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; and the table "Final Rule on Enhanced Regulatory Capital Standards--Implications for Community Banking Organizations" is available atwww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/commbankguide20130702.pdf.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Rule to Expand Applicability of Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and Apply It to Certain Savings and Loan Holding Companies," press release, April 9.Return to text 4.More on the Large Institution Supervision Coordination Committee is available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm.Return to text 5.More on the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council is available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htm.Return to text 6.Current and past issues ofConsumer Compliance Outlookare available athttps://consumercomplianceoutlook.org.Return to text 7.See Jerome H. Powell (2014), "Opening Remarks," speech delivered at the Webinar on Community Banking, Washington, October 20.Return to text 8.More information is available for Community Banking Connections athttps://communitybankingconnections.organd forFed Linksathttps://www.communitybankingconnections.org/fedlinks.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the conference held in honor of Professor Haim Ben-Shahar, former president of Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel I am happy to be here today, and I thank the organizers for inviting me.1It is a particular pleasure to be back in Israel, where my career as a central banker began. At the Fed, I face a somewhat different set of responsibilities, and my lecture today is on the special challenges that face the Federal Reserve and the global economy in an increasingly interconnected world.2 Over the past 50 years, global trade has more than tripled relative to world gross domestic product (GDP), and the ratio of total exports to global GDP now stands at about 30 percent--though, interestingly, the rate of growth of global international trade has declined to the level of the growth rate of world GDP since the start of the Great Recession. International trade has not loomed as large in the U.S. national accounts as it has for many other countries, but it is an increasingly important driver of the U.S. economy, with the share of trade in U.S. GDP currently at about 15 percent. Although the U.S. share of world GDP has gradually declined since the mid-20th century, the broader importance of the United States to the global economy has diminished less, as a result of increasing financial linkages. In particular, U.S. residents' ownership of private foreign assets has risen from 6.5 percent of U.S. annual GDP in 1950 to more than 140 percent of annual U.S. GDP (nearly $25 trillion), reflecting the leading role of U.S. capital markets in cross-border finance. Total foreign investment in the United States is even larger, at more than $30 trillion. In a progressively integrating world economy and financial system, a central bank cannot ignore developments beyond its country's borders, and the Fed is no exception. This is true even though the Fed's statutory objectives are defined as specific goals for the U.S. economy. In particular, the Federal Reserve's objectives are given by its dual mandate to pursue maximum sustainable employment and price stability, and our policy decisions are targeted to achieve these dual objectives.3Hence, at first blush, it may seem that there is little need for Fed policymakers to pay attention to developments outside the United States. But such an inference would be incorrect. The state of the U.S. economy is significantly affected by the state of the world economy. A wide range of foreign shocks affect U.S. domestic spending, production, prices, and financial conditions. To anticipate how these shocks affect the U.S. economy, the Federal Reserve devotes significant resources to monitoring developments in foreign economies, including emerging market economies (EMEs), which account for an increasingly important share of global growth. The most recent available data show 47 percent of total U.S. exports going to EME destinations. And of course, actions taken by the Federal Reserve influence economic conditions abroad.4Because these international effects in turn spill back on the evolution of the U.S. economy, we cannot make sensible monetary policy choices without taking them into account. In this lecture, I would like to emphasize both aspects of our global connectedness--spillovers from the United States to foreign economies and the effect of foreign economies on the United States. I. International Transmission of Monetary PoliciesThe recognition that a change in interest rates in one nation can spill over to other countries dates back at least to the 18th-century writings of David Hume on the international effect of changes in the money supply.5The standard models incorporating the international transmission of monetary policy were developed by Marcus Fleming and Robert Mundell. In the Mundell-Fleming framework, as well as in modern developments of the same theme, a shift toward a more accommodative monetary policy in the United States spills over to foreign economies by causing their interest rates to fall--though typically by less than in the United States--and their currencies to appreciate against the dollar. At the same time, international capital flows tend to shift toward foreign economies in response to their relatively more attractive interest rates. The pass-through of changes in U.S. policy rates abroad depends importantly on how foreign monetary authorities respond. A decline in U.S. policy rates has a relatively large effect on foreign policy rates in economies that opt to limit exchange rate fluctuations, at least for economies with reasonably open capital accounts. By contrast, a central bank in an economy with a freely floating exchange rate might choose to lower its interest rate by a much smaller amount than in the United States if it believes that domestic conditions so warrant. In this case, the country's exchange rate would appreciate as investors rebalance their portfolios in favor of assets denominated in its currency in response to the higher interest rate differential.6 There is also evidence that monetary policy actions can influence investors' willingness to hold risky assets, the so-called risk-taking channel.7Such effects seem to be most potent when financial conditions are stressed. And countries that offer high prospective returns but have weak policy frameworks or other structural vulnerabilities may be particularly sensitive to fluctuations in international investment associated with global risk factors.8 Effects of monetary accommodation since the global financial crisisAfter the 2007-08 global financial crisis, there has been heightened concern about the international spillovers of monetary policies--and of ours, in particular. Some EME critics argued that U.S. policy accommodation contributed to a surge of capital inflows and excessive credit growth in their economies, creating risks of financial instability. But, as time wore on, most EMEs seemed glad to receive those flows. There is little doubt that the aggressive actions the Federal Reserve took to mitigate the effects of the global financial crisis significantly affected asset prices at home and abroad as well as international capital flows. While the Fed's asset purchases were composed wholly of Treasury, agency, and agency-backed securities (for legal and practical reasons), the program also aimed to boost the prices of riskier assets and ease financial conditions for the private sector.9(And this is what the textbooks say the program should have done.) The preponderance of evidence suggests that the Fed's asset purchases raised the prices of the assets purchased and close substitutes as well as those of riskier assets.10 Importantly, evidence shows that foreign asset markets have been significantly affected by the Fed's purchase programs.11For example, event studies of announcements associated with the Fed's purchase programs have found that they prompted inflows into investment funds holding both foreign debt and foreign equity securities. Of course, other countries' monetary policy announcements can also leave an imprint on international asset prices, with market reactions to new initiatives enacted by the European Central Bank (ECB) one recent example.12However, event studies tend to find larger international interest rate spillovers for U.S. policy announcements than for those of other central banks.13 Earlier studies of the international effects of conventional U.S. monetary policy--namely, changes in the policy rate--have also found significant spillovers to asset prices in other countries.14Studies that have compared the spillovers of monetary policy across conventional and unconventional measures generally conclude that the effects on global financial markets are roughly similar.15 Given the relatively fast recovery of many EMEs from the crisis, post-crisis monetary accommodation in the United States and other advanced economies created policy challenges for many EMEs.16If they resisted currency appreciation pressures by lowering their policy rates, they risked over­stimulating domestic demand, exacerbating financial excesses, and overheating their economies. If, instead, they reduced their policy rates less than the United States had done while intervening to resist currency appreciation, capital inflows could have increased further, thus partially offsetting their attempts to stabilize their economies. And, if they allowed currency appreciation pressures to pass through to their full extent, this could threaten their recoveries by hurting exports. In the event, EMEs tried to make the best of a difficult set of tradeoffs by allowing some exchange rate appreciation, partially reducing their interest rates, and in some countries also using capital controls. I would also argue strongly that U.S. monetary policies were not beggar thy neighbor policies in that, on balance, they generally did not drain demand from other economies. Federal Reserve staff analysis finds that an easing of monetary policy in the United States benefits foreign economies from both stronger U.S. activity and improved global financial conditions. The "taper tantrum" of 2013We should also expect spillovers when monetary policy is tightened. Central bank communications can be a tricky business. And indeed, financial markets reacted strongly to the first statements by Chairman Bernanke in the spring of 2013 that the Fed's asset purchases were likely to decelerate in the near future and come to an end not long after that. Some market participants clearly understood these statements to be broadly in line with previous guidance about the eventual normalization of policy as recovery of the U.S. economy took hold. But others may have grown accustomed to continuing asset purchases; the most recent program of quantitative easing, commonly referred to as QE3, had been first announced less than a year before and was proceeding at a steady pace of $85 billion per month. The onset of the taper tantrum went well beyond a roiling of U.S. financial markets. Spillovers to other advanced-economy financial markets included stock price declines, significant increases in sovereign yields, higher overnight interest swap rates in the United Kingdom and euro area, and rising credit spreads in some countries. Spillovers to EME asset markets were significantly stronger. Inflows to EME investment funds reversed sharply, EME currencies depreciated, and other asset prices declined.17 II. Normalization of Monetary PoliciesThe cumulative effects over half of a decade of the extraordinary actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks will need to be unwound in the coming years as the U.S. and other economies make progress toward economic recovery. In the normalizing of its policy, just as when loosening policy, the Federal Reserve will take account of how its actions affect the global economy. The taper tantrum episode notwithstanding, most EMEs have generally weathered the wind-down of our asset purchases reasonably well so far. The actual raising of policy rates could trigger further bouts of volatility, but my best estimate is that the normalization of our policy should prove manageable for the EMEs. We have done everything we can, within the limits of forecast uncertainty, to prepare market participants for what lies ahead. The Federal Reserve and other central banks are going to great lengths to communicate policy intentions and strategies clearly. Given this, markets should not be greatly surprised by either the timing or the pace of normalization. In fact, it bears mentioning that, following the taper tantrum, when the Fed started to taper its purchases, there was little reaction from markets. The tightening of U.S. policy will begin only when the U.S. expansion has advanced far enough--when we have seen further improvement in the labor market and when we are reasonably confident that the inflation rate will rise to our 2 percent goal.18The stronger U.S. economy should directly benefit our foreign trading partners by raising the demand for their exports, and perhaps also indirectly, by boosting confidence globally. And if foreign growth is weaker than anticipated, the consequences for the U.S. economy could lead the Fed to remove accommodation more slowly than otherwise. The EMEs themselves have generally done a good job of reducing their financial and economic vulnerabilities over the past couple of decades, which should bolster their resilience should normalization lead to financial market stresses. Since the 1990s, many EMEs have made remarkable progress in reducing inflation, improving government debt ratios, building foreign reserves, and better regulating and capitalizing their banking systems. In addition, the development of local-currency debt markets has made EMEs less vulnerable to exchange rate fluctuations. To be sure, some EMEs continue to face a wide array of structural and policy challenges, including, prominently, rapid credit growth. But it does not seem that the overall risks to global financial stability are unusually elevated at this time. Nevertheless, it could be that some more vulnerable economies, including those that pursue overly rigid exchange rate policies, may find the road to normalization somewhat bumpier. This gives all the more reason for the Fed and other major central banks to communicate policy intentions clearly and for EMEs to continue to strengthen their policy frameworks and to consider their own policy responses to the forthcoming normalization in the United States and some other advanced economies. III. The Fed's Responsibility to the Global EconomySo far, I have focused on the immediate spillovers of U.S. monetary policy abroad and the feedback of those effects to the U.S. economy. More tacitly than explicitly stated has been my view that the United States is not just any economy and, thus, the Federal Reserve not just any central bank. The U.S. economy represents nearly one-fourth of the global economy measured at market rates and a similar share of gross capital flows. The significant size and international linkages of the U.S. economy mean that economic and financial developments in the United States have global spillovers. It is, therefore, important to ask, what is the Federal Reserve's responsibility to the global economy? First and foremost, it is to keep our own house in order. Economic and financial volatility inanycountry can have negative consequences for the world, but sizable and significant spillovers are almost assured from an economy that is large. There is no question that sharp declines in U.S. output or large deviations of U.S. inflation from its target level would have adverse effects on the global economy. Conversely, strong and stable U.S. growth in the context of inflation close to our policy objective has substantial benefits for the world. Thus, as part of our efforts to achieve our congressionally mandated objective of maximum sustainable employment and price stability, the Federal Reserve will also seek to minimize adverse spillovers and maximize the beneficial effect of the U.S. economy on the global economy. As the recent financial crisis showed all too clearly, to achieve this objective, we must take financial stability into account. For half a decade, we have been working to understand and better guard against the financial disruptions that were the genesis of the Great Recession. These efforts have spawned many speeches, including some of my own, which testify to our efforts.19In these speeches, we often emphasize that, given the integration of global capital markets, what happens in one market affects others. Thus, our efforts to stabilize the U.S. financial system also have positive spillovers abroad. These financial stability responsibilities do not stop at our borders, given the size and openness of our capital markets and the unique position of the U.S. dollar as the world's leading currency for financial transactions. For example, the global financial crisis highlighted the extent of borrowing and lending in U.S. dollars by foreign financial institutions. When these institutions came under pressure, their actions contributed to the strains in both foreign and domestic dollar funding markets. To achieve financial stability domestically and maintain the flow of credit to American households and businesses, we took action. Importantly, we developed swap facilities with central banks in countries that represented major financial markets or trading centers in order to facilitate the provision of dollar liquidity to these markets. We did so in recognition of the scope of dollar markets and dollar-denominated transactions outside of our country, the benefits they provide to U.S. households and firms, and the adverse consequences to our financial markets if these centers lose access to dollar liquidity. We have continued to maintain swap facilities with a number of central banks. Although usage is currently very low, these facilities represent an important backstop in the event of a resurgence in global financial tensions. But I should caution that the responsibility of the Fed is not unbounded. My teacher Charles Kindleberger argued that stability of the international financial system could best be supported by the leadership of a financial hegemon or a global central bank.20But I should be clear that the U.S. Federal Reserve System is not that bank. Our mandate, like that of virtually all central banks, focuses on domestic objectives. As I have described, to meet those domestic objectives, we must recognize the effect of our actions abroad, and, by meeting those domestic objectives, we best minimize the negative spillovers we have to the global economy. And because the dollar features so prominently in international transactions, we must be mindful that our markets extend beyond our borders and take precautions, as we have done before, to provide liquidity when necessary. That said, the world is not without other resources to guard against adverse economic and financial spillovers. Most obviously, the International Monetary Fund has played and will continue to play a critical role in providing liquidity and financial support to its member countries. In the United States, we are working to ensure that our financial institutions and other market participants are prepared for the normalization of monetary policy and the return to a world of higher interest rates. It is equally important that individuals, businesses, and institutions around the world do the same. For our part, the Federal Reserve will promote a smooth transition by communicating our assessment of the economy and our policy intentions as clearly as possible. IV.Concluding RemarksTo summarize and conclude, the Fed's statutory objectives are defined by its dual mandate to pursue maximum sustainable employment and price stability in the U.S. economy. But the U.S. economy and the economies of the rest of the world have important feedback effects on each other. To make coherent policy choices, we have to take these feedback effects into account. The most important contribution that U.S. policymakers can make to the health of the world economy is to keep our own house in order--and the same goes for all countries. Because the dollar is the primary international currency, we have, in the past, had to take action--particularly in times of global economic crisis--to maintain order in international capital markets, such as the central bank liquidity swap lines extended during the global financial crisis. In that case, we were acting in accordance with our dual mandate, in the interest of the U.S. economy, by taking actions that also benefit the world economy. Going forward, we will continue to be guided by those same principles. ReferencesAhmed, Shaghil, and Andrei Zlate (2014). "Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World?"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 48 (November), pp. 221-28. Avdjiev, Stefan, and Előd Takáts (2014). "Cross-Border Bank Lending during the Taper Tantrum: The Role of Emerging Market Fundamentals (PDF),"BIS Quarterly Review,September, pp. 49-60. Bernanke, Ben S. (2010a). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, August 27. ------ (2010b). "Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress,"statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, July 21. ------ (2012). "U.S. Monetary Policy and International Implications," speech delivered at "Challenges of the Global Financial System: Risks and Governance under Evolving Globalization," a seminar sponsored by the Bank of Japan and the International Monetary Fund, Tokyo, Japan, October 14. ------ (2014). "The Federal Reserve: Looking Back, Looking Forward," speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Philadelphia, January 3. Borio, Claudio, and Haibin Zhu (2012). "Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy: A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?"Journal of Financial Stability, vol. 8 (December), pp. 236-51. Bowman, David, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza (2014). "U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1109. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin (2015). "Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity,"Review of Economic Studies,vol. 82 (April), pp. 535-64. Chen, Qianying, Andrew Filardo, Dong He, and Feng Zhu (2012). "International Spillovers of Central Bank Balance Sheet Policies (PDF)," BIS Papers Series 66p. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, October. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol.108 (May), pp. 425-48. Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher (2005). "Equal Size, Equal Role? Interest Rate Interdependence between the Euro Area and the United States,"Economic Journal,vol. 115 (October), pp. 930-50. ------ (2009). "Global Financial Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks,"Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, vol. 71 (December), pp. 739-59. Federal Open Market Committee (2014).Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF). Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 28. Fischer, Stanley (2014). "Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We?" speech delivered at the Martin Feldstein Lecture at the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. Fleming, J. Marcus (1962). "Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under Floating Exchange Rates,"International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, vol. 9 (November), pp. 369-80. Fratzscher, Marcel (2012). "Capital Flows, Push versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 88 (November), pp. 341-56. Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013). "On the International Spillovers of U.S. Quantitative Easing (PDF)," Working Paper Series1557. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, June. Furceri, Davide, Stephanie Guichard, and Elena Rusticelli (2011). "Medium-Term Determinants of International Investment Positions: The Role of Structural Policies," OECD Economics Department Working Paper Series 863. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, May. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). "Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review,vol. 17 (May), pp. 41-59. Glick, Reuven, and Sylvain Leduc (2013). "The Effects of Unconventional and Conventional U.S. Monetary Policy on the Dollar (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2013‑11. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44 (February), pp. 3-46. Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein (2015). "Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 115 (March), pp. 429-48. Hausman, Joshua, and Jon Wongswan (2011). "Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements,"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 30 (April), pp. 547-71. Hume, David (1742). "Of Interest,"Political Discourses,essay IV, in Eugene F. Miller, ed.,Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, Inc. (1987). Joyce, Michael A.S., Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011). "The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7 (September), pp. 113-61. Kindleberger, Charles P. (1986).The World in Depression, 1929-1939.Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press. Luca, Oana, and Nikola Spatafora (2012). "Capital Inflows, Financial Development, and Domestic Investment: Determinants and Inter-Relationships (PDF)," IMF Working Paper Series WP/12/120. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May. Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2014). "Risk-Taking Channel of Monetary Policy: A Global Game Approach (PDF)," working paper, Princeton University, January. Mundell, Robert A. (1963). "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates,"Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science, vol. 29 (November), pp. 475-85. Neely, Christopher J. (2011). "The Large-Scale Asset Purchases Had Large International Effects (PDF)," Working Paper Series2010-018C. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, January. Powell, Jerome H. (2013). "Advanced Economy Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Economies," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2013 Asia Economic Policy Conference, San Francisco, November 4. Rey, Hélène (2015). "Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 21162. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Rogers, John H., Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright (2014). "Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Comparison (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1101. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Sahay, Ratna, Vivek Arora, Thanos Arvanitis, Hamid Faruqee, Papa N'Diaye, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, and an IMF Team (2014). "Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from the Taper Tantrum (PDF)," IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/14/09. Washington: International Monetary Fund, September. Takáts, Előd, and Abraham Vela (2014). "International Monetary Policy Transmission (PDF)," BIS Papers Series 78. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, August. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2014). "Stress Testing after Five Years," speech delivered at the Third Annual Stress Test Modeling Symposium, sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, June 25. Yellen, Janet L. (2014). "Monetary Policy and Financial Stability," speech delivered at the 2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, July 2. ------ (2015). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27. 1.I am grateful to John Ammer, Christopher Erceg, Joseph Gruber, and Beth Anne Wilson of the Federal Reserve Board's staff for their assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2.This lecture is an updated and shortened version of the Per Jacobsson lecture that I delivered in October 2014.Return to text 3.The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has judged that 2 percent inflation in the price of personal consumption expenditures is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate. For more information, see Federal Open Market Committee (2014). The Fed also has separate responsibilities for promoting financial stability (some of which are spelled out in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010) that are, in many respects, complementary to the dual mandate. See Yellen (2014) for further discussion.Return to text 4.For a discussion of the effect of Federal Reserve actions on international economic conditions, see Rey (2015).Return to text 5.See Hume (1742).Return to text 6.See Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962). One key implication of the Mundell-Fleming framework is that a central bank can exercise full control over both the exchange rate and the domestic interest rate only when there are significant barriers to the international capital mobility. Accordingly, policymakers face the constraint of the "impossible trinity," which states that a country cannot simultaneously have an independent monetary policy, free capital movement, and a fixed exchange rate.Return to text 7.Several recent papers discuss risk-taking channels through which monetary policy influences financial conditions more broadly than the level of safe interest rates. See Borio and Zhu (2012), Rey (2015), Morris and Shin (2014), Bruno and Shin (2015), and the Hanson and Stein (2015) "reaching for yield" concept.Return to text 8.Studies using panel data typically have found that country-specific factors help explain cross-sectional differences in international investment and capital flows. See, for example, Furceri, Guichard, and Rusticelli (2011); Fratzscher (2012); and Luca and Spatafora (2012). Avdjiev and Takáts's (2014) study of cross-border bank lending during the "taper tantrum" shows a larger pullback for countries with weaker current account balances, and Sahay and others (2014) find that country-specific market reactions during this period also were affected by high inflation, weak growth prospects, and relatively low reserves.Return to text 9.See, for example, Bernanke (2010a, 2010b).Return to text 10.See, for example, D'Amico and King (2013); Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2011); Hamilton and Wu (2012); and Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014).Return to text 11.See Neely (2011); Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub (2013); Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014); and Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2014). Also, Ahmed and Zlate (2014) show that both conventional and nonconventional U.S. monetary expansion have driven capital flows into EMEs.Return to text 12.See Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014) and Chen, Filardo, He, and Zhu (2012) for more systematic evidence.Return to text 13.See, for example, Rogers, Scotti, and Wright's (2014) recent event study of central bank announcement effects on sovereign yields in different countries. Similarly, earlier work by Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005) finds larger reactions in euro-area interest rates to U.S. rate changes than vice versa.Return to text 14.See, for example, Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2009) and Hausman and Wongswan (2011).Return to text 15.Among studies of spillovers from conventional versus unconventional U.S. monetary policy, Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014) report no significant differences in relative announcement effects on advanced foreign economy asset prices and Treasury yields; Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2014) find similar EME asset price responses; Takáts and Vela (2014) report mixed results for EMEs, with a weaker post-2007 relationship in levels of EME policy rates with U.S. rates but a stronger post-2008 relationship in levels of five-year yields; and Glick and Leduc (2013) also report similar spillovers to exchange rates. The effects of the Bank of England's quantitative easing program on corporate bond yields and sterling exchange rates are similar to predictions from a model estimated over an earlier period by Joyce, Lasaosa, Stevens, and Tong (2011).Return to text 16.See the discussion in Bernanke (2012).Return to text 17.Powell (2013) notes that EMEs with larger current account deficits experienced both greater depreciations of their currencies and larger increases in their bond yields in mid-2013, suggesting that, while a reassessment of U.S. monetary policy may have triggered the retrenchment from EME assets, investor concerns about underlying vulnerabilities appear to have amplified the reactions.Return to text 18.See Yellen (2015) for further discussion of the determinants of the pace of normalization.Return to text 19.Bernanke (2014), Fischer (2014), and Tarullo (2014) also discuss concrete steps that U.S. authorities have taken in the past five years to implement financial reform of large financial institutions (including introducing a systematic framework for stress-testing, stronger capital and liquidity requirements, and progress on resolution mechanisms for failed institutions), of financial market infrastructures, and in short-term funding markets.Return to text 20.See Kindleberger (1986).Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Providence Chamber of Commerce, Providence, Rhode Island Good afternoon. I am pleased to be with you, and it is good to be back in Providence. As many of you know, I attended Brown University, and the city I see today is very different from the one I remember from my time here in the 1960s. Many of those differences reflect dramatic and, at times, wrenching economic changes in Rhode Island over those years, especially since the financial crisis and the Great Recession. As ever, Providence has faced these challenges, and I am impressed by the revival and renewal evident downtown, encouraged by attractions like Waterfire, which bring visitors and commerce here and build civic pride. Today I would like to speak with you about the outlook for the U.S. economy. I should note at the outset that my remarks today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. The Recession and the Recovery So FarAs you all know, the economy is still recovering from the Great Recession, the worst downturn since the terrible episode of the 1930s that inspired its name. The recession began more than seven years ago, the result of the collapse in the housing market and the financial crisis that it sparked. Rhode Islanders are well aware of the great toll taken by the recession. The unemployment rate hit 10 percent nationally, and it reached 11.3 percent here in Rhode Island. Nationally, payrolls shrank by some 8-1/2 million, about 6 percent, and the 41,000 jobs lost in Rhode Island represented close to 8 percent of the state's employment. U.S. economic output fell more than 4 percent nationally, the most since the Great Depression, and many of the hardest-hit industries, including housing construction and manufacturing, are important to the Rhode Island economy.1 The Federal Reserve took action to help stabilize the financial system during the crisis, and we have supported the economic recovery with monetary policy actions designed to hold down longer-term interest rates. With this help, the economy has made significant strides. The pace of job gains has gradually strengthened, and payrolls expanded by more than 3 million in 2014 alone. The unemployment rate has come down steadily to 5.4 percent in April. One sign of a stronger labor market is that the number of job openings has risen impressively, and another is that more workers are quitting their jobs, signaling greater confidence in their ability to find a new job. Rhode Island is sharing in this recovery, but I am well aware that economic conditions remain difficult here. Rhode Island's unemployment rate improved very slowly during the recovery, and, for a time, it was the highest of any state. The jobless rate has come down a lot over the past year or so, but at 6.3 percent in March, unemployment here remains above the national average, and payroll employment has yet to regain its pre-recession peak. In recent months, some economic data have suggested that the pace of improvement in the economy may have slowed, a topic I will address in a moment. And even with the significant gains of the past couple years, it is only now, six years after the recession ended, that the labor market is approaching its full strength. I say "approaching," because in my judgment we are not there yet. The unemployment rate has come down close to levels that many economists believe is sustainable in the long run without generating inflation. But the unemployment rate today probably does not fully capture the extent of slack in the labor market. To be classified as unemployed, people must report that they are actively seeking work, and many people without jobs say they are not doing so--that is, they are classified as being out of the labor force. Most people out of the labor force are there voluntarily, including retirees, teenagers, young adults in school, and people staying home to care for children. But I also believe that a significant number are not seeking work because they still perceive a lack of good job opportunities. In addition to those too discouraged to seek work, an unusually large number of people report that they are working part time because they cannot find full-time jobs, and I suspect that much of this also represents labor market slack that could be absorbed in a stronger economy. Finally, the generally disappointing pace of wage growth also suggests that the labor market has not fully healed. Higher wages raise costs for employers, of course, but they also boost the spending and confidence of customers and would signal a strengthening of the recovery that will ultimately be good for business. In the aggregate, the main measures of hourly compensation rose at a rate of only around 2 percent through most of the recovery. And in Rhode Island, average hourly earnings have not risen at all in the past year. Nationally, there are at least some encouraging signs of a pickup so far this year.2The fact that some large companies, such as Wal-Mart and Target, have announced wage increases for their employees also might be a sign that larger wage gains are on the horizon. This improvement in the labor market has brought the economy closer to one of the two goals of monetary policy assigned to the Fed by the Congress--maximum employment. Less progress has been made toward the other goal, price stability. Consumer price inflation remains below the Fed's stated objective of 2 percent. The notion that inflation can be too low may sound odd, but over time low inflation means that wages as well as prices will rise by less, and very low inflation can impair the functioning of the economy--for example, by making it more difficult for households and firms to pay off their debts. Overall consumer price inflation has been especially low--close to zero--over the past year, as the big fall in oil prices since last summer lowered prices for gasoline, heating oil, and other energy products. But inflation excluding food and energy, which is often a better indicator of where overall inflation will be in the future, has also been low, below the Fed's 2 percent objective both now and for almost all of the economic recovery. Inflation has been held down by the continued economic weakness during the slow recovery and, more recently, by lower prices of imported goods as well as the fall in oil prices. With oil prices no longer declining, and with the public's expectations of future inflation apparently stable, my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and I believe that consumer price inflation will move up to 2 percent as the economy strengthens further and as other temporary factors weighing on inflation recede. A number of economic headwinds have slowed the recovery, and to some extent they continue to influence the outlook. These headwinds include, first, the fact that the housing crash left many households with less wealth and higher debt, weighing on consumer spending. Many homeowners lost their homes, and many more ended up "underwater," owing more on their mortgages than their homes were worth. Economists have noted that areas of the country that saw a larger boom and bust in housing have subsequently fared worse economically than other areas of the country.3Rhode Island is one such place. While the housing bust was not as large here as in Florida, Nevada, and parts of California, it was larger than average, and the largest in New England. This factor likely has contributed to the fact that the overall recovery here in Rhode Island has lagged.4 In some respects, this headwind has diminished. Home prices have moved up appreciably in many areas of the country, alleviating the burden for many homeowners, though the improvement in some areas, including Rhode Island, has lagged. Nationally, the share of mortgages that are underwater fell by about one-half between 2011 and 2014.5And credit availability for mortgages has improved as well, although mortgages are still very hard to obtain for would-be homeowners without pristine credit records. So I would score this headwind as still a concern, but one that is likely to continue to fade. A second headwind, also quite important here in Rhode Island, has come from changes in fiscal policy to reduce budget deficits. At the federal level, the fiscal stimulus of 2008 and 2009 supported economic output, but the effects of that stimulus faded; by 2011, federal fiscal policy actions became a drag on output growth when the recovery was still weak. Meanwhile, states and municipalities, faced with serious budget problems due to the recession and required by law to balance their budgets, were forced to cut spending and raise taxes. The recovery has by now boosted tax revenue in most states, though Rhode Island, I know, is among those areas still facing considerable budget strain. Overall, fiscal policy actions at both the federal and the state and local levels look like they are no longer a significant drag on economic growth. So this headwind, I hope, is mostly behind us. A third headwind has been the restraining influences on the United States from the global economy. I won't say as much about this factor today, but I will make just a few observations. Initially the euro-area crisis was the biggest headwind coming from the rest of the world. Supported by monetary stimulus, reduced fiscal drag, and significant institutional reforms, the recovery in the euro area now appears to be on a firmer footing. However, growth in many other parts of the global economy, including China and some other emerging market economies, has slowed. Weak growth abroad, together with its accompanying implications for exchange rates, has dented U.S. exports and weighed on our economy. This headwind too should abate as growth in the global economy firms, supported by monetary policies that generally remain highly accommodative. Factors Affecting the OutlookWith the waning of the headwinds that I have discussed, the U.S. economy seems well positioned for continued growth. Households are seeing the benefits of the improving jobs situation, and consumer confidence has been solid. In addition, the drop in oil prices amounts to a sizable boost in household purchasing power. The annual savings in gasoline costs has been estimated at about $700 per household, on average, and savings on heating costs--especially here in the Northeast, where it was so cold this winter--are also large.6Given these energy savings on top of the job gains, real disposable income has risen almost 4 percent nationally over the past four quarters. Households and businesses also are benefiting from favorable financial conditions. Borrowing costs are low, supported by the Fed's accommodative monetary policies. And credit availability to both households and small businesses has improved. In recent months, as I noted earlier, there has been some softness in the economic data. Recent indicators of both household spending and business investment have slowed, and industrial output has declined. The Commerce Department's initial estimate was that real gross domestic product was nearly flat in the first quarter of 2015. If confirmed by further estimates, my guess is that this apparent slowdown was largely the result of a variety of transitory factors that occurred at the same time, including the unusually cold and snowy winter and the labor disputes at ports on the West Coast, both of which likely disrupted some economic activity. And some of this apparent weakness may just be statistical noise. I therefore expect the economic data to strengthen. All of that said, the headwinds facing our economy have not fully abated, and, as such, I expect that continued growth in employment and output will be moderate over the remainder of the year and beyond. Despite the recovery I noted in home prices and a greater number of home sales, residential construction activity remains quite low. I mentioned the ongoing issues with mortgage credit, but more generally, many years of a weak job market and slow wage gains seem to have induced many people to double-up on housing, and many young adults continue to live with their parents. Population growth is creating a need for more housing, whether to rent or to own, and I do expect that continuing job and wage gains will encourage more people to form new households. Nevertheless, activity in the housing sector is likely to improve only gradually. The pace of business investment has also been only modest during this recovery, and some of the reasons might persist a while longer. Businesses seem not to have had sufficient confidence in the strength and durability of the recovery to undertake substantial capital expenditures. Moreover, some analysts have suggested that uncertainty, not only about the strength of the recovery but also about economic policy, could be a significant factor. And the fact that many businesses seem to be holding large amounts of cash may suggest that risk aversion is playing a role. Weak investment in the energy sector is also likely to persist. This represents the negative side to the fall in oil prices, one being felt by the oil-producing regions of the country. New domestic oil drilling has plunged over the past few months, and we have also seen a slowdown in activity in sectors that supply oil production companies, including steel and certain types of machinery. I would add, however, that, on balance, the plusses for energy consumers from the fall in oil prices almost surely outweigh the minuses. Remember that we are still a net importer of oil. Putting it all together, the economic projections of most members of the FOMC call for growth in real gross domestic product of roughly 2-1/2 percent per year over the next couple of years, a little faster than the pace of the recovery thus far, with the unemployment rate continuing to move down to near 5 percent by the end of this year. And for inflation, as I noted earlier, my colleagues and I expect inflation to move up toward our objective of 2 percent as the economy strengthens further and as transitory influences wane. Of course, the outlook for the economy, as always, is highly uncertain. I am describing the outlook that I see as most likely, but based on many years of making economic projections, I can assure you that any specific projection I write down will turn out to be wrong, perhaps markedly so. For many reasons, output and job growth over the next few years could prove to be stronger, and inflation higher, than I expect; correspondingly, employment could grow more slowly, and inflation could remain undesirably low. Implications for Monetary PolicyGiven this economic outlook and the attendant uncertainty, how is monetary policy likely to evolve over the next few years? Because of the substantial lags in the effects of monetary policy on the economy, we must make policy in a forward-looking manner. Delaying action to tighten monetary policy until employment and inflation are already back to our objectives would risk overheating the economy. For this reason, if the economy continues to improve as I expect, I think it will be appropriate at some point this year to take the initial step to raise the federal funds rate target and begin the process of normalizing monetary policy. To support taking this step, however, I will need to see continued improvement in labor market conditions, and I will need to be reasonably confident that inflation will move back to 2 percent over the medium term. After we begin raising the federal funds rate, I anticipate that the pace of normalization is likely to be gradual. The various headwinds that are still restraining the economy, as I said, will likely take some time to fully abate, and the pace of that improvement is highly uncertain. If conditions develop as my colleagues and I expect, then the FOMC's objectives of maximum employment and price stability would best be achieved by proceeding cautiously, which I expect would mean that it will be several years before the federal funds rate would be back to its normal, longer-run level. Having said that, I should stress that the actual course of policy will be determined by incoming data and what that reveals about the economy. We have no intention of embarking on a preset course of increases in the federal funds rate after the initial increase. Rather, we will adjust monetary policy in response to developments in economic activity and inflation as they occur. If conditions improve more rapidly than expected, it may be appropriate to raise interest rates more quickly; conversely, the pace of normalization may be slower if conditions turn out to be less favorable. Longer-Run GrowthBefore I conclude, let me put this discussion into a longer-term context. The Federal Reserve's objectives of maximum employment and price stability do not, by themselves, ensure a strong pace of economic growth or an improvement in living standards. The most important factor determining living standards is productivity growth, defined as increases in how much can be produced in an hour of work. Over time, sustained increases in productivity are necessary to support rising incomes. Here the recent data have been disappointing. The growth rate of output per hour worked in the business sector has averaged about 1-1/4 percent per year since the recession began in late 2007. This rate is down from gains averaging 2-3/4 percent over the preceding decade. I have mentioned the tepid pace of wage gains in recent years, and while I do take this as evidence of slack in the labor market, it also may be a reflection of relatively weak productivity growth. Productivity depends on many factors, including our workforce's knowledge and skills and the quantity and quality of the capital, technology, and infrastructure that they have to work with. Economists debate how optimistic to be about our nation's productivity prospects. Some argue that the decade starting in the mid-1990s was exceptional, with unusually large advances in information technologies, and that the more recent period provides a better guide to the future. Others are more optimistic, suggesting that recent technological innovation remains as impressive as ever, and that history shows it may take some years to fully reap the economic benefits of such innovations.7I do not know who is right, but I do believe that, as a nation, we should be pursuing policies to support longer-run growth in productivity. Policies to strengthen education, to encourage entrepreneurship and innovation, and to promote capital investment, both public and private, can all be of great benefit. It also is possible that a portion of the relatively weak productivity growth we have seen recently may be the result of the recession itself.8Firms slashed their capital expenditures during the recession, and as I noted earlier, the increases in investment during the recovery have been modest. In particular, investment in research and development has been relatively weak. Moreover, a lack of financing may have impaired the ability of people to start new businesses and implement new ideas and technologies. As the economy strengthens further, many of these processes could work in reverse, boosting our productivity prospects. To the extent this is so, Federal Reserve actions to strengthen the recovery may not only help bring our economy back to its productive potential, but it may also support the growth of productivity and living standards over the longer run. 1.For a discussion of recent economic developments in Rhode Island, see Mary A. Burke (2014), "Rhode Island in the Great Recession: Factors Contributing to Its Sharp Downturn and Slow Recovery," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Current Policy Perspectives 14-9 (Boston: FRB Boston, December).Return to text 2.According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics' (BLS) employment cost index--which measures both wages and the cost of employer-provided benefits--hourly compensation in private industry rose 2-3/4 percent over the year ended in March after having averaged gains of about 2 percent per year during most of the recovery. However, some other prominent aggregate wage measures have remained softer. For example, the BLS's average hourly earnings for all employees on nonfarm payrolls have increased 2-1/4 percent over the 12 months through April.Return to text 3.See Atif Mian and Amir Sufi (2014),House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great Recession, and How We Can Prevent It from Happening Again(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).Return to text 4.See Burke, "Rhode Island in the Great Recession," in note 1.Return to text 5.The share varies by source of data. According to Zillow's October 2014Real Estate Market Overview,the share of mortgages in negative equity positions declined from about 30 percent in 2011 to 17 percent in 2014. According to CoreLogic's 4thquarter 2014Equity Report,the share declined from about 25 percent to 11 percent over that period.Return to text 6.The gasoline figure is from the U.S. Energy Information Administration (2015),Short-Term Energy Outlook(Washington: EIA, May).Return to text 7.For a relatively pessimistic view of productivity growth because "the low-hanging fruit is picked," see Robert J. Gordon (2012), "Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds," NBER Working Paper Series 18315 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August); and Tyler Cowen (2011),The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better(New York: Dutton). For a more optimistic perspective, see Joel Mokyr (2014), "Secular Stagnation? Not in Your Life," in Coen Teulings and Richard Baldwin, eds.,Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures(London: CEPR Press), pp. 83-89; and Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2014),The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies(New York: W.W. Norton & Company). The greatest return to adopting information technology appears five to seven years after investment, according to Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin M. Hitt (2003), "Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 793-808.Return to text 8.See Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2015), "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"IMF Economic Review,advance online publication, March 17, http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/imfer.2015.1. (A previous version of this paper is also available on the Board of Governors website atwww.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2013/201377/201377abs.html.)Return to text