Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal banking agencies will hold an outreach meeting on Monday, October 19, 2015, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago as part of their regulatory review under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA). The meeting is the fifth in a series of outreach sessions that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Federal Reserve Board, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency are holding throughout the country. The meeting will feature panel presentations by bankers and consumer and community groups. Interested persons may also present their views on any of the 12 categories of regulations listed onhttp://egrpra.ffiec.gov. FDIC Chairman Martin J. Gruenberg, Comptroller of the Currency Thomas J. Curry, and Federal Reserve Governor Lael Brainard are scheduled to attend. Bryan A. Schneider, secretary of the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, will also attend. Other state banking regulators are invited to participate through the State Liaison Committee of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). The meeting will be webcast live athttp://egrpra.ffiec.gov. Online viewers will be able to submit written comments using the text chat feature at any time during the presentations. In addition, a toll-free telephone number also will be provided for members of the public who would like only to listen to the meeting, and who may choose later to submit written comments. EGRPRA requires the agencies, along with the FFIEC, to conduct a review at least every 10 years to identify outdated or otherwise unnecessary regulations. The agencies have divided their regulations into 12 categories and requested comments in theFederal Registerfor nine categories. The agencies will request comment on the remaining three categories later this year. The previously publishedFederal Registernotices are available athttp://egrpra.ffiec.gov/federal-register-notices/fedreg-index.html. As previously announced, the agencies have expanded the scope of the EGRPRA review to cover newly issued regulations. Comments will be accepted on all rules that have been finalized before the publication of the last in the series of EGRPRA notices. Details on the Chicago meeting, including registration information and the agenda, are available on the EGRPRA website,http://egrpra.ffiec.gov/outreach/outreach-index.html. The final outreach meeting will be held in the Washington, D.C., area on December 2, 2015.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Federal Reserve Board and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced that they have approved Bank of America and its subsidiary national banks to begin using the "advanced approaches" capital framework starting in the fourth quarter of 2015. Under this framework, firms must meet specific risk-measurement and risk-management criteria when calculating their risk-based capital requirements. The framework implements standards developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and applies to large, internationally active banking organizations--generally those with at least $250 billion in total consolidated assets or at least $10 billion in total on-balance sheet foreign exposure--and includes the depository institution subsidiaries of those firms. Before a banking organization may use the advanced approaches framework, it must conduct a satisfactory trial, or "parallel run," using the framework. Under the supervision of its regulator, a firm must show it can comply with the framework during the parallel run period for at least four consecutive calendar quarters by using risk-measurement and risk-management systems that adhere to the advanced approaches framework. Bank of America and its subsidiary national banks (Bank of America, National Association; Bank of America California, National Association; and Recontrust Company, National Association) have each completed a parallel run. These firms will use the advanced approaches framework to calculate and publicly disclose their risk-based capital ratios beginning in the fourth quarter of 2015. The firms must meet the minimum risk-based capital ratios under both the advanced approaches and the generally applicable risk-based capital frameworks.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Banque de France Conference: Financial Regulation--Stability versus Uniformity; A Focus on Non-bank Actors, Paris, France Strengthening the quantity and quality of capital held by banks has been a central element of post-financial crisis regulatory reform. Yet, as the topic of this conference reminds us, the crisis also exposed weaknesses in other financial intermediaries that carried systemic implications. In the United States, when Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers failed, they were so-called freestanding investment banks, not subject even to the inadequate pre-crisis regulatory regime for bank holding companies. The stress at American International Group (AIG), an insurance company, and the vulnerability of money market funds to destabilizing runs contributed to a profound deepening of the crisis. Hence the theme for this session of the conference: In light of this recent history and, more generally, of the steady growth of nonbank financial intermediaries, to what degree should they be subject to the capital regulations developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and applied to bank holding companies in the United States and to all commercial and investment banks in Europe? At first glance, the answer to this question might seem intuitively obvious. After all, the risk of loss associated with a particular corporate loan or mortgage-backed security or, indeed, any other asset does not vary just because its legal owner is an insurance company or mutual fund, rather than a bank. Yet we all know that regulatory capital requirements sometimes do vary with the nature of the firm. And I suspect that most people in this room believe there are good reasons why theyshouldvary under at least some circumstances. In my remarks this morning, I will explain how the identification of those circumstances should proceed--by looking not at the asset side of a financial intermediary's balance sheet, but at the liability side. The scope and nature of a firm's liabilities provide the justifications for capital requirements regulation. Differences in liabilities can, accordingly, sometimes warrant different capital requirements for portfolios of similar assets across firms. At the risk of packing too much into these introductory points, let me also note that an emphasis on a firm's liabilities is related to, but not synonymous with, an emphasis on its activities. Thus, for example, simply deciding that an intermediary provides mostly commercial banking services or insurance products does not fully answer the question of what its capital requirements should be. My purpose today is not to offer specific proposals, or even a comprehensive conceptual framework, but instead to propose an approach for thinking about the purposes of capital regulation across types of financial intermediaries that will suggest appropriate starting points for shaping--or reshaping--applicable capital regulation. This seems to me a particularly important effort at a time when the financial system is undergoing significant change. Liability Structure and Capital RegulationTo begin, we should remind ourselves that capital regulation of private corporations is unusual. Generally, market actors with actual or contemplated claims on a nonfinancial corporation are left to their own devices in protecting their interests, though various features of contract, securities, and insolvency law are designed to help them make these judgments more efficiently. In many kinds of financial intermediaries, on the other hand, capital levels are regulated, usually because of market failures attributable to some combination of information problems, moral hazard, collective action problems, and systemic risk. Scrutiny of the liability side of the balance sheet reveals whether and how these various justifications are present for different financial intermediaries. Let me start with a couple of straightforward examples, well-established in regulatory practice. The first example arises from the fact that, by the very nature of their business, many intermediaries have substantially more customer-facing liabilities1on their balance sheets than nonfinancial firms. This characteristic often means that leverage is higher. It almost always means that a large portion of the liability side of the balance sheet is accounted for by such customers, who are not well-positioned to evaluate the soundness of these intermediaries' often-opaque balance sheets. Consider the case of a very traditional life insurance company, which collects premiums from customers over a protracted period of time, while promising a payout to beneficiaries if the insured dies within the coverage period. The duration of the exposure, difficulties in evaluating the company's ability to pay, and the potentially high costs of changing coverage to another firm even if that evaluation can be done together provide a rationale for insurance company capital requirements. Here the motivation for capital regulation is likely oriented toward the capacity of the company to meet these long-term claims as they come due, presumably over a fairly extended span. Investors and counterparties from the financial sector might well be left to fend for themselves. Thus this rationale for capital regulation focuses only on assuring sufficient assets over time to satisfy the policyholders' claims should the company fail, with less attention to maintaining the company as a going concern. A second example of how the liability side of an intermediary's balance sheet suggests the appropriate form of capital regulation is presented by the familiar problem of deposit runs on banks. Like a policyholder, a depositor has difficulty gauging the health of the financial intermediary. But unlike a life insurance policyholder, a depositor can withdraw all or most of her funds if she has any fear--even an ill-founded fear--that the bank may be in trouble. Indeed, depositors have a rational incentive to act quickly, since the first to withdraw will have the best chance of getting all their money back. Experience with bank runs, and with the more-damaging cases of bank panics (in which problems at one bank are imputed to others on the basis of incomplete and possibly incorrect information), led to government-provided deposit insurance. While countering runs and panics and protecting depositors from loss, government deposit insurance creates different justifications for capital regulation--protecting the government insurance fund, which is now guaranteeing a significant portion of the bank's liabilities, and countering moral hazard, which may arise because insured depositors need no longer care whether the bank is adequately capitalized. The moral hazard issue leads us to a third example of how the liability side of the balance sheet of a financial intermediary reveals the need for capital regulation--the too-big-to-fail (TBTF) problem. As the size of an intermediary increases, its exposures to other market actors--including many other intermediaries--may become so extensive that its failure would threaten the financial system as a whole. Believing that the government will, for this reason, prevent such an intermediary from becoming insolvent, market actors may extend credit as if a guarantee similar to deposit insurance were in place. Thus the nature and extent of the firm's liabilities, taken as a whole, may warrant capital regulation to offset an implicit TBTF subsidy. Even if the distinct problem of TBTF could be countered through other means, such as a credible bankruptcy or resolution option, the failure of a financial intermediary with systemically significant liabilities raises the prospect of imposing very large negative externalities on the financial system. This prospect creates an additional argument for capital requirements--or, more precisely, an argument for progressively higher capital requirements that would reduce the probability of the failure of the systemically important intermediary. Note that this last discussion has moved us toward consideration of macroprudential reasons for capital requirements--specifically, for higher requirements aimed at reducing the probability of insolvency below that which would be warranted if the sole regulatory aim were to protect customers, depositors, or even a government deposit insurance fund. As has been much discussed in recent years, pre-crisis financial regulatory regimes had substantially undervalued systemwide considerations. Indeed, in the first instance the crisis spread not only because of the direct effects engendered by the insolvency of individual firms, but also because of the dramatic contraction of funding available throughout markets for widely held assets such as mortgage-backed securities. The pre-crisis explosion of short-term wholesale funding, both inside and outside traditional banks, left the entire financial system vulnerable to the disappearance of this market funding as real estate prices declined sharply and uncertainty spread about the value of the assets being funded. Concerns about solvency accelerated the run of wholesale funding from Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, raising the prospect of classic fire sales of their assets, with consequent depressing effects on the balance sheets of all firms holding these assets. Experience during the financial crisis vindicated the view of those who had argued that liquidity, as well as capital, in large intermediaries needed to be regulated.2It also buttressed the view that capital and liquidity regulation are closely related and need to be developed in tandem, if not as part of the same regulatory framework. Much academic research prompted by the crisis has focused on the interrelationship between funding and solvency problems.3 Here, then, is another way in which the characteristics of the liability side of an intermediary's balance sheet should determine the form and stringency of capital regulation. Shorter duration and, if you will, increased "runnability" of its liabilities create greater threats to both its stability and that of the financial system as a whole. Where a firm is significantly dependent on this kind of funding, it may need more common equity to convince counterparties and investors of its solvency during periods in which assets are very volatile and to maintain its solvency should it need to sell assets at fire sale prices. This microprudential basis for higher capital requirements is complemented by the macroprudential rationale that intermediaries whose deleveraging could have a broad impact on market liquidity through fire sale or related effects should be required to hold still more capital. Let me make three additional points on this rationale for higher capital standards. First, a run that cuts off funding to widely held assets is a greater risk to the system than a conventional bank run in the absence of deposit insurance. A bank's whole loans would not usually be sold in great number even under stressed circumstances and, even to the degree they were, other banks' portfolios of loans are generally not marked down because of the stressed bank's sales. Second, the possible availability of central bank liquidity support does not obviate the need for higher capital for intermediaries reliant on short-term wholesale funding. The same factors that make market actors uncertain about the value of the intermediary's assets in times of stress will be relevant to the central bank's ability to assure itself that the recipient of temporary liquidity is in fact solvent. Third, because these risks to the firm and the financial system arise from of the composition of the liability side of the balance sheet, the concerns expressed here apply--though perhaps in somewhat different degrees--regardless of the particular form of intermediation in which the firm is engaged. Tailoring Capital RegulationWith only modest simplification of the always complex world of financial regulation, one can say that while capital requirements traditionally have differed significantly for different types of financial intermediaries, they have been relatively uniform for all firms classified as a particular type of intermediary. As I mentioned at the outset, the variations in capital requirements might run contrary to the intuition that the risk of loss of a given portfolio of assets is the same no matter who owns them. Of course, the direct explanation for the variations lies in part in institutional history, with different regulatory bodies having been given authority over different types of financial intermediaries. Still, as we have seen, differences in the liability side of the balance sheet can in fact provide a good policy justification for having varying capital requirements among different types of financial intermediaries. Yet, as I will suggest in a moment, even if conventional differences are at least broadly justifiable (which, of course, is not to say that certain differences in any particular jurisdiction have been well-formulated in all their specifics), the fact that so many intermediaries have moved well beyond their traditional practices, products, and scope may warrant some qualification of conventional practice. Conversely, the conventional regulatory principle of imposing more or less uniform capital requirements on a given form of intermediary might have seemed intuitively correct. But one lesson regulators around the world have drawn from the crisis is that macroprudential considerations can sometimes argue for varying capital requirements among the same kind of intermediaries. Let me address, then, some implications of the liability-side perspective on capital requirements for different forms of financial intermediaries. Despite the focus of this session of the conference on nonbanks, I want to begin by noting how post-crisis changes in the Basel regime reflected the characteristics of an intermediary's liabilities. Prior to the crisis, the Basel regime--though nominally applicable only to internationally active banks--in fact applied to most banks in many member jurisdictions, including the United States and the European Union (EU). There were no quantitative liquidity requirements, and capital requirements did not vary based on the liability side of the balance sheet. Indeed, the major departure from uniform application of capital rules was the opportunity afforded by Basel II for large banks to use their own internal models in determining their regulatory capital requirements, an opportunity that Basel II's proponents expected to result in slightly lower requirements than under a standardized approach. In the wake of the crisis, Basel III strengthened capital quality and levels across the board. In addition, capital surcharges were imposed on about thirty banks of global systemic importance (G-SIBs), based on criteria that roughly reflect TBTF concerns--that is, the size and interconnectedness of the firms' balance sheets. Neither the generally applicable Basel III changes nor the G-SIB surcharges were specifically tied to the stability of a bank's debt structure. However, minimum quantitative liquidity requirements have been developed in the form of the shorter-horizon Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the longer-horizon Net Stable Funding Ratio, which together are intended to place some limits on excessive reliance on runnable liabilities.4 Important as these changes have been, the risks to the financial system posed by large amounts of short-term wholesale funding argue for closer regulatory linkage between capital and liquidity concerns. Conceptually, the cleanest approach might be to integrate capital and liquidity requirements in a single regulatory framework, which would establish minimum levels of capital and liquidity and then increase the capital requirement for intermediaries with more vulnerable funding structures. Higher capital levels would be especially warranted for intermediaries using large enough amounts of short-term debt that their response when funding liquidity is constrained--either selling assets or withholding funding from their own customers--could adversely affect the financial system as a whole. Realistically, though, the goal of full integration of capital and liquidity regulation seems unattainable for the foreseeable future. For one thing, it is hard to imagine all the relevant banking, market, and insurance regulators converging on such a novel approach anytime soon. In addition, though, without a more complete understanding of the precise relationship between liquidity and capital needs, placing so much weight on one form of regulation would be ill-advised. For the present, then, the Basel regime will maintain separate capital and liquidity regulations, which may differ among types of financial intermediaries.5But we can at least strive to establish each set of regulations with reference to the other and to attain at least a rough consistency across regulatory regimes applicable to various intermediaries. In the United States, we have already taken one step in this direction. As you may know, in implementing the Basel G-SIB capital surcharge, we decided that surcharges somewhat higher than those finally agreed in Basel were appropriate. As we refashioned the Basel approach, we added a metric on short-term wholesale funding dependence to the formula for determining a firm's systemic significance, a factor that unfortunately had not been included in Basel. I hope that when it comes time for a review of the Basel methodology for identifying and grouping G-SIBs, funding practices and vulnerabilities will receive more attention. And there may be further steps that could increase that sensitivity. Exploring ideas along these lines seems to me far preferable to raising minimum liquidity requirements for all banks, even those with capital levels well above the regulatory minimum. For example, while stress testing has traditionally focused on risks to capital, some observers have suggested adding liquidity risks to the stress test. Turning now to some implications for other intermediaries, I will begin with broker-dealers, which pose perhaps the clearest case of the capital/funding relationship. Broker-dealers tend to hold large amounts of assets that are of longer duration, but that also are relatively liquid in normal times (in contrast, say, to whole loans by a bank). However, as seen most graphically in the case of mortgage-backed securities during the crisis, many of these assets can rapidly become quite illiquid in periods of stress. Since broker-dealers generally fund substantial portions of these assets with short-term liabilities, such as repurchase agreements (repos) rather than insured deposits, there is the potential, again seen in the crisis, for runs reminiscent of the bank runs of the era before the advent of deposit insurance. To a considerable extent, of course, the Basel framework covers these firms. In the EU, any broker-dealer is covered, whether as a stand-alone entity or as part of a universal bank. In the pre-crisis period in the United States, matters were less clear, since only broker-dealers affiliated with bank holding companies were covered by the full panoply of Basel requirements. There was partial coverage of the five largest freestanding broker-dealers that needed such oversight in order to operate within the EU. Because, during the crisis, those five firms either became bank holding companies or failed and had their continuing operations absorbed by bank holding companies, all sizeable domestically owned broker-dealers are now covered by Basel requirements. However, as I mentioned just a moment ago, the Basel framework itself has not gone as far as is desirable in making capital requirements at the largest institutions sensitive to macroprudential funding concerns, a circumstance underscored by the balance sheets typical of broker-dealers. Consideration of changes such as refinement of the formula for assigning surcharges to G-SIBs would be useful when Basel standards are revisited over time. In the interim, there are more near-term opportunities for supervisory measures that take account of the relationship between capital levels and funding vulnerabilities. Perhaps the most interesting application of a liability-side focus on capital regulation is the case of insurance companies. Given the ongoing discussions of capital standards in the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, the issue is also a timely one. Several relevant points can be derived from attention to the liability side of insurance company balance sheets. First, as shown in my earlier example of how liability structure affects capital needs, the largest segment of a traditional insurance company's liabilities is composed of contingent claims based on the occurrence of specified events, such as the death of an insured person or destruction of insured property. These claims cannot be accelerated at the discretion of the holders of the contracts so, unlike deposits in a bank, these liabilities cannot run in any meaningful sense. Unless customers decide to sever their relationship with the company, in which case the contingent liability will be reduced or eliminated, they will continue to provide funding to the firm. Life insurance, in particular, has an unusually predictable liability pattern, well-refined by actuaries over the years. Thus there is a relative absence of liquidity risk as compared with other kinds of intermediaries. Property and casualty insurance is somewhat more volatile but that volatility is not correlated with the broader economy. So, while higher capital levels may be needed for microprudential purposes, the traditional property-casualty insurance model does not appear to raise significant funding, fire sale, or other macroprudential concerns. These traditional insurance liabilities argue for lower capital requirements than might be required for a hypothetical bank holding a similar portfolio of assets. And, as noted earlier, in some respects they also argue for a gone-concern approach to capital regulation. However, a second observation is that the liability side of the balance sheets of many large insurance companies look quite different from this traditional picture. Many life insurers, for example, now offer wealth and retirement products with account values that can be withdrawn at the discretion of the policyholder, sometimes with little or no surrender penalty. Although these products are generally considered medium to long-term liabilities, the option to surrender or withdraw funds creates the potential for increased claims that could strain the liquidity of the firm. Recent history suggests that the surrender rates of fixed annuities are directly related to the path of interest rate rises. In the middle part of the last decade, as interest rates rose in the United States, the surrender rate for these products increased by about 75 percent in just a few years, before dropping precipitously after the rapid decline in rates following the onset of the financial crisis. Similarly, the move of some insurance firms into securities lending, repo, over-the-counter derivatives, and other capital market activities can work significant changes in the balance sheets of those firms, creating tighter connections to the rest of the financial system. As with other financial intermediaries, insurers then become subject to demands for posting additional collateral or closing out positions as unfavorable market conditions take hold. In addition, if the books of the insurance company are large enough, it then becomes a potential vehicle for transmitting distress at the company to other parts of the financial system. Thus the liability side of the balance sheets of firms that are all "insurance companies" can vary substantially, just as with firms that are called "banks" or "bank holding companies." Yet capital regulation currently applicable to insurance companies seems not to make some of the relevant distinctions. Traditional capital regulation, with an implicit aim of protecting only conventional policyholders over time, potentially through an orderly insolvency, does not reflect the balance sheet risks I have just described. Yet more recent measures, such as Solvency II, with its heavy emphasis on current market valuation, may not take account of the fact that liability and liquidity risks for genuinely traditional life insurance products are relatively limited compared to those of many other intermediaries. In some respects, Solvency II ignores the strength of conventional insurance funding--that assets can be held for the truly long-term, through multiple business cycles--even as it focuses directly on the fluctuations in asset values that are indeed relevant to many less conventional activities. This brief review illustrates the challenges in fashioning capital requirements for large insurance companies with a mix of traditional, nontraditional, and noninsurance activities that are sometimes quite intertwined in particular business lines or subsidiaries. And, even where these activities are reasonably segregated from one another, some of the policy devices suggested for differential capital treatment may be misplaced. For example, deciding on higher capital requirements based solely on whether an activity is "nontraditional" for an insurance company can be inappropriate. A "nontraditional" activity for an insurance company could embrace everything from the massive derivatives business maintained by the pre-crisis AIG to very sedate businesses outside the financial sphere entirely. In confronting these and similar challenges, I would suggest that a focus on the actual nature of liabilities associated with a firm's activities provides a good starting point for sound analysis. Finally, let me mention asset managers briefly. As they have garnered increasing shares of financial system assets, a trend that accelerated following the financial crisis, the question has arisen whether they too should hold capital buffers. Of course in most cases the asset manager itself does not have much of a balance sheet at all. The funds themselves are often not leveraged, in which case nearly all the liabilities are shares of the fund held by investors, the price of which varies to reflect the value of the assets purchased by the manager of the fund.6 While some commentators have suggested that liquidity challenges and consequent fire sale type behavior might develop if the structure of the fund places a premium on exiting first, these kinds of risks would support an argument less for capital buffers than for some form of prudential market regulation, such as rules on liquidity or redemptions. I would note in this regard that last week the SEC issued a proposed rulemaking that would require open-ended funds to have liquidity risk management controls in place for shareholder redemptions, including during times of stress.7Likewise, to the degree that certain idiosyncratic risks might exist with respect to the decisions and operations of certain asset managers, their liability structure again suggests that some form of prudential market regulation would be better suited to address these risks. ConclusionIn conclusion, let me recapitulate one set of points and add another. To recapitulate--focusing on the characteristics of the liability side of a financial intermediary's balance sheet suggests that therearereasons to vary capital regulation across different forms of financial intermediation, but that significant shifts in the nature and scope of an intermediary's liabilities may in turn provide reasons for varying applicable capital regulation among firms that are primarily identified as a particular type of intermediary. Conceptual, institutional, and practical impediments to developing a single framework for capital regulation are doubtlessly insuperable for the foreseeable future. But regulators with mandates covering different kinds of intermediaries, including the Federal Reserve, must keep both sides of this perspective in mind. And, hopefully, regulators with a more focused responsibility will be sensitive to the ways in which their regulated entities have departed from their original liability structure. The additional point follows from the first. When concerns are raised about regulatory arbitrage or a level playing field, they are usually in the context of a similar asset being held, or a business activity conducted, by financial firms with different regulatory structures. My discussion today would suggest that attention must be paid to the liability structure of the different firms before deciding whether the asymmetric regulatory treatment is prudent or an invitation to the propagation of new financial risks. These two points underscore the fact that the question for regulators is not really whether capital rules developed for banks should be extended to nonbank actors. The Basel standards have already evolved to take account of different forms of intermediation in the financial firms subject to those rules. The Basel framework might itself be enhanced by further differentiation of capital and liquidity requirements based on the liability structures of firms. Similarly, capital rules for intermediaries not subject to Basel rules should be shaped by similar considerations. 1.By "customer facing liabilities," I mean liabilities to households, retail investors, and businesses. In financial intermediaries, these liabilities are not only greater than in similarly sized balance sheets of non-financial firms. They also disproportionately arise from financial transactions--such as accepting deposits or investments--rather than for performance of services or delivery of goods.Return to text 2.For a highly insightful survey of the implications of illiquidity issues for market performance and regulation, see Jean Tirole (2011), "Illiquidity and All Its Friends," Journal of Economic Literature vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 287-325.Return to text 3.See, e.g., Markus Brunnermeier and Lasse Heje Pedersen (2009), "Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,"Review of Financial Studies, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 2201-2238; Viral Acharya and S. Viswanathan (2011), "Leverage, Moral Hazard, and Liquidity,"Journal of Finance, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 99-138; Zhiguo He and Wei Xiong (2012), "Rollover Risk and Credit Risk,"Journal of Finance, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 391-429; Stephen Morris and Hun Song Shin (2008), "Financial Regulation in a System Context," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall), pp. 229-61.Return to text 4.In the United States, we have also applied a somewhat less stringent version of the LCR to banks that are large but that do not cross the threshold of being internationally active. This tiered approach is consistent with the principle stated earlier that prudential requirements should vary based on the potential impact of a firm's failure on the financial system as a whole. The liquidity rules clearly seem to have influenced the way banks manage their balance sheets. In the United States, bank holding companies subject to the LCR significantly increased their holdings of high-quality liquid assets from the beginning of 2013 until the beginning of this year, to the point that many internationally active banks reported their LCR ratios already above fully phased-in requirements, even though the transition rules set an 80 percent minimum ratio for January 1, 2015.Return to text 5.It is worth noting that the net capital rule for broker-dealers maintained by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission is a form of hybrid capital and liquidity regulation. However, it seems basically oriented to protecting customers, a bit like traditional regulation of life insurance companies, and was not developed with going concern or systemic implications in mind. It does not, for instance, place higher requirements on firms with heavy reliance on short-term wholesale funding, though it does penalize firms that hold large amounts of illiquid assets. In many respects the rule seems well-suited to smaller broker-dealers but, for reasons explained earlier, it does not seem optimal for the large broker-dealers in large bank holding companies.Return to text 6.Through the use of certain kinds of derivatives, some funds acquire synthetic leverage. There are arguments for additional regulation in those cases, though again, capital requirements do not seem at first glance the optimal tool.Return to text 7.Under the proposed rules, mutual funds and exchange-traded funds would be required to implement liquidity risk management programs to address investor redemptions, including swing pricing during times of rapid redemption and calculation requirements to measure the amount of assets that could be liquidated without impacting market prices. Securities and Exchange Commission Press Release 2015-201,SEC Proposes Liquidity Management Rules for Mutual Funds and ETFs, September 22. SEC Chairman Mary Jo White previously provided a roadmap to the development of a regulatory approach for the asset management industry: "Enhancing Risk Monitoring and Regulatory Safeguards for the Asset Management Industry," speech delivered at the New York Times DealBook Opportunities for Tomorrow Conference, New York, December 11.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the Community Banking in the 21st Century, The Third Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, Cosponsored by the Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri I would like to thank the event organizers for inviting me to participate in this year's Community Banking Research and Policy Conference. Supporting the health and vitality of America's community banks is an important priority for me. Community banks have long been a central provider of finance to Main Street America. Despite the challenging environment of the past several years, community banks have continued to play a significant role in a number of key market segments. Today I want to focus on one of the most important of those segments--the provision of credit to small businesses--and to explore how the traditional role of community banks may be affected by the growing role of online lenders. Some view the growth of online platforms as a challenge to community banks in their traditional core businesses. But it is also possible that the very different strengths of community banks and online lenders could lead to complementarity and collaboration in the provision of credit to small business while recognizing there are important risks that must be managed by banks and borrowers. By working together, lenders, borrowers, and regulators can help support an outcome whereby credit channels are strengthened and the possible risks are being proactively managed. Small Businesses, Small Business Credit, and the U.S. EconomySmall businesses make up a large and vitally important segment of the U.S. economy. And their vitality hinges centrally on their access to credit. More than three-fourths of American businesses have fewer than 10 employees and another nearly one-fourth have between 10 and 500 employees.1In addition to constituting the vast majority of firms in the United States, small businesses account for about one-half of private-sector employment.2And small firms, especially new small firms, are an even greater source of net new jobs in our economy.3Thus, ensuring that creditworthy small businesses have access to credit is vitally important. Discussions of small businesses, along with their credit needs, often fail to appreciate the tremendous heterogeneity that exists among these firms and, consequently, the variation in their credit needs. Small businesses include plumbers and electricians, medical and dental offices, dry cleaners and hair salons, restaurants and bodegas, as well as growth-oriented tech start-ups and small manufacturers. They range in size from having zero employees--which accounts for a very large share of small businesses--to the much smaller share of small businesses with a few hundred employees. Although some small businesses aspire to grow quickly, many others are unlikely to grow much at all. While some have audited financial statements, most small businesses do not. Some have assets that can be pledged as collateral, but many do not. Some have a long history of solid, profitable performance, while others have short histories or a mixed track record with regard to profitability. Not surprisingly, there is also considerable variation in the credit needs of small businesses. Some small businesses, particularly very small firms in knowledge or service industries, may have little or no need for credit. Larger small businesses, and those that require a substantial amount of equipment or need to hold sizeable inventories, tend to have greater credit needs. Among small businesses that do need credit, funds may be required for managing cash flow, for purchasing or maintaining property or equipment, for building inventory, or for expanding operations. Depending on the needs, firms may be interested in term loans, capital leases, lines of credit, or credit card loans. The characteristics of a small business and the nature of its credit needs influence the type of lender that is best suited to meeting those needs. Community Banks and Small Business LendingCommunity banks have long been a primary source of credit for small businesses and today may continue to have the best business model for fulfilling many small business credit needs.4But changing technology has led to increased competition in this product space from both larger banks and, in recent years, alternative lenders. Large banking organizations ramped up their small business lending between 2003 and 2008. Although they pulled back from this market segment in the wake of the financial crisis, their small loans to businesses have been gradually rising since 2011. Meanwhile, community banks experienced very modest growth in small loans to businesses during the pre-crisis period, followed by a decline from 2009 through 2013 and a subsequent leveling-off. Consequently, community banks' share of the dollar volume of outstanding small loans to businesses at commercial banks has declined over the past decade.5Despite this decline, community banks continue to hold about 50 percent of outstanding small business loans at commercial banks, far in excess of their 20 percent share of commercial banking assets and deposits.6 To understand the continued strong role played by community banks, it is helpful to look at the differences in small business lending between large and small banks. Although large banks and small banks now provide about equal dollar volumes of small loans to businesses, they tend to provide different types of loans to different types of borrowers, using different underwriting methods. On the one hand, large banks generally have some advantages in the provision of transaction-based lending--that is, lending that relies on hard or quantitative information such as financial ratios, collateral, or credit scores. Small banks, on the other hand, have advantages in the provision of relationship-based lending--lending based on context-specific or qualitative information, such as the owner's character and reliability and the needs of the community. When we use Call Report data to break down commercial banks' loans to businesses by loan size, it is striking that most of the erosion in community banks' share over the past decade has been concentrated among the very smallest loans--those with initial principal amounts less than $100,000. Among these so-called micro loans, the share held by large banks grew from 42 percent in 2005 to 67 percent in 2015. In contrast, large banks' share of larger outstanding small loans to businesses--those with initial principal amounts between $100,000 and $1 million--grew much more modestly, from 39 percent to 43 percent, over the same time period. Business micro loans are typically underwritten based, primarily or exclusively, on credit scores because the small loan size makes it unprofitable to produce such loans using more costly traditional underwriting methods. Thus, the growth in large banks' share of micro business loans is likely attributable to their ability to benefit from economies of scale in credit-score-based lending. Business loans with principal amounts between $100,000 and $1 million are generally not underwritten solely on the basis of credit scores--probably because lenders are not willing to incur the risk associated with larger loan amounts without the benefit of a traditional underwriting approach. For these larger loans--and for smaller loans where the borrower does not qualify based on credit score alone--community banks are often the lender of choice. Their local knowledge and close ties to the communities they serve enable community bankers to establish a deep understanding of local businesses that allows them to prudently provide credit to borrowers who might not otherwise be considered creditworthy. A number of empirical studies confirm that relationships are important factors influencing both the availability and the terms of loans to small businesses.7 Similarly, when we slice the Call Report data to separate commercial and industrial (C&I) loans from commercial real estate loans, we see that while community banks' share of outstanding small C&I loans dwindled from about 54 percent in 2005 to 40 percent in 2015, their share of small commercial real estate loans has remained relatively stable, moving marginally from 66 percent to 63 percent. Community bankers' intimate knowledge of their communities and their familiarity with local economic conditions provide an advantage relative to large, geographically dispersed banks in underwriting commercial real estate loans. Since large banks are unlikely to become as knowledgeable about local economic conditions or as adept at small business relationship lending as community banks, there may be some limits to their expansion in this segment of lending. Online Alternative LendersIn recent years, online alternative lenders have also made inroads into small business lending. There has been a lot of speculation about the effect of this sector on traditional banks: Will it disrupt their activities, broaden their reach, or maybe a little of both? Focusing specifically on nonbank alternative online lenders or online marketplace lenders, it is important to underscore that the online space is highly dynamic, with a number of business models emerging and evolving. I will touch on two business models in particular, recognizing that as these business models are tested, it is likely that some will prove more successful than others, and that some may adapt in ways that will cause us to revise our segmentation of online alternative lending.8First, online balance sheet lenders generally use their own capital to fund small business credit products that are originated either directly on their platforms or indirectly through brokers or referral partnerships.9Credit products offered by these lenders are usually short term and include loans, lines of credit, or cash advances.10 Second, peer-to-peer lending platforms, by contrast, act as intermediaries to connect borrowers with lenders and to assist investors in identifying and purchasing loans that meet their investment criteria. These lenders can be individuals, banks, or institutional investors.11 Although data are limited on this sector, the data that are available suggest that the various types of online alternative lenders have captured a small but rapidly growing share of lending since the financial crisis. In aggregate, the outstanding portfolio balances of these lenders have doubled every year since the mid-2000s.12It is estimated that online alternative lenders originated $12 billion in 2014, with unsecured consumer loans representing $7 billion and small business loans accounting for approximately $5 billion.13While this amount represents only a small fraction of U.S. unsecured consumer and small business lending overall, the rate of growth is notable. Much of the growth in online alternative lending has been supported by innovative uses of technology that allow lending platforms to streamline and automate loan applications, expedite underwriting and quickly price risk, and provide loan applicants with quick loan decisions and access to funds. Online alternative lenders use algorithms to provide rapid decisions on loan applications, often taking into account information from a wide range of sources that are not typically involved in bank underwriting of loans. For example, aggregated information for small business underwriting may include data on online banking, accounting, bookkeeping, credit card, shipping, supplier, and social media. So, while traditional banks often focus on personal credit scores for underwriting consumer loans and the majority of small dollar, small business loans, online alternative lenders may analyze a broader variety of data to develop different metrics to measure and price loan risk. Currently, the largest platforms typically offer online or mobile applications that allow consumers and small business owners to easily submit information and aggregate vast amounts of data to complete loan applications. Although rates vary by platform and borrower characteristics, when taking into account origination fees and repayment periods, the average annual cost of borrowing, or APR, associated with loans and credit products offered by online alternative small business lenders tend to be higher than those associated with traditional bank products.14Reports suggest that some borrowers are willing to pay a higher price in exchange for an easy application process, a quick decision, and rapid availability of funds.15 While some see online alternative lenders as a disruptive threat to traditional lenders, banks increasingly are finding ways to partner with online alternative lenders, including through loan purchases and referral agreements. Loan purchases by community banks of loans originated by online alternative lenders have been focused on unsecured consumer debt. As the percentage of unsecured consumer debt outstanding held by community banks has been declining in recent years, several banks have partnered with online alternative lenders to grow and diversify their portfolios of unsecured consumer debt.16 In contrast to the consumer loan activity, the small business partnerships that have developed so far are largely fee-based referral partnerships. In these partnerships, banks refer to online alternative lenders some of their small business customers who are usually seeking loan amounts that the referring banks may see as too costly to underwrite and service, particularly in the size range below $100,000.17For example, in 2014, OnDeck announced small business loan referral partnerships with BBVA Compass and with the ProfitStars Lending Network, part of the Independent Community Bankers of America Preferred Service Provider program. Another type of partnership that has been announced recently involves alternative online lenders and Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) that seek to provide loans to low-income and underserved borrowers and neighborhoods. These partnerships may enable the CDFI to use the online lender's technology platform at no cost or for a reduced cost in order to make underwriting decisions faster and more cost effective.18These partnerships are still in the early stages. Risks and OpportunitiesAcross the Federal Reserve System, we are actively following developments in the alternative online lending space and have engaged with several alternative online lenders over the past few years to learn more about the industry, the technology, and the business models as well as engaging with bankers to understand how these developments are affecting their markets.19Most recently, several alternative lenders have participated in events where we have joined with community development finance experts to discuss ways to adopt platform lending technology to better serve low- and moderate-income borrowers and small business owners.20 We want to better understand the opportunities presented by technological advances that may bring new data to bear and help lenders make available credit to a more diverse set of small business borrowers. In some cases, partnerships between community banks and online platforms may help expand access to credit for consumers and small businesses, and help banks retain and grow their customer base. As regulators, we also want to help the various stakeholders anticipate and carefully manage the associated risks. Of course, third-party and vendor risks are factors that banks should always take into account when introducing new products and services. Taking the time to identify and mitigate risks is a prudent step that banks can take to avoid unintended consequences when entering into partnership agreements with alternative online lenders. In addition, banks should consider whether the partnerships provide new opportunities to diversify their portfolios if they are purchasing loans, and whether the partnerships provide opportunities to offer new products that are a good strategic fit for their bank and their customers.21 It is also important for banks to carefully consider regulatory compliance. When purchasing consumer loans originated by online alternative lenders, banks should examine whether fair lending or unfair or deceptive acts or practices issues result from the origination and underwriting methods used by online alternative lenders.22To the extent that the underlying algorithms used for credit decisionmaking use nontraditional data sources, it will be important to ensure that this does not lead to disparate treatment or have a disparate impact on a prohibited basis. Aside from these risks, banks should consider a variety of others, including the implications of credit risk stemming from the purchase of loans and reputational risk if referrals to online alternative lending platforms end badly. The risks I have described so far have primarily been from the perspective of banks considering partnerships with online alternative lenders. Another important set of concerns are focused on the small business borrowers who may be considering online alternative loans. Some have raised concerns about the high APRs associated with some online alternative lending products. Others have raised concerns about the risk that some small business borrowers may have difficulty fully understanding the terms of the various loan products or the risk of becoming trapped in layered debt that poses risks to the survival of their businesses. Some industry participants have recently proposed that online lenders follow a voluntary set of guidelines designed to standardize best practices and mitigate these risks.23It is too soon to determine whether such efforts of industry participants to self-police will be sufficient. Even with these efforts, some have suggested a need for regulators to take a more active role in defining and enforcing standards that apply more broadly in this sector. No doubt, ongoing technological advances and the evolving competitive lending landscape will continue to present both challenges and opportunities for community bankers who are deeply committed to the provision of credit to small businesses. I remain confident that community bankers will continue to play a vital role in the small business lending landscape as the respective business models of online platforms and community banks evolve. The advantage that comes from close relationships with their customers and intimate knowledge of their communities that lie at the heart of community banking will continue to provide a powerful advantage in serving the vital banking needs of small businesses, even as the use of nontraditional sources of data and electronic processing platforms may permit faster loan decisions, especially for smaller loan amounts, to a broader set of borrowers. Thank you, again, to the conference organizers for inviting me to this important event and for the opportunity to speak to you today. ReferencesBerger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell (1995). "Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit in Small Firm Finance,"Journal of Business,vol. 68 (July), pp. 351-81. Berger, Allen N., Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein (2005). "Does Function Follow Organizational Form? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 76 (May), pp. 237-69. Clark, Patrick (2014). "How Much Is Too Much to Pay for a Small Business Loan?"Bloomberg Businessweek,May 16, www.bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2014-05-16/how-much-is-too-much-to-pay-for-a-small-business-loan. Cole, Rebel A. (1998). "The Importance of Relationships to the Availability of Credit,"Journal of Banking and Finance,vol. 22 (August), pp. 959-77. Cole, Rebel A., Lawrence G. Goldberg, and Lawrence J. White (2004). "Cookie Cutter Versus Character: The Micro Structure of Small Business Lending by Large and Small Banks,"Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,vol. 39 (June), pp.227-51. Cortese, Amy (2014). "Can't Get a Bank Loan? The Alternatives Are Expanding,"New York Times,March 5. Cowley, Stacy (2015). "Online Lenders Offer a Faster Lifeline for Small Businesses,"New York Times,April 8. Curran, Teresa (2013). "Consideration When Introducing a New Product or Service at a Community Bank,"Community Banking Connections,First Quarter. Federal Reserve System Community Banking Connections Advisory Board (2014). "Introducing a New Product or Service (PDF),"FedLinks,September. Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2013). "Who Creates Jobs? Small Versus Large Versus Young,"The Review of Economics and Statistics,vol.95 (May), pp. 347-61. Lipman, Barbara J., and Ann Marie Wiersch (2015).Alternative Lending through the Eyes of "Mom-and-Pop" Small-Business Owners: Findings from Online Focus Groups. Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, August. Mills, Karen G., and Brayden McCarthy (2014). "The State of Small Business Lending: Credit Access During the Recovery and How Technology May Change the Game (PDF)," Working paper 15-004. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School, July. Morgan Stanley Research (2015).Global Marketplace Lending: Disruptive Innovation in Financials.Morgan Stanley, Global Research, May. Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan (1994). "The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence from Small Business Data,"Journal of Finance,vol. 49 (March), pp. 3-37. Tracy, Ryan (2015). "Lending Club, Small U.S. Banks Plan New Consumer-Loan Program,"Wall Street Journal, February 9. U.S. Department of Treasury (2015). "Public Input on Expanding Access to Credit through Online Marketplace Lending (PDF),"notice submitted to the Office of the Federal Register. Washington: Department of Treasury. I am grateful to Robin Prager for her assistance in preparing this text. 1.See Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Table G, Distribution of Private Sector Firms by Size Class: 1993/Q1 through 2014/Q1, Not Seasonally Adjusted (.txt)."Return to text 2.See Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Table F, Distribution of Private Sector Employment by Firm Size Class: 1993/Q1 through 2014/Q1, Not Seasonally Adjusted (.txt)."Return to text 3.For more on small firms and net new jobs, see Haltiwanger (2013).Return to text 4.For purposes of this talk, I define a community bank as a bank with less than $10 billion in assets, which is either independent or part of a banking organization that also has less than $10 billion in assets.Return to text 5.Small loans to businesses are loans to businesses with initial principal amounts of less than $1 million.Return to text 6.Data on bank assets, deposits, and small loans to businesses were compiled from Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, also known as Call Reports, that banks file with the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. Data on banks' small loans to businesses are widely used to proxy for bank loans to small businesses because data on the latter are not collected.Return to text 7.Examples of such studies include Petersen and Rajan (1994), Berger and Udell (1995), Cole (1998), Berger and others (2005), and Cole and others (2004).Return to text 8.As the industry has evolved, alternative online lenders have increasingly been referred to as marketplace lenders, a term that helps emphasize the growing institutional investor base of the sector. So while peer-to-peer lenders initially allowed individual borrowers to connect with individual lenders, individual lenders increasingly are being replaced by institutional investors who are turning to online marketplace lenders for investment opportunities. Because some balance sheet lenders are now originating small business loans for institutional investors to purchase, balance sheet lenders are also often referred to as marketplace lenders. In the Treasury Department's recent Request for Information, they defined online marketplace lending as "the segment of the financial services industry that uses investment capital and data-driven online platforms to lend either directly or indirectly to small businesses and consumers." (See U.S. Treasury, 2015, p. 6.)Return to text 9.Online balance sheet lenders include companies such as OnDeck, Square Capital, Fundation, CAN Capital, Kabbage, and PayPal Credit.Return to text 10.Cash advances, sometimes known as merchant cash advances, capital advances, or business cash advances, are credit products that allow businesses to convert future credit card or payment account receivables into capital (Lipman and Wiersch, 2015).Return to text 11.Peer-to-peer lending platforms include companies such as Prosper, Lending Club, and Funding Circle.Return to text 12.See Mills and McCarthy (2014, p. 42).Return to text 13.For information on online alternative lenders, see U.S. Treasury (2015, p. 6); for more on unsecured consumer loans and small business loans, see Morgan Stanley Research (2015).Return to text 14.For example, Mills and McCarthy (2014, p. 44) note that many alternative lending platforms charge yields ranging from 30 to 120 percent of the loan value, depending on the size, term duration, and risk profile of the loan. Several alternative online lenders advertise lower rates, but industry sources note that lending is rarely done at those rates.Return to text 15.For example, see Clark (2014), Cortese (2014), Crowley (2015), and Mills and McCarthy (2014, p. 46).Return to text 16.In 1994, banks and thrifts with less than $10 billion in assets held about 69 percent of U.S. consumer loans, according to an analysis of regulatory filings by SNL Financial. That share dropped to 19 percent in 2004 and 9 percent in 2014 (Tracy, 2015). Recently, BancAlliance, a consortium of approximately 200 community banks, has partnered with Lending Club to purchase consumer loans originated on Lending Club's platform and the Western Independent Bankers, a consortium of more than 160 independent and community banks, have entered into a partnership with Prosper to encourage member banks to use Prosper's platform to facilitate consumer loans for their customers. Also, Lending Club and Citi Community Capital, the community development lending and investing division of CitiGroup, recently announced a partnership to facilitate up to $150million in consumer loans designed to provide more affordable credit to underserved, lower-income borrowers in low- and moderate-income communities.Return to text 17.As an indication of the demand for small dollar loans on the part of small businesses, the Joint Small Business Credit Survey conducted in 2014 by the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Atlanta, Cleveland, and Philadelphia found that more than one-half of small business loan applicants sought $100,000 or less in credit. (For more information, the survey report is available atwww.newyorkfed.org/smallbusiness/SBCS-2014-Report.pdf. )Return to text 18.For example, in June 2015, Lending Club and the Opportunity Fund, a California-based CDFI microenterprise lender, announced a partnership intended to provide $10 million in loans over a period of five months to 400 small businesses in underserved areas of California (for more information, see www.opportunityfund.org/media/blog/clinton-announces-partnership-between-opportunity-fund-and-lending-club). In 2012, the Association for Enterprise Opportunities (AEO) launched the TILT Forward platform, an online lending platform that is powered by OnDeck's technology and can be used by AEO's network of nonprofit community lenders and other community-based organizations to reach underserved entrepreneurs (more information is available at www.tiltforward.com).Return to text 19.In April 2014, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York hosted "Filling the Gaps: Summit on Small Business Credit Innovations." and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco will be hosting the Consumer Financial Services Revolution in November 2015.Return to text 20.For example, in March 2014, the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and San Francisco convened a small group of thought leaders for a discussion on the challenges and opportunities presented by crowdfunding investments as a significant source of capital for the community development industry; and in March 2015, we cohosted the Financial Innovations Roundtable with the University of New Hampshire's Carsey School of Public Policy and brought together representatives from banks, CDFIs, mission-driven lenders, and small business online alternative lenders to talk about opportunities for collaboration, the challenges of scaling up small business lending, and potential consumer and safety and soundness regulatory issues facing partnerships between regulated financial institutions and alternative online lenders. As the sector grows and evolves, we will continue to monitor the development of online alternative lenders and the risks and opportunities that they may have for a range of stakeholders.Return to text 21.If a bank is considering a referral partnership, the following questions could help identify potential risks: Do existing customers have a need for the product or are there less expensive products that would better serve borrower's needs? Are the features, risks, and terms of the products offered through the referral program explained clearly and conspicuously, or are they buried in a lengthy document full of "legalese" that makes it difficult for borrowers to make a truly informed choice? Finally, are the products offered through the referral partnership consistent with what would be recommended to a family member? (See Curran, 2013.)Return to text 22.There are several regulatory compliance-related questions that banks should consider. For example, have the loans offered or the lending platform to be partnered with been reviewed for compliance with applicable federal and state laws? Have the loans originated by the partnering lending platform been reviewed from a consumer fairness standpoint? When assessing referral partnerships, have any issues been identified that would lead to disparate treatment of customers if banks selectively refer customers to online alternative lending partners? (See Federal Reserve System Community Banking Connections Advisory Board, 2014).Return to text 23.For example, seewww.responsiblebusinesslending.org.Return to text
The attached table and charts released on Thursday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents for the September 16-17 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the September 16-17 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Banner Corporation and Elements Merger Sub, LLC, both of Walla Walla, Washington, to acquire Starbuck Bancshares, Inc., Seattle, and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary, AmericanWest Bank, Spokane, both of Washington. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Empresas Juan Yarur SpA and its subsidiary, Banco de Credito e Inversiones, both of Santiago, Chile, to acquire CM Florida Holdings, Inc., Coral Gables, Florida, and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary, City National Bank of Florida, Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by First Horizon National Corporation, Memphis, Tennessee, to acquire TrustAtlantic Financial Corporation and thereby indirectly acquire its wholly owned subsidiary, TrustAtlantic Bank, both of Raleigh, North Carolina. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the applications by M&T Bank Corporation ("M&T"), Buffalo, New York, to acquire Hudson City Bancorp, Inc., Paramus, New Jersey; and by M&T's subsidiary bank, Manufacturers and Traders Trust Company, Buffalo, to merge with Hudson City Savings Bank, Paramus, and retain and operate branches at the locations of Hudson City Savings Bank's main office and branches. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of a proposal by PacWest Bancorp, Los Angeles, California, to merge with Square 1 Financial, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire its wholly owned subsidiary, Square 1 Bank, and the nonbank subsidiaries of Square 1 Financial, all of Durham, North Carolina, pursuant to sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the members of its newly created Community Advisory Council (CAC). The CAC is composed of individuals with consumer- and community development-related expertise who will provide information, advice, and recommendations to the Board on a wide range of relevant policy matters and emerging issues of interest. The fifteen members of the CAC were selected from a pool of individuals who responded tothe Board's public request for candidates (HTML). CAC members will initially serve one-, two-, or three-year staggered terms to provide the CAC with continuity. Going forward, new members will be appointed to three-year terms. The first meeting of the CAC will be held in Washington, D.C. on November 20, 2015. A summary of the meeting will be posted shortly thereafter. The members of the CAC are: Roberto BarraganPresident and Chief Executive OfficerVEDCVan Nuys, Calif. Angela Glover BlackwellFounder and Chief Executive OfficerPolicyLinkOakland, Calif. Patrick DujakovichPresidentGreater Kansas City AFL-CIOKansas City, Mo. Benjamin DulchinExecutive DirectorAssociation for Neighborhood & Housing DevelopmentNew York, N.Y. Brian FoglePresident and Chief Executive OfficerCommunity Foundation of the OzarksSpringfield, Mo. Ben ManganExecutive Director and LecturerHaas School of Business, U.C. Berkeley, Center for Social Sector LeadershipBerkeley, Calif. Rodrick MillerPresident and Chief Executive OfficerDetroit Economic Growth CorporationDetroit, Mich. Noel PoyoExecutive DirectorNational Association for Latino Community Asset BuildersSan Antonio, Texas Michael RubingerPresident and Chief Executive OfficerLocal Initiatives Support Corporation (LISC)New York, N.Y. Arden ShankPresident and Chief Executive OfficerNeighborhood Housing Services of South FloridaMiami, Fla. Adrienne SmithPresident and Chief Executive OfficerNew Mexico Direct Caregivers CoalitionPlacitas, N.M. Sue TaokaExecutive Vice PresidentCraft3.orgSeattle, Wash. Mary TingerthalCommissionerMinnesota Housing Finance AgencySt. Paul, Minn. Raul VazquezChief Executive OfficerOportunRedwood City, Calif. Catherine WilsonProfessorUniversity of Nebraska-Lincoln College of LawLincoln, Neb. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) and the president and vice president of the council for 2016. CDIAC advises the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues of interest to community depository institutions. Members are selected from representatives of commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils serves on CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. Further information on CDIAC can be foundhere. Michael J. Castellana, chairman, president, and chief executive officer of SEFCU, Albany, N.Y., will serve as president in 2016. Janet Garufis, president and chief executive officer of Montecito Bank & Trust, Santa Barbara, Calif., will serve as vice president. The other members of CDIAC in 2016 are: Glenn D. BarksPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFirst Community Credit UnionChesterfield, Mo. S. Boyce BrownChairman, President, and Chief Executive OfficerExtraco CorporationWaco, Texas Kyle HeckmanPresident and Chairman of the BoardFlatirons BankBoulder, Colo. Brian L. JohnsonChief Executive OfficerChoice Financial GroupGrand Forks, N.D. Gilda NogueiraPresident and Chief Executive OfficerEast Cambridge Savings BankCambridge, Mass. Thomas M. PetroPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFox Chase BankHatboro, Pa. Jeffrey PlaggePresident and Chief Executive OfficerNorthwest Financial Corp.Arnolds Park, Iowa Jan RochePresident and Chief Executive OfficerState Department FCUAlexandria, Va. Ronald J. SeiffertPresident and Chief Executive OfficerDCB Financial Corporation and the Delaware County Bank and Trust CompanyLewis Center, Ohio Douglas L. WilliamsPresident and Chief Executive OfficerAtlantic Capital BankAtlanta, Ga. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the approval of enhancements to the Federal Reserve Banks' same-day automated clearing house (ACH) service. The enhancements are intended to align the Reserve Banks' same-day ACH service with recent amendments to NACHA's ACH operating rules and will facilitate the use of the ACH network for certain time-critical payments, accelerate final settlement, and improve funds availability to payment recipients. The enhancements become effective September 23, 2016, and require receiving depository financial institutions (RDFIs) to participate in the service and originating depository financial institutions (ODFIs) to pay a fee to RDFIs for each same-day ACH forward transaction. The enhancements will be adopted by incorporation of NACHA's amended operating rules into Operating Circular 4, governing the Reserve Banks' ACH services. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Registernotice For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: First State Bank of Colorado (PDF), Hotchkiss, ColoradoOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated September 18, 2015 The Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Liberty Bancorp of Georgia, Inc., Clayton, GeorgiaWritten Agreement issued October 30, 2012Terminated September 16, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Independent Bank (PDF), Grand Rapids, MichiganOrder of assessment of civil money penalty dated August 27, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Carver Bancorp, Inc., New York, New YorkOrder to Cease and Desisted issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated February 7, 2011Terminated September 24, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First National Community Bancorp, Inc., Dunmore, PennsylvaniaWritten Agreement issued November 24, 2010Terminated September 2, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Virginia Community Bankshares, Inc. and Virginia Community Bank, both of Louisa, VirginiaWritten Agreement issued June 29, 2011Terminated August 28, 2015 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in July suggests that economic activity is expanding at a moderate pace. Household spending and business fixed investment have been increasing moderately, and the housing sector has improved further; however, net exports have been soft. The labor market continued to improve, with solid job gains and declining unemployment. On balance, labor market indicators show that underutilization of labor resources has diminished since early this year. Inflation has continued to run below the Committee's longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation moved lower; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. Recent global economic and financial developments may restrain economic activity somewhat and are likely to put further downward pressure on inflation in the near term. Nonetheless, the Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced but is monitoring developments abroad. Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this target range, the Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen some further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Charles L. Evans; Stanley Fischer; Dennis P. Lockhart; Jerome H. Powell; Daniel K. Tarullo; and John C. Williams. Voting against the action was Jeffrey M. Lacker, who preferred to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points at this meeting.
Federal Reserve System Appoints Payments Security Strategy Leader The Federal Reserve System on Thursday announced the appointment of Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Senior Vice President Todd Aadland as its Payments Security Strategy Leader. In this role, Aadland will lead the System's activities to address fraud risk and advance the safety, security and resiliency of the payment system. His responsibilities will include chairing the Secure Payments Task Force, comprised of more than 170 payments stakeholders. "Todd's combination of business experience and technical expertise is exactly what is needed to partner with the industry on improved payments security," said Gordon Werkema, the Federal Reserve's payments strategy director to whom Aadland will report. "Equally important, he has a collaborative leadership style that will be key to advancing on some very tough industry challenges." Aadland's 20 years of Federal Reserve experience includes leading the business strategy, development and management of the Federal Reserve Banks' FedLine access solutions, which are used by more than 10,000 U.S. financial institutions to transact $4 trillion of payment value daily. Aadland has also led risk management, security and application development functions. He holds a master of business administration degree from the Kellogg Graduate School of Management at Northwestern University and a master of science in electronic commerce from DePaul University. He is a Certified Information Systems Security Professional and was commissioned by the Board of Governors as a bank examiner. Additional information about the Federal Reserve'sStrategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System, including the Secure Payments Task Force, is available atwww.FedPaymentsImprovement.org.
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts I would like to thank Michael Ash for his kind introduction and the University of Massachusetts for the honor of being invited to deliver this year's Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture. In my remarks today, I will discuss inflation and its role in the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy. I will begin by reviewing the history of inflation in the United States since the 1960s, highlighting two key points: that inflation is now much more stable than it used to be, and that it is currently running at a very low level. I will then consider the costs associated with inflation, and why these costs suggest that the Federal Reserve should try to keep inflation close to 2 percent. After briefly reviewing our policy actions since the financial crisis, I will discuss the dynamics of inflation and their implications for the outlook and monetary policy. Historical Review of InflationA crucial responsibility of any central bank is to control inflation, the average rate of increase in the prices of a broad group of goods and services. Keeping inflation stable at a moderately low level is important because, for reasons I will discuss, inflation that is high, excessively low, or unstable imposes significant costs on households and businesses. As a result, inflation control is one half of the dual mandate that Congress has laid down for the Federal Reserve, which is to pursue maximum employment and stable prices. The Federal Reserve has not always been successful in fulfilling the price stability element of its mandate. The dashed red line infigure 1plots the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)--the measure of inflation that the Fed's policymaking body, the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, uses to define its longer-run inflation goal.1Starting in the mid-1960s, inflation began to move higher. Large jumps in food and energy prices played a role in this upward move, but they were not the whole story, for, as illustrated here, inflation was already moving up before the food and energy shocks hit in the 1970s and the early 1980s.2And if we look at core inflation, the solid black line, which excludes food and energy prices, we see that it too starts to move higher in the mid-1960s and rises to very elevated levels during the 1970s, which strongly suggests that something more than the energy and food price shocks must have been at work. A second important feature of inflation over this period can be seen if we examine an estimate of its long-term trend, which is plotted as the dotted black line in figure 1. At each point in time, this trend is defined as the prediction from a statistical model of the level to which inflation is projected to return in the long run once the effects of any shocks to the economy have fully played out.3As can be seen from the figure, this estimated trend drifts higher over the 1960s and 1970s, implying that during this period there was no stable "anchor" to which inflation could be expected to eventually return--a conclusion generally supported by other procedures for estimating trend inflation. Today many economists believe that these features of inflation in the late 1960s and 1970s--its high level and lack of a stable anchor--reflected a combination of factors, including chronically overheated labor and product markets, the effects of the energy and food price shocks, and the emergence of an "inflationary psychology" whereby a rise in actual inflation led people to revise up their expectations for future inflation. Together, these various factors caused inflation--actual and expected--to ratchet higher over time. Ultimately, however, monetary policy bears responsibility for the broad contour of what happened to actual and expected inflation during this period because the Federal Reserve was insufficiently focused on returning inflation to a predictable, low level following the shocks to food and energy prices and other disturbances. In late 1979, the Federal Reserve began significantly tightening monetary policy to reduce inflation. In response to this tightening, which precipitated a severe economic downturn in the early 1980s, overall inflation moved persistently lower, averaging less than 4 percent from 1983 to 1990. Inflation came down further following the 1990-91 recession and subsequent slow recovery and then averaged about 2 percent for many years. Since the recession ended in 2009, however, the United States has experienced inflation running appreciably below the FOMC's 2 percent objective, in part reflecting the gradual pace of the subsequent economic recovery. Examining the behavior of inflation's estimated long-term trend reveals another important change in inflation dynamics. With the caveat that these results are based on a specific implementation of a particular statistical model, they imply that since the mid-1990s there have been no persistent movements in this predicted long-run inflation rate, which has remained very close to 2 percent. Remarkably, this stability is estimated to have continued during and after the recent severe recession, which saw the unemployment rate rise to levels comparable to those seen during the 1981-82 downturn, when the trend did shift down markedly.4As I will discuss, the stability of this trend appears linked to a change in the behavior of long-run inflation expectations--measures of which appear to be much better anchored today than in the past, likely reflecting an improvement in the conduct of monetary policy. In any event, this empirical analysis implies that, over the past 20 years, inflation has been much more predictable over the longer term than it was back in the 1970s because the trend rate to which inflation was predicted to return no longer moved around appreciably. That said, inflation still varied considerably from year to year in response to various shocks. Asfigure 2highlights, the United States has experienced very low inflation on average since the financial crisis, in part reflecting persistent economic weakness that has proven difficult to fully counter with monetary policy. Overall inflation (shown as the dashed red line) has averaged only about 1-1/2 percent per year since 2008 and is currently close to zero. This result is not merely a product of falling energy prices, as core inflation (the solid black line) has also been low on average over this period. Inflation CostsIn 2012 the FOMC adopted, for the first time, an explicit longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent as measured by the PCE price index.5(Other central banks, including the European Central Bank and the Bank of England, also have a 2 percent inflation target.) This decision reflected the FOMC's judgment that inflation that persistently deviates--up or down--from a fixed low level can be costly in a number of ways. Persistent high inflation induces households and firms to spend time and effort trying to minimize their cash holdings and forces businesses to adjust prices more frequently than would otherwise be necessary. More importantly, high inflation also tends to raise the after-tax cost of capital, thereby discouraging business investment. These adverse effects occur because capital depreciation allowances and other aspects of our tax system are only partially indexed for inflation.6 Persistently high inflation, if unanticipated, can be especially costly for households that rely on pensions, annuities, and long-term bonds to provide a significant portion of their retirement income. Because the income provided by these assets is typically fixed in nominal terms, its real purchasing power may decline surprisingly quickly if inflation turns out to be consistently higher than originally anticipated, with potentially serious consequences for retirees' standard of living as they age.7 An unexpected rise in inflation also tends to reduce the real purchasing power of labor income for a time because nominal wages and salaries are generally slow to adjust to movements in the overall level of prices. Survey data suggest that this effect is probably the number one reason why people dislike inflation so much.8In the longer run, however, real wages--that is, wages adjusted for inflation--appear to be largely independent of the average rate of inflation and instead are primarily determined by productivity, global competition, and other nonmonetary factors. In support of this view,figure 3shows that nominal wage growth tends to broadly track price inflation over long periods of time. Inflation that is persistently very low can also be costly, and it is such costs that have been particularly relevant to monetary policymakers in recent years. The most important cost is that very low inflation constrains a central bank's ability to combat recessions. Normally, the FOMC fights economic downturns by reducing the nominal federal funds rate, the rate charged by banks to lend to each other overnight. These reductions, current and expected, stimulate spending and hiring by lowering longer-termrealinterest rates--that is, nominal rates adjusted for inflation--and improving financial conditions more broadly. But the federal funds rate and other nominal interest rates cannot go much below zero, since holding cash is always an alternative to investing in securities.9Thus, the lowest the FOMC can feasibly push therealfederal funds rate is essentially the negative value of the inflation rate. As a result, the Federal Reserve has less room to ease monetary policy when inflation is very low. This limitation is a potentially serious problem because severe downturns such as the Great Recession may require pushing real interest rates far below zero for an extended period to restore full employment at a satisfactory pace.10For this reason, pursuing too low an inflation objective or otherwise tolerating persistently very low inflation would be inconsistent with the other leg of the FOMC's mandate, to promote maximum employment.11 An unexpected decline in inflation that is sizable and persistent can also be costly because it increases the debt burdens of borrowers. Consider homeowners who take out a conventional fixed-rate mortgage, with the expectation that inflation will remain close to 2 percent and their nominal incomes will rise about 4 percent per year. If the economy were instead to experience chronic mild deflation accompanied by flat or declining nominal incomes, then after a few years the homeowners might find it noticeably more difficult to cover their monthly mortgage payments than they had originally anticipated. Moreover, if house prices fall in line with consumer prices rather than rising as expected, then the equity in their home will be lower than they had anticipated. This situation, which is sometimes referred to as "debt deflation," would also confront all households with outstanding student loans, auto loans, or credit card debt, as well as businesses that had taken out bank loans or issued bonds.12Of course, in this situation,lenderswould be receiving more real income. But the net effect on the economy is likely to be negative, in large part because borrowers typically have only a limited ability to absorb losses. And if the increased debt-service burdens and declines in collateral values are severe enough to force borrowers into bankruptcy, then the resultant hardship imposed on families, small business owners, and laid-off workers may be very severe.13 Monetary Policy Actions since the Financial CrisisAs I noted earlier, after weighing the costs associated with various rates of inflation, the FOMC decided that 2 percent inflation is an appropriate operational definition of its longer-run price objective.14In the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, however, achieving both this objective and full employment (the other leg of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate) has been difficult, as shown infigure 4. Initially, the unemployment rate (the solid black line) soared and inflation (the dashed red line) fell sharply. Moreover, after the recession officially ended in 2009, the subsequent recovery was significantly slowed by a variety of persistent headwinds, including households with underwater mortgages and high debt burdens, reduced access to credit for many potential borrowers, constrained spending by state and local governments, and weakened foreign growth prospects. In an effort to return employment and inflation to levels consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate, the FOMC took a variety of unprecedented actions to help lower longer-term interest rates, including reducing the federal funds rate (the dotted black line) to near zero, communicating to the public that short-term interest rates would likely stay exceptionally low for some time, and buying large quantities of longer-term Treasury debt and agency-issued mortgage-backed securities.15 These actions contributed to highly accommodative financial conditions, thereby helping to bring about a considerable improvement in labor market conditions over time. The unemployment rate, which peaked at 10 percent in 2009, is now 5.1 percent, slightly above the median of FOMC participants' current estimates of its longer-run normal level. Although other indicators suggest that the unemployment rate currently understates how much slack remains in the labor market, on balance the economy is no longer far away from full employment. In contrast, inflation has continued to run below the Committee's objective over the past several years, and over the past 12 months it has been essentially zero. Nevertheless, the Committee expects that inflation will gradually return to 2 percent over the next two or three years. I will now turn to the determinants of inflation and the factors that underlie this expectation. Inflation DynamicsModels used to describe and predict inflation commonly distinguish between changes in food and energy prices--which enter into total inflation--and movements in the prices of other goods and services--that is, core inflation. This decomposition is useful because food and energy prices can be extremely volatile, with fluctuations that often depend on factors that are beyond the influence of monetary policy, such as technological or political developments (in the case of energy prices) or weather or disease (in the case of food prices). As a result, core inflation usually provides a better indicator than total inflation of where total inflation is headed in the medium term.16Of course, food and energy account for a significant portion of household budgets, so the Federal Reserve's inflation objective is defined in terms of the overall change in consumer prices. What, then, determines core inflation? Recalling figure 1, core inflation tends to fluctuate around a longer-term trend that now is essentially stable. Let me first focus on these fluctuations before turning to the trend. Economic theory suggests, and empirical analysis confirms, that such deviations of inflation from trend depend partly on the intensity of resource utilization in the economy--as approximated, for example, by the gap between the actual unemployment rate and its so-called natural rate, or by the shortfall of actual gross domestic product (GDP) from potential output. This relationship--which likely reflects, among other things, a tendency for firms' costs to rise as utilization rates increase--represents an important channel through which monetary policy influences inflation over the medium term, although in practice the influence is modest and gradual. Movements in certain types of input costs, particularly changes in the price of imported goods, also can cause core inflation to deviate noticeably from its trend, sometimes by a marked amount from year to year.17Finally, a nontrivial fraction of the quarter-to-quarter, and even the year-to-year, variability of inflation is attributable to idiosyncratic and often unpredictable shocks.18 What about the determinants of inflation's longer-term trend? Here, it is instructive to compare the purely statistical estimate of the trend rate of future inflation shown earlier in figure 1 with survey measures of people's actual expectations of long-run inflation, as is done infigure 5. Theory suggests that inflation expectations--which presumably are linked to the central bank's inflation goal--should play an important role in actual price setting.19Indeed, the contours of these series are strikingly similar, which suggests that the estimated trend in inflation is in fact related to households' and firms' long-run inflation expectations.20 To summarize, this analysis suggests that economic slack, changes in imported goods prices, and idiosyncratic shocks all cause core inflation to deviate from a longer-term trend that is ultimately determined by long-run inflation expectations. As some will recognize, this model of core inflation is a variant of a theoretical model that is commonly referred to as anexpectations-augmented Phillips curve.21Total inflation in turn reflects movements in core inflation, combined with changes in the prices of food and energy. An important feature of this model of inflation dynamics is that the overall effect that variations in resource utilization, import prices, and other factors will have on inflation depends crucially on whether these influences also affect long-run inflation expectations.Figure 6illustrates this point with a stylized example of the inflation consequences of a gradual increase in the level of import prices--perhaps occurring in response to stronger real activity abroad or a fall in the exchange value of the dollar--that causes the rate of change of import prices to be elevated for a time.22First, consider the situation shown in panel A, in which households' and firms' expectations of inflation are not solidly anchored, but instead adjust in response to the rates of inflation that are actually observed.23Such conditions--which arguably prevailed in the United States from the 1970s to the mid-1990s--could plausibly arise if the central bank has, in the past, allowed significant and persistent movements in inflation to occur. In this case, the temporary rise in the rate of change of import prices results in a permanent increase in inflation. This shift occurs because the initial increase in inflation generated by a period of rising import prices leads households and firms to revise up their expectations of future inflation. A permanent rise in inflation would also result from a sustained rise in the level of oil prices or a temporary increase in resource utilization. By contrast, suppose that inflation expectations are instead well anchored, perhaps because the central bank has been successful over time in keeping inflation near some specified target and has made it clear to the public that it intends to continue to do so. Then the response of inflation to a temporary increase in the rate of change of import prices or any other transitory shock will resemble the pattern shown in panel B. In this case, inflation will deviate from its longer-term level only as long as import prices are rising. But once they level out, inflation will fall back to its previous trend in the absence of other disturbances.24 A key implication of these two examples is that the presence of well-anchored inflation expectations greatly enhances a central bank's ability to pursuebothof its objectives--namely, price stability and full employment. Because temporary shifts in the rate of change of import prices or other transitory shocks have no permanent influence on expectations, they have only a transitory effect on inflation. As a result, the central bank can "look through" such short-run inflationary disturbances in setting monetary policy, allowing it to focus on returning the economy to full employment without placing price stability at risk. Indeed, the Federal Reserve has done just that in setting monetary policy over the past decade or more. Moreover, as I will discuss shortly, these inflation dynamics are a key reason why the FOMC expects inflation to return to 2 percent over the next few years. On balance, the evidence suggests that inflation expectations are in fact well anchored at present.Figure 7plots the two survey measures of longer-term expected inflation I presented earlier, along with a measure of longer-term inflation compensation derived as the difference between yields on nominal Treasury securities and inflation-indexed ones, called TIPS. Since the late 1990s, survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been quite stable; this stability has persisted in recent years despite a deep recession and concerns expressed by some observers regarding the potential inflationary effects of unconventional monetary policy. The fact that these survey measures appear to have remained anchored at about the same levels that prevailed prior to the recession suggests that, once the economy has returned to full employment (and absent any other shocks), core inflation should return toitspre-recession average level of about 2 percent. This conclusion is tempered somewhat by recent movements in longer-run inflation compensation, which in principle could reflect changes in investors' expectations for long-run inflation. This measure is now noticeably lower than in the years just prior to the financial crisis.25However, movements in inflation compensation are difficult to interpret because they can be driven by factors that are unique to financial markets--such as movements in liquidity or risk premiums--as well as by changes in expected inflation.26Indeed, empirical work that attempts to control for these factors suggests that the long-run inflation expectations embedded in asset prices have in fact moved down relatively little over the past decade.27Nevertheless, the decline in inflation compensation over the past year may indicate that financial market participants now see an increased risk of very low inflation persisting. Although the evidence, on balance, suggests that inflation expectations are well anchored at present, policymakers would be unwise to take this situation for granted. Anchored inflation expectations were not won easily or quickly: Experience suggests that it takes many years of carefully conducted monetary policy to alter what households and firms perceive to be inflation's "normal" behavior, and, furthermore, that a persistent failure to keep inflation under control--by letting it drift either too high or too low for too long--could cause expectations to once again become unmoored.28Given that inflation has been running below the FOMC's objective for several years now, such concerns reinforce the appropriateness of the Federal Reserve's current monetary policy, which remains highly accommodative by historical standards and is directed toward helping return inflation to 2 percent over the medium term.29 Before turning to the implications of this inflation model for the current outlook and monetary policy, a cautionary note is in order. The Phillips-curve approach to forecasting inflation has a long history in economics, and it has usefully informed monetary policy decisionmaking around the globe. But the theoretical underpinnings of the model are still a subject of controversy among economists. Moreover, inflation sometimes moves in ways that empirical versions of the model, which necessarily are a simplified version of a complicated reality, cannot adequately explain. For this reason, significant uncertainty attaches to Phillips curve predictions, and the validity of forecasts from this model must be continuously evaluated in response to incoming data. Policy ImplicationsAssuming that my reading of the data is correct and long-run inflation expectations are in fact anchored near their pre-recession levels, what implications does the preceding description of inflation dynamics have for the inflation outlook and for monetary policy? This framework suggests, first, that much of the recent shortfall of inflation from our 2 percent objective is attributable to special factors whose effects are likely to prove transitory. As the solid black line infigure 8indicates, PCE inflation has run noticeably below our 2 percent objective on average since 2008, with the shortfall approaching about 1 percentage point in both 2013 and 2014 and more than 1-1/2 percentage points this year. The stacked bars in the figure give the contributions of various factors to these deviations from 2 percent, computed using an estimated version of the simple inflation model I just discussed.30As the solid blue portion of the bars shows, falling consumer energy prices explain about half of this year's shortfall and a sizable portion of the 2013 and 2014 shortfalls as well. Another important source of downward pressure this year has been a decline in import prices, the portion with orange checkerboard pattern, which is largely attributable to the 15 percent appreciation in the dollar's exchange value over the past year. In contrast, the restraint imposed by economic slack, the green dotted portion, has diminished steadily over time as the economy has recovered and is now estimated to be relatively modest.31Finally, a similarly small portion of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent is explained by other factors (which include changes in food prices); importantly, the effects of these other factors are transitory and often switch sign from year to year. Although an accounting exercise like this one is always imprecise and will depend on the specific model that is used, I think its basic message--that the current near-zero rate of inflation can mostly be attributed to the temporary effects of falling prices for energy and non-energy imports--is quite plausible. If so, the 12-month change in total PCE prices is likely to rebound to 1-1/2 percent or higher in 2016, barring a further substantial drop in crude oil prices and provided that the dollar does not appreciate noticeably further. To be reasonably confident that inflation will return to 2 percent over the next few years, we need, in turn, to be reasonably confident that we will see continued solid economic growth and further gains in resource utilization, with longer-term inflation expectations remaining near their pre-recession level. Fortunately, prospects for the U.S. economy generally appear solid. Monthly payroll gains have averaged close to 210,000 since the start of the year and the overall economy has been expanding modestly faster than its productive potential. My colleagues and I, based on our most recent forecasts, anticipate that this pattern will continue and that labor market conditions will improve further as we head into 2016. The labor market has achieved considerable progress over the past several years. Even so, further improvement in labor market conditions would be welcome because we are probably not yet all the way back to full employment. Although the unemployment rate may now be close to its longer-run normal level--which most FOMC participants now estimate is around 4.9 percent--this traditional metric of resource utilization almost certainly understates the actual amount of slack that currently exists: On a cyclically adjusted basis, the labor force participation rate remains low relative to its underlying trend, and an unusually large number of people are working part time but would prefer full-time employment.32Consistent with this assessment is the slow pace at which hourly wages and compensation have been rising, which suggests that most firms still find it relatively easy to hire and retain employees. Reducing slack along these other dimensions may involve a temporary decline in the unemployment rate somewhat below the level that is estimated to be consistent, in the longer run, with inflation stabilizing at 2 percent. For example, attracting discouraged workers back into the labor force may require a period of especially plentiful employment opportunities and strong hiring. Similarly, firms may be unwilling to restructure their operations to use more full-time workers until they encounter greater difficulty filling part-time positions. Beyond these considerations, a modest decline in the unemployment rate below its long-run level for a time would, by increasing resource utilization, also have the benefit of speeding the return to 2 percent inflation. Finally, albeit more speculatively, such an environment might help reverse some of the significant supply-side damage that appears to have occurred in recent years, thereby improving Americans' standard of living.33 Consistent with the inflation framework I have outlined, the medians of the projections provided by FOMC participants at our recent meeting show inflation gradually moving back to 2 percent, accompanied by a temporary decline in unemployment slightly below the median estimate of the rate expected to prevail in the longer run. These projections embody two key judgments regarding the projected relationship between real activity and interest rates. First, the real federal funds rate is currently somewhat below the level that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential, which implies that the unemployment rate is likely to continue to fall in the absence of some tightening. Second, participants implicitly expect that the various headwinds to economic growth that I mentioned earlier will continue to fade, thereby boosting the economy's underlying strength. Combined, these two judgments imply that the real interest rate consistent with achieving and then maintaining full employment in the medium run should rise gradually over time. This expectation, coupled with inherent lags in the response of real activity and inflation to changes in monetary policy, are the key reasons that most of my colleagues and I anticipate that it will likely be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate sometime later this year and to continue boosting short-term rates at a gradual pace thereafter as the labor market improves further and inflation moves back to our 2 percent objective. By itself, the precise timing of the first increase in our target for the federal funds rate should have only minor implications for financial conditions and the general economy. What matters for overall financial conditions is the entire trajectory of short-term interest rates that is anticipated by markets and the public. As I noted, most of my colleagues and I anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant raising short-term interest rates at a quite gradual pace over the next few years. It's important to emphasize, however, that both the timing of the first rate increase and any subsequent adjustments to our federal funds rate target will depend on how developments in the economy influence the Committee's outlook for progress toward maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. The economic outlook, of course, is highly uncertain and it is conceivable, for example, that inflation could remain appreciably below our 2 percent target despite the apparent anchoring of inflation expectations. Here, Japan's recent history may be instructive: As shown infigure 9, survey measures of longer-term expected inflation in that country remained positive and stable even as that country experienced many years of persistent, mild deflation.34The explanation for the persistent divergence between actual and expected inflation in Japan is not clear, but I believe that it illustrates a problem faced by all central banks: Economists' understanding of the dynamics of inflation is far from perfect. Reflecting that limited understanding, the predictions of our models often err, sometimes significantly so. Accordingly, inflation may rise more slowly or rapidly than the Committee currently anticipates; should such a development occur, we would need to adjust the stance of policy in response. Considerable uncertainties also surround the outlook for economic activity. For example, we cannot be certain about the pace at which the headwinds still restraining the domestic economy will continue to fade. Moreover, net exports have served as a significant drag on growth over the past year and recent global economic and financial developments highlight the risk that a slowdown in foreign growth might restrain U.S. economic activity somewhat further. The Committee is monitoring developments abroad, but we do not currently anticipate that the effects of these recent developments on the U.S. economy will prove to be large enough to have a significant effect on the path for policy. That said, in response to surprises affecting the outlook for economic activity, as with those affecting inflation, the FOMC would need to adjust the stance of policy so that our actions remain consistent with inflation returning to our 2 percent objective over the medium term in the context of maximum employment. Given the highly uncertain nature of the outlook, one might ask: Why not hold off raising the federal funds rate until the economy has reached full employment and inflation is actually back at 2 percent? The difficulty with this strategy is that monetary policy affects real activity and inflation with a substantial lag. If the FOMC were to delay the start of the policy normalization process for too long, we would likely end up having to tighten policy relatively abruptly to keep the economy from significantly overshooting both of our goals. Such an abrupt tightening would risk disrupting financial markets and perhaps even inadvertently push the economy into recession. In addition, continuing to hold short-term interest rates near zero well after real activity has returned to normal and headwinds have faded could encourage excessive leverage and other forms of inappropriate risk-taking that might undermine financial stability. For these reasons, the more prudent strategy is to begin tightening in a timely fashion and at a gradual pace, adjusting policy as needed in light of incoming data. ConclusionTo conclude, let me emphasize that, following the dual mandate established by the Congress, the Federal Reserve is committed to the achievement of maximum employment and price stability. To this end, we have maintained a highly accommodative monetary policy since the financial crisis; that policy has fostered a marked improvement in labor market conditions and helped check undesirable disinflationary pressures. However, we have not yet fully attained our objectives under the dual mandate: Some slack remains in labor markets, and the effects of this slack and the influence of lower energy prices and past dollar appreciation have been significant factors keeping inflation below our goal. But I expect that inflation will return to 2 percent over the next few years as the temporary factors that are currently weighing on inflation wane, provided that economic growth continues to be strong enough to complete the return to maximum employment and long-run inflation expectations remain well anchored. Most FOMC participants, including myself, currently anticipate that achieving these conditions will likely entail an initial increase in the federal funds rate later this year, followed by a gradual pace of tightening thereafter. But if the economy surprises us, our judgments about appropriate monetary policy will change. ReferencesAscari, Guido, and Argia M. Sbordone (2014). "The Macroeconomics of Trend Inflation,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 52 (September), pp. 679-739. Ball, Laurence (2013). "The Case for Four Percent Inflation," Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey,Central Bank Review,vol. 13 (2), pp. 17-31. Bernanke, Ben S. (2012). "Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis," speech delivered at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 31. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Bewley, Truman F. (1999).Why Wages Don't Fall during a Recession.Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro (2010). "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy (PDF)," IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/03. Washington: International Monetary Fund, February 12. Blinder, Alan S., and Jeremy B. Rudd (2013). "The Supply-Shock Explanation of the Great Stagflation Revisited," in Michael D. Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides, eds.,The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 119-75. Briault, Clive (1995). "The Costs of Inflation,"Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,vol. 35 (February), pp. 33-45. Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams (2012). "Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44 (February), pp. 47-82. Clark, Todd, and William Bednar (2015). "Recent Inflation Trends," Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Economic Trends, July 16. Clark, Todd E., and Troy Davig (2008). "An Empirical Assessment of the Relationships among Inflation and Short- and Long-Term Expectations (PDF)," Research Working Paper RWP 08-05. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, November. Clark, Todd E., and Stephen J. Terry (2010). "Time Variation in the Inflation Passthrough of Energy Prices,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 42 (October), pp. 1419-33. Cogley, Timothy, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Thomas J. Sargent (2010). "Inflation-Gap Persistence in the US,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 2 (January), pp. 43-69. Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent (2005). "Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and Outcomes in the Post WWII US,"Review of Economic Dynamics,vol. 8 (April), pp. 262-302. Cohen, Darrel, Kevin A. Hassett, and R. Glenn Hubbard (1999). "Inflation and the User Cost of Capital: Does Inflation Still Matter?" in Martin Feldstein, ed.,The Costs and Benefits of Price Stability.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 199-230. Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2015). "Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well after All? Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 7 (January), pp. 197-232. Curdia, Vasco, Andrea Ferrero, Ging Cee Ng, and Andrea Tambalotti (2014). "Has U.S. Monetary Policy Tracked the Efficient Interest Rate? (PDF)" Working Paper Series 2014-12. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May. D'Amico, Stefania, Don Kim, and Min Wei (2014). "Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation-Protected Security Prices (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-24. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Detmeister, Alan K. (2011). "The Usefulness of Core PCE Inflation Measures (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-56. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. --------- (2012). "What Should Core Inflation Exclude? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-43. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,vol. 34 (1), pp. 139-233. Engen, Eric M., Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. English, William B. (1999). "Inflation and Financial Sector Size,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 44 (December), pp. 379-400. English, William B., J. David Lopez-Salido, and Robert J. Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (April), pp. 22-70. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, eds.,Handbook of Economic Forecasting,vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, pp. 3-56. Feldstein, Martin (1997). "The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price Stability," in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 123-66. --------- (1999). "Capital Income Taxes and the Benefit of Price Stability," in Martin Feldstein, ed.,The Costs and Benefits of Price Stability.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 9-40. Fisher, Irving (1933). "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,"Econometrica,vol. 1 (October), pp. 337-57. Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 58 (March), pp. 1-17. Hooker, Mark A. (2002). "Are Oil Shocks Inflationary? Asymmetric and Nonlinear Specifications versus Changes in Regime,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 34 (May), pp. 540-61. Krugman, Paul R. (1998). "It's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,vol. 29 (2), pp. 137-206. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007). "The Federal Reserve's Enhanced Communication Strategy and the Science of Monetary Policy," speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29. Peneva, Ekaterina V., and Jeremy B. Rudd (2015). "The Passthrough of Labor Costs to Price Inflation (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-042. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. Reifschneider, Dave, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2015). "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (1), pp. 71-109. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936-66. Shiller, Robert J. (1997). "Why Do People Dislike Inflation?" in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 13-65. Tobin, James (1972). "Inflation and Unemployment,"American Economic Review,vol. 62 (March), pp. 1-18. Van Zandweghe, Willem (forthcoming). "Monetary Policy Shocks and Aggregate Supply (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Economic Review. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Yellen, Janet L. (2013). "Challenges Confronting Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the 2013 National Association for Business Economics Policy Conference, Washington, March 4. Appendix: The Estimated Inflation Model and Inflation Decomposition ProcedureThe inflation model used in the decomposition procedure includes two equations--an identity for the change in the price index for total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and a simple reduced-form forecasting equation for core PCE inflation.35The identity is whereanddenote growth rates (expressed as annualized log differences) of total and core PCE prices, respectively;andare annualized growth rates for prices of consumer energy goods and services and prices of food and beverages, both expressed relative to core PCE prices; andandare the weights of energy and food in total consumption. The core inflation forecasting equation is whereis expected long-run inflation;denotes the level of resource utilization;controls for the effect of changes in the relative price of core imported goods;is a white-noise error term; and the coefficients are ordinary least squares estimates obtained using data from 1990:Q1 to 2014:Q4. For estimation purposes,is approximated using the unemployment rate less the Congressional Budget Office's (CBO) historical series for the long-run natural rate, whileis proxied using the median forecasts of long-run PCE or CPI inflation reported in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, with a constant adjustment of 40 basis points prior to 2007 to put the CPI forecasts on a PCE basis. (Prior to 1991:Q4, this series is based on the long-run inflation expectations reported in the Hoey survey.) The relative import price term,, is defined as the annualized growth rate of the price index for core imported goods (defined to exclude petroleum, natural gas, computers, and semiconductors), less the lagged four-quarter change in core PCE inflation, all multiplied by the share of nominal core imported goods in nominal GDP.36 To decompose recent movements in inflation into its various components, the series used in the inflation model--for which data are available only through 2015:Q2 in most cases--are first extended through the end of 2015. In the case of inflation, the extensions are consistent with the medians of FOMC participants' projections for total and core PCE inflation in 2015 that were reported at the press conference following the September FOMC meeting.37Similarly,over the second half of 2015 is defined to be consistent with the median of FOMC projections for the 2015:Q4 unemployment rate, less the CBO's estimates of the historical path of the long-run natural rate; the CBO's 2015 estimate is almost identical to the median of FOMC participants' most recent projections of the normal longer-run level of the unemployment rate. For changes in the prices of consumer energy and core imports, the 2015:H2 extrapolations are based on regressions of these two series on current and lagged changes in, respectively, crude oil prices and exchange rates. This approach predicts that energy prices should decline at annual rates of about 6 percent in 2015:Q3 and 18 percent in 2015:Q4, while core import prices should fall about 2-1/2 percent at an annual rate in both quarters.38Food prices are assumed to remain flat at their 2015:Q2 level; this assumption ensures that the combined contribution of food and energy prices to inflation in 2015 is consistent with the median difference between FOMC participants' projections for total and core inflation. Finally, nominal spending shares for food, energy, and core imports are assumed to remain unchanged at their 2015:Q2 levels, and long-run inflation expectations are assumed to remain constant at 2 percent. After computing historicaltracking errors for the two equations of the model, the final step in the decomposition procedure is to run a sequence of counter-factual simulations of the model from 1990:Q1 through 2015:Q4. One by one, each explanatory variable of the model is set to zero and the model is simulated; the resulting difference between actual inflation and its simulated value equals the historical contribution of that particular factor. Importantly, the simulations are all dynamic in that the lagged inflation term in the core inflation equation is set equal to its simulated value in the preceding period, rather than its actual value. As a result, the decompositions incorporate the effects of changes in lagged inflation that are attributable to previous movements in the explanatory variables. 1.See the Federal Open Market Committee'sStatement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF), available on the Board's website.Return to text 2.The first jump in energy prices in the 1970s reflected a rise in crude oil prices whose proximate cause was the so-called Arab oil embargo that followed the 1973 Arab-Israeli War; the first jump in food prices was caused by disease and poor harvests combined with low levels of inventories (particularly for grains) in many countries. The second energy price shock resulted from a jump in crude oil prices following the 1978-79 revolution in Iran and subsequent Iraqi invasion; the second food price shock was largely attributable to bad weather and disease. (See Blinder and Rudd, 2013, for an assessment of the effect that these and other special factors--including the imposition and removal of price controls over the 1971-74 period--had on consumer price inflation in the 1970s and 1980s.)Return to text 3.The predicted long-run trend shown here updates an estimate made by Peneva and Rudd (2015), which uses a vector autoregression (VAR) with time-varying parameters and stochastic volatility to compute a stochastic trend for inflation (see that paper for additional details regarding model specification and data definitions). The estimation procedure for the VAR is similar to that used by Clark and Terry (2010), which in turn follows Cogley and Sargent (2005); see also Cogley and others (2010) and Ascari and Sbordone (2014) for related applications.Return to text 4.Trend inflation estimates from univariate statistical models manifest somewhat less stability in recent years; see Clark and Bednar (2015).Return to text 5.In contrast, the FOMC has determined that a number of considerations preclude it from setting a fixed numerical target for the other leg of its dual mandate, maximum employment. As discussed in its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (see note 1), the maximum level of employment is something that is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Moreover, the maximum level of employment, the longer-run "natural" rate of unemployment, and other related aspects of the labor market are not directly observable, can change over time, and can only be estimated imprecisely. As a result, views vary about what labor market conditions would be consistent with a normal level of resource utilization.Return to text 6.For a general survey of the costs of high inflation, see Briault (1995). English (1999) discusses costs associated with an increased need for cash management. For a discussion of costs that arise through interactions of inflation with the tax system, see Feldstein (1997, 1999) and Cohen and others (1999). Finally, high inflation may adversely affect the economy's allocation of resources by increasing the magnitude of misalignments in relative prices that result because firms do not continually adjust all of their prices; for a discussion of such costs in the context of the new-Keynesian model of inflation, see Ascari and Sbordone (2014).Return to text 7.More broadly, if inflation evolves in an unpredictable manner over many years, then even financially sophisticated households and firms may not be able to avoid significant forecasting errors with their attendant costs. Such costs can arise in a wide variety of situations; for instance, any firm, union, or other entity that engages in a multiyear nominal contract may be adversely affected by unexpected increases or decreases in inflation, although those on the other side of the contract might benefit.Return to text 8.For more on this survey, see Shiller (1997).Return to text 9.Because of the inconvenience of storing and protecting very large quantities of currency, some firms are willing to pay a premium to hold short-term government securities or bank deposits instead. As a result, several foreign central banks have found it possible to push nominal short-term interest rates somewhat below zero.Return to text 10.For example, Curdia and others (2014) estimate that stabilizing the economy during the last recession would have required lowering the real federal funds rate to negative 10 percent for a time; by comparison, the average value of the real federal funds has been only negative 1-1/4 percent since early 2009. Of course, the FOMC was able to use other policy tools, such as large-scale asset purchases, to put additional downward pressure on long-term interest rates after the nominal funds rate was cut to near zero; however, those policies had potential costs and risks that made them an imperfect substitute for traditional interest rate policy. See Krugman (1998), Reifschneider and Williams (2000), and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) for discussions of the effects that low inflation and the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates have on a central bank's ability to stimulate the economy during economic downturns. In addition, see English, Lopez-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) and Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015) for model-based analyses of the effectiveness of the Federal Reserve's large-scale asset purchases and forward guidance in mitigating the effects of the zero lower bound. Finally, for a discussion of the costs and benefits of employing large scale asset purchases, see Bernanke (2012) and Yellen (2013).Return to text 11.For a further discussion of this point, see Mishkin (2007).Return to text 12.See Fisher (1933) for an early discussion of debt deflation and its effects on the economy.Return to text 13.Very low inflation also can result in chronically higher unemployment by closing off an important way in which the labor market can respond to adverse shocks. In sectors where productivity is lagging or demand is slowing, declines in real wages might be necessary to avoid even worse outcomes, such as layoffs. For various reasons, however, employers often try to avoidnominalwage cuts. (Bewley (1999) suggests a number of reasons that firms find cutting nominal wages difficult, including the effect that such cuts have on employee morale. Inflation is therefore often said to "grease the wheels of the labor market" because it permits these required adjustments in real wages to occur through a combination of unchanged nominal wages and rising prices.) But when inflation falls to a very low level, this passive approach to wage reductions may no longer be viable for many firms, causing relatively more of the burden of adjustment to fall on employment.Return to text 14.Blanchard, Dell'Ariccia and Mauro (2010), among others, have recently suggested that central banks should consider raising their inflation targets, on the grounds that conditions since the financial crisis have demonstrated that monetary policy is more constrained by the effective lower bound (ELB) on nominal interest rates than was originally estimated. Ball (2013), for example, has proposed 4 percent as a more appropriate target for the FOMC. While it is certainly true that earlier analyses of ELB costs significantly underestimated the likelihood of severe recessions and slow recoveries of the sort recently experienced in the United States and elsewhere (see Chung and others, 2012), it is also the case that these analyses did not take into account central banks' ability to use large-scale asset purchases and other unconventional tools to mitigate the costs arising from the ELB constraint. In addition, it is not obvious that a modestly higher target rate of inflation would have greatly increased the Federal Reserve's ability to support real activity in the special conditions that prevailed in the wake of the financial crisis, when some of the channels through which lower interest rates stimulate aggregate spending, such as housing construction, were probably attenuated. Beyond these tactical considerations, however, changing the FOMC's long-run inflation objective would risk calling into question the FOMC's commitment to stabilizing inflation at any level because it might lead people to suspect that the target could be changed opportunistically in the future. If so, then the key benefits of stable inflation expectations discussed below--an increased ability of monetary policy to fight economic downturns without sacrificing price stability--might be lost. Moreover, if the purpose of a higher inflation target is to increase the ability of central banks to deal with the severe recessions that follow financial crises, then a better strategic approach might be to rely on more vigorous supervisory and macroprudential policies to reduce the likelihood of such events. Finally, targeting inflation in the vicinity of 4 percent or higher would stretch the meaning of "stable prices" in the Federal Reserve Act.Return to text 15.For a more complete listing of the Federal Reserve's policy actions in recent years, see "The Federal Reserve's Response to the Financial Crisis and Action to Foster Maximum Employment and Price Stability," a webpage available on the Board's website. Also see Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015) for an analysis of the combined macroeconomic effects of the FOMC's asset purchases and guidance concerning the future path of the federal funds rate.Return to text 16.Several other approaches are commonly used to abstract from the short-term volatility of overall inflation and thereby better discern its medium-term direction. For example, one procedure removes the components of the total PCE price index with the largest or smallest price changes before computing the average price change, yielding the "trimmed mean" PCE index; another uses themedianprice change in a given period, rather than the mean change, to represent the overall inflation rate. In practice, simply using core inflation does about as well in predicting overall inflation over the coming year and beyond as these alternative procedures (see Detmeister, 2011, 2012).Return to text 17.Another input cost that can affect core inflation is the price of energy; in recent decades, however, the pass-through of energy price changes to core inflation appears much smaller than in previous periods (see Hooker, 2002; Clark and Terry, 2010).Return to text 18.Some of these idiosyncratic shocks are related to identifiable factors, such as changes in Medicare reimbursement rates or movements in the (imputed) price of holding a checking account. (Both of these factors are included in the services component of the PCE price index, but not the consumer price index (CPI).) However, not all idiosyncratic shocks can be reliably traced to specific factors, as a significant fraction represents unpredictable "noise."Return to text 19.Most theoretical versions of the Phillips curve suggest that inflation should depend on short-run inflation expectations, but, as an empirical matter, measures of long-run expectations appear to explain the data better.Return to text 20.See Clark and Davig (2008); see also Faust and Wright (2013), who make a related point in the context of inflation forecasting. Note that the question about expected inflation in the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers is not phrased in terms of a specific measure of prices, so its level--as opposed to its contour--cannot be directly compared with a particular measure of inflation such as the change in the PCE price index.Return to text 21.See Tobin (1972) and Friedman (1968) for early discussions of the theory underpinning the expectations-augmented Phillips curve. Theoretical descriptions of the inflation process remain an active area of research in economics. In recent years, many economic theorists have used a so-called new-Keynesian framework--in which optimizing agents are assumed to face constraints on price or wage setting in the form of adjustment costs or explicit nominal contracts--to model inflation dynamics (see Woodford, 2003, chapter 3, for a textbook treatment). Although these new-Keynesian inflation models can differ importantly in their specifics, they all tend to assign a central role to inflation expectations and resource utilization as drivers of inflation dynamics.Return to text 22.In this exercise, we ignore any inflation effects that might arise because of shifts in resource utilization induced by the change in import prices, which are expressed relative to core prices.Return to text 23.An expectations-augmented Phillips curve in which expectations of inflation are assumed to eventually respond one-for-one to actual past inflation is typically referred to as anaccelerationistPhillips curve.Return to text 24.Qualitatively similar results obtain in fully specified structural models with rational expectations--including the FRB/US, EDO, and SIGMA models maintained at the Federal Reserve Board--in which the long-term behavior of inflation and inflation expectations is governed by the central bank's (fixed) inflation objective.Return to text 25.In evaluating the potential implications of this decline for expected PCE inflation, one also needs to keep in mind that TIPS are indexed to the CPI. CPI inflation generally runs a few tenths of a percentage point higher than PCE inflation, though that differential can vary materially over time.Return to text 26.Another complication is that we do not know whose expectations "matter" for determining inflation. Inflation expectations of professional forecasters (such as those collected in the Blue Chip Economic Indicators, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, or the Survey of Primary Dealers) or inflation expectations derived from asset prices probably capture the views of participants in financial markets but need not reflect the views of households and firms more broadly. As an empirical matter, the little information available on the longer-term inflation expectations of firms from the Atlanta Federal Reserve Business Inflation Expectations survey suggests that firms' expectations more closely resemble expectations from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers than the expectations of professional forecasters. Similarly, preliminary data from a New Zealand study suggests that inflation forecasts of firms are much more similar to those of households than those of professional forecasters (see Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2015).Return to text 27.D'Amico, Kim, and Wei (2014) examine a number of models that use TIPS yields to back out expected inflation estimates. The best-fitting models show only a small decline in longer-term inflation expectations since 2005.Return to text 28.My interpretation of the historical evidence is that long-run inflation expectations become anchored at a particular level only after a central bank succeeds in keeping actual inflation near some target level for many years. For that reason, I am somewhat skeptical about the actual effectiveness of any monetary policy that relies primarily on the central bank's theoretical ability to influence the public's inflation expectations directly by simply announcing that it will pursue a different inflation goal in the future. Although such announcements might potentially persuade some financial market participants and professional forecasters to shift their expectations, other members of the public are probably much less likely to do so. Hence, actual inflation would probably be affected only after the central bank has had sufficient time to concretely demonstrate its sustained commitment and ability to generate a new norm for the average level of inflation and the behavior of monetary policy--a process that might take years, based on U.S. experience. Consistent with my assessment that announcements alone are not enough, Bernanke and others (1999) found no evidence across a number of countries that the initial disinflation which follows the adoption of inflation targeting is any less costly than disinflations carried out under alternative monetary regimes.Return to text 29.Some might be surprised that the preceding discussion of inflation determinants makes no mention of labor costs. In the past, wages provided a good empirical indicator of the future direction of price inflation; indeed, the presence of a so-calledwage-price spiral--in which higher price inflation led workers to push for higher wage growth, thereby in turn leading to even faster price increases as firms' labor costs accelerated--was often invoked to explain the inflationary dynamics of the 1970s. The wage-price spiral no longer seems to provide a useful description of the U.S. inflation process. In fact, some evidence suggests that, like inflation, the rate of growth of labor costs is now characterized by a stable long-run trend; again, a likely explanation for this empirical finding is the improved anchoring of long-term inflation expectations. (See Peneva and Rudd, 2015, for some suggestive evidence along these lines.) More generally, movements in labor costs no longer appear to be an especially good guide to future price movements. (This development does not imply that wage developments carrynouseful information: Because wage growth is influenced by labor market slack, observed movements in compensation gains can provide an indication of how close the economy is to full employment.)Return to text 30.For a technical explanation of the procedure used to produce this decomposition, see the appendix. In the decomposition procedure, movements in core inflation affect headline inflation one-for-one; as a result, the contributions of food and energy price inflation are defined as each component's price change relative to the core, weighted by its share in total nominal consumer spending. (Note that the "other" category includes the effects of changes in food prices.) The estimated contribution of movements in import prices is also computed relative to core inflation; thus, if import prices are rising at the same rate as core inflation, they have no estimated effect on the shortfall of overall inflation from 2 percent. In addition, the decomposition takes account of lags in the adjustment of core inflation to movements in resource utilization and other factors.Return to text 31.As discussed later, the current difference between the unemployment rate and its normal longer-run level likely understates the actual amount of slack that remains in the labor market. If so, the estimates reported in figure 8 somewhat understate the contribution of slack to the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent and, correspondingly, overstate the contribution from other factors. For example, if the standard unemployment gap currently understates the true level of slack by 1/2 percentage point, then the contribution of slack to this year's inflation shortfall is roughly 0.1 percentage point larger than the estimate reported in figure 8.Return to text 32.For a further discussion of the current level of resource utilization, see the Federal Reserve Board's most recentMonetary Policy Report,dated July 15, 2015.Return to text 33.For a discussion of the supply-side damage that has occurred since 2007 and the potential benefits of partially reversing it through more accommodative monetary policy, see Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox (2015) and Van Zandweghe (forthcoming).Return to text 34.In addition, we cannot count on expectations remaining anchored if the Federal Reserve were to permit actual inflation to continue to run noticeably below its announced objective after the real economy has substantially recovered.Return to text 35.This appendix was revised on December 17, 2015, to provide additional information on the definition of core import inflation and its implications for the longer-run rate of unemployment consistent with stable inflation. In addition, the original version of the appendix incorrectly reported that the adjustment factor used to convert historical readings on expected long-run inflation from a CPI basis to a PCE basis was 50 basis points.Return to text 36.This measure of core import prices is constructed by Board staff using published and unpublished data provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis and the Bureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 37.The information on participants' forecasts provided at the September 17, 2015 press conference is available on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20150917.pdf.Return to text 38.The level of core import prices, expressed relative to core consumer prices, displayed a modest downward trend from 1990 through 2001 but since then has displayed little persistent trend, particularly if one controls for shifts related to recent changes in the real exchange rate. If the post-2001 pattern persists in coming years, thenwould be expected to converge to zero within a few quarters and core PCE inflation to converge to 2 percent within two or three years, assuming that the unemployment rate remains close to 5 percent (the CBO estimate of the natural rate) and there are no further shocks to the exchange rate and other factors. If, however, core import prices were expected to resume trending down relative to consumer prices, then the model as specified would imply that the unemployment rate consistent with inflation stabilizing at 2 percent in the longer run would be somewhat lower than 5 percent.Return to text
Thomas Sullivan, Associate Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Subcommittee on Housing and Insurance, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives , Washington, D.C. IntroductionChairman Luetkemeyer, Ranking Member Cleaver, and other members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify on behalf of the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve welcomes the opportunity to participate in today's hearing, and I am pleased to be joined by my colleagues from the Federal Insurance Office (FIO) of the U.S. Treasury, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), and the independent insurance member of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). While we each have our own unique authority and mission, we remain committed to working collaboratively on a wide range of insurance supervisory and regulatory issues. The Federal Reserve's Role in the Supervision of Certain Insurance Holding CompaniesWith the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act), the Federal Reserve assumed expanded responsibility as the consolidated supervisor of a significant number of insurance holding companies. As a result of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve is responsible for the consolidated supervision of insurance holding companies that own an insured bank or thrift, as well as insurance holding companies designated for Federal Reserve supervision by the FSOC. The insurance holding companies for which the Federal Reserve is the consolidated supervisor hold about $3 trillion in total assets and one-third of U.S. insurance industry assets. These insurance holding companies vary greatly in terms of size, the types of products they offer, and their geography. After the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve moved quickly to develop a supervisory framework that is appropriate for insurance holding companies that own depository institutions and promptly assigned supervisory teams to handle day-to-day supervision of those insurance holding companies. We have also acted promptly to commence supervision of the three insurance holding companies designated by the FSOC for Federal Reserve supervision. Our supervisory teams for insurance holding companies are a combination of experienced Federal Reserve staff as well as newly hired staff with insurance expertise. We currently have approximately 90 full-time equivalent employees devoted to the supervision of insurance firms. Many of our supervisors are individuals with substantial prior experience in state insurance departments or the insurance industry. We plan to continue to add staff, as appropriate, at both the Board and the Reserve Banks, to ensure we have the proper depth and experience to carry out our mandate. Our supervisory efforts to date have focused on strengthening firms' internal controls; corporate governance; and risk identification, measurement, and management. Our principal supervisory objectives for insurance holding companies are protecting the safety and soundness of the consolidated firms and their subsidiary depository institutions while mitigating any risks to financial stability.1 The Federal Reserve's Development of Domestic Capital Standards for Insurance Holding CompaniesLast year, Congress enacted the Insurance Capital Standards Clarification Act of 2014 (S. 2270), which amended the provision of the Dodd-Frank Act that had required the minimum capital standards for banks be applied to any insurance holding company that controls an insured depository institution or is designated for Federal Reserve supervision by the FSOC. Using the greater adaptability provided by this amendment to the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve is now focusing on constructing a domestic regulatory capital framework for our supervised insurance holding companies that is well tailored to the business of insurance. We are exercising great care as we approach this challenging mandate. The Federal Reserve is investing significant time and effort into enhancing our understanding of the insurance industry and the firms we supervise, and we are committed to tailoring our framework to the specific business lines, risk profiles, and systemic footprints of the insurance holding companies we oversee. We have increased our staffing and have been engaging extensively with other insurance supervisors, independent experts, regulated entities, and market participants to solicit feedback on various potential approaches to the development of an appropriate consolidated group-wide capital regime for insurance holding companies that would be consistent with federal requirements. We also play a role, along with our colleagues from the FIO and the NAIC, as members of the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). In partnership with the NAIC and the FIO, we advocate for the development of international standards that best meet the needs of the U.S. insurance market. While we view the development of international standards as important to helping improve financial stability and to providing a competitive playing field in an industry that is continuing to develop on a global basis, no standards recommended or developed by the IAIS (or any other international body) apply in the United States unless they are consistent with applicable U.S. law and are adopted in accordance with U.S. law. In particular, we are committed to developing our insurance capital framework through a transparent rulemaking process that allows for an open public comment period on a concrete proposal. We will continue to engage with interested parties as we move forward. Cooperation and Coordination among U.S. Supervisors and the IndustryOur primary role in supervision is as the group-wide supervisor for insurance holding companies. Our consolidated supervision and capital requirements will supplement existing legal-entity supervision with a perspective that considers the risks across the entire firm, including risks that emanate from non-insurance subsidiaries and other entities within the group. Our role as the consolidated supervisor does not seek to lessen the critical importance of supervising individual insurance legal entities by the states. We do not regulate the manner in which insurance is provided by these companies or the types of insurance that they provide. Those important aspects of the actual business of providing insurance are the province of the relevant state insurance supervisors. We conduct our consolidated supervision efforts in a manner that is complementary to, and coordinated with, other insurance regulators. We leverage the work of state insurance regulators where possible and continue to look for opportunities to further coordinate with them. We do this both informally and through formal mechanisms such as supervisory colleges. We also enter into agreements with institutions that allow us to share confidential information with state supervisors. We continue to meet with state insurance departments to discuss supervisory plans and findings for the insurance firms for which we have consolidated supervisory responsibility. In addition to working with the states, we also coordinate with other international and domestic regulators. We have hosted multiple crisis management groups that included participation from other parties such as the state insurance departments, the FIO, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Among the topics discussed in these groups was resolution planning for systemically important entities in order to protect policyholders and to mitigate risks to financial stability without putting taxpayer money at risk. An example of our collaboration with the states is in evaluating companies' Own Risk and Solvency Assessments (ORSAs). Many states have recently enacted legislation that requires state regulated insurers to produce this assessment on a group-wide basis. While we recognize that the ORSA process belongs to the NAIC and the states, it is potentially a useful and valuable tool for us as well because it is fashioned on a group-wide basis. It has helped us to understand some institutions' processes for monitoring, measuring, controlling, and managing risk in a way that avoids unnecessary duplication in our oversight function. We have been meeting with state insurance departments to discuss views on ORSA submissions, and we have appreciated their perspective on these subjects. We will continue our active collaboration with state regulators. Mr. Chairman, thank you for inviting me here today. I look forward to an active dialogue on these issues with you and other members of the committee. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2014), "Incorporation of Federal Reserve Policies into the Savings and Loan Holding Company Supervision Program," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 14-9 (November 7).Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Community Banking in the 21st Century, The Third Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, Cosponsored by the Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri Thank you. It is truly a pleasure for me to join President Bullard and Chairman Cotney in welcoming you to the Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, which I am proud to say has been cosponsored since its inception by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS). This is the third year for this conference, which I consider a milestone. The first time you organize a conference like this, all you can be sure about is that there was indeed enough research and interest for such a conference. The second time it is held, you proved that you could do it again. But the third year, this year, is when we can start to feel we have established a tradition. If this year's conference comes even close to being as successful as the first two were, and I expect it will be, I hope that we have established an ongoing role for this gathering, which provides such a great opportunity for bankers, regulators, and academic researchers to come together to share ideas and insights about the issues that matter most in community banking. Based on the agenda and conference materials I have seen, I expect participants over the next two days will tackle some of the most important issues facing community banks, provoke discussion and debate about opportunities and challenges, and generate some promising ideas about how community banks can continue to play the indispensable role they have played in so many communities. The lineup of speakers, which includes my Federal Reserve Board colleague, Governor Brainard, is impressive. She and others will delve deeply into the important research questions and other issues facing community banking. My role today is to welcome you on behalf of the Federal Reserve Board. In the interest of getting to the important work of this conference, I will be brief, but if I accomplish anything by speaking to you today, I hope it is to convey the Board's understanding of the unique and important role of community banks in our financial system as well as the Board's commitment, at the highest level, to consider how our supervisory and regulatory decisions affect those institutions. My fellow Board members and I know that community banks provide essential financial services to households, small businesses, and farms in communities throughout the country. We know that community banks serve many customers that large banks do not and provide services that are not offered by large banks in many communities. This circumstance is especially true in rural areas and other small communities, where community banks are sometimes the only retail financial institutions. We understand that community bankers serve members of their local communities who are not just their customers, but also their neighbors and their friends. We know the strong links these banks have to the people and businesses in their communities provide firsthand knowledge of local economic conditions. My colleagues on the Board understand, as I do, that these close ties give community bankers special insight and understanding into local needs so that they can tailor their products and services to meet those needs. Although community banks largely kept to their traditional business model of prudent, local lending and avoided the excessive risk-tasking that helped fuel the financial crisis, that crisis, and the deep recession that followed, devastated many communities and the banks that serve them. The significant improvement in the economy since then has helped communities and community banks, but I am well aware that the challenges for this sector continue, and my Board colleagues understand this also. We know and appreciate these concerns because the Board makes it our business to regularly and extensively meet with and talk to community bankers and industry leaders. The Board of Governors meets twice a year with the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, which includes representatives of community banks, thrifts, and credit unions in each of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts.1The Board also has a Subcommittee on Smaller Regional and Community Banking, headed by Governor Powell and including Governor Brainard.2 Let me also say that the experiences, aspirations, and challenges of community banking are not new to me. Before I became Chair of the Board of Governors and Vice Chair before that, I spent six years as president of the San Francisco Fed. In this role, I was responsible for the supervision of a substantial number of community banking organizations in the nine states of the 12th District. Among the things I learned from that experience is that, when it comes to bank regulation and supervision, one size does not fit all. To effectively promote safety and soundness and ensure consumer compliance without creating undue regulatory burden, rules and supervisory approaches should be tailored to different types of institutions. That is why the Congress chose to exempt community banks from many aspects of new, post-crisis regulations and why financial regulators, including the Fed, have otherwise recognized the differences between community banks and larger, more complex institutions. The Federal Reserve is committed to this approach to community bank oversight and to ensuring that new and existing regulations are not unduly burdensome for community banks. One way we are fulfilling this commitment is through the regulatory review required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). The Federal Reserve and other agencies involved in the EGRPRA process have so far held four in a series of six planned outreach meetings at locations across the country. We have heard many comments about community bank concerns and are taking those insights into account as we consider options for alleviating unnecessary regulatory burden. Let me conclude by returning to the occasion of this conference and what I believe it says about the Federal Reserve's commitment to supporting the ongoing role of community banking in America. In addition to its responsibilities for monetary policy and financial regulation and supervision, the Federal Reserve takes very seriously its role as a research institution. We believe strongly in the idea that high-quality research can add to knowledge and understanding and help inform economic and financial policymaking to yield better decisions that benefit society. The Fed instituted this conference in partnership with the CSBS because we believe that research can help us better understand the benefits that community banks provide to society and the challenges they face. The work presented at this conference and subsequent research that may be spurred by this work can deepen community bankers' understanding of their businesses, and it can help state and federal regulators make better-informed decisions. Ultimately, research can help provide answers to how community banks can continue to succeed in the 21st century. Thank you for this opportunity to speak, welcome to St. Louis, and I hope you enjoy the discussions of the next two days. 1.More information on the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council is available on the Board's websitehere.Return to text 2.Board member assignments are available on the Board's websitehere.Return to text