Governor Jerome H. Powell At the 2016 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York This paper reviews Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) communications from the time the Committee began issuing regular postmeeting statements in 1999 to the present.1The authors provide an extended and insightful discussion of the theory and practice of providing forward guidance about monetary policy. They offer one central lesson: Data-based forward guidance is mostly good, while time-based forward guidance is mostly bad. The authors show that data-based guidance has desirable characteristics and can make monetary policy more effective. When clearly articulated and well understood, it allows markets to react appropriately to incoming data, doing the heavy lifting for the central bank. Time-based guidance is found to have certain bad characteristics and should be avoided, except at the zero lower bound and when other options are not available or not working. Time-based guidance may reduce the sensitivity of rates to incoming macroeconomic data, suppress volatility, encourage risk-taking and increased leverage, and threaten financial stability. It may also put policymakers in a box when changes in the economy make it optimal to deviate from previously expressed guidance, but the Committee cannot do so without losing credibility. The authors blame time-based guidance for several episodes in which the Committee zigged when the market looked for it to zag, leaving market participants unhappy and, in the authors' view, the FOMC's credibility damaged. They argue that the Committee has relied too much on time-based guidance in recent years and should use it only parsimoniously in the future. I commend the authors for undertaking this enormously challenging and useful exercise. The paper forces us to reconsider the Committee's evolving understanding of the macroeconomic environment before, during, and after the Great Recession; its decisions and its communications; and the market's understanding of those decisions, which have sometimes deviated from what the Committee actually said. The distinction between time-based and data-based guidance is an important one, and the potential problems with time-based guidance are real and well described in the paper. That said, I am not convinced that this distinction has played a central role in determining the successes and challenges of FOMC communications in this remarkable era, or that it helps us improve in the future. The authors are, in their words, "unabashedly judgmental" in labeling specific communications to be either time- or data-based.2My own judgments differ in significant respects from those described in the paper. Discussion of Forward GuidanceI will start in December 2008, when the Committee said that "weak economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some time."3This relatively weak time-based guidance was strengthened in a series of steps until August 2011, when the time-based language became "at least through mid-2013."4The calendar reference was later extended in a couple of steps to "at least through mid-2015."5This guidance was explicitly time-based, and the authors seem to agree that, through this point, the guidance served its intended purpose at the zero lower bound by pushing down medium- and longer-term rates.6 At the December 2012 meeting, the Committee ended this calendar-based guidance. The Committee instead adopted thresholds, saying that it did not intend to raise rates at least as long as unemployment remained above 6-1/2 percent, inflation one to two years ahead was projected to be no higher than 2-1/2 percent, and longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored.7The adoption of thresholds was a clear change to data-based guidance, as its principal sponsors had frequently urged.8The point was not to provide additional stimulus at the time of adoption, but rather to allow market participants to adjust their expectations about future monetary policy in response to incoming data--exactly what the authors advocate.9 The Committee also used balance sheet policy through most of this period. The first two programs of large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs), popularly known as QE1 and QE2, and the maturity extension program were announced in terms of time and quantity--that is, a certain quantity of assets would be purchased over a certain time. In adopting QE3, by contrast, the Committee committed to continuing purchases until there was a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.10QE3 was fully data-contingent. Former Chairman Bernanke recounts in his recent book that he saw QE3 as akin to Mario Draghi's statement that the European Central Bank would do "whatever it takes."11He also notes that FOMC participants held divergent views on the potential costs and benefits of the program. Minutes of the relevant meetings described the complex discussions and differing views. Contemporaneous reports by Wall Street analysts show frustration and confusion about the Committee's intentions. When various FOMC communications suggested that the time to begin reducing purchases was nearing, long-term rates rose sharply--the so-called taper tantrum. The contention of this paper is that time-based guidance was responsible. But as the paper acknowledges, the open-ended, data-contingent nature of the QE3 program created a strong sense that the Fed was "all in" and that the purchases might go on for a long time. That powerful commitment "would set things up for some fireworks" when the time came to provide more precise guidance as to the timing of tapering, whether that was done through time- or data-based guidance.12While Committee communications are subject to fair criticism, I don't see an important role in this narrative for time-based guidance. Let's turn briefly to 2015 and the run-up to last December's increase in the federal funds rate--also an important focus of the paper. The authors and many market participants are critical of communication around the September meeting. With the June 2015 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) showing that 15 of 17 FOMC participants judged that appropriate policy would entail an initial increase in the federal funds rate by the end of 2015, markets saw about a 50 percent chance that the first increase would occur in September. This probability fell to about 30 percent after global markets experienced a sudden bout of volatility following China's surprise devaluation of its currency in August. At the September meeting, the FOMC decided to wait to see how global markets and the economy evolved, noting in its statement that "Recent global economic and financial developments may restrain economic activity somewhat and are likely to put further downward pressure on inflation in the near term."13 A data-driven Committee, making decisions meeting by meeting, is likely to surprise markets from time to time. The authors join many others in criticizing the "measured pace" period of 2004 through 2006, during which the Committee increased rates by 25 basis points at 17 consecutive FOMC meetings. A common criticism has been that this high level of predictability made investors complacent, encouraging a buildup of leverage and helping set the stage for the Global Financial Crisis. That criticism may well overstate the importance of the Committee's communications; nonetheless, a number of FOMC participants have said that the Committee intends to be "data driven" and not fall into an excessively predictable, data-insensitive path. Lower predictability implies more surprises. In the statement released after its October 2015 meeting, the Committee reemphasized data dependence and focused on the importance of incoming data for the Committee's decision "at its next meeting," which led the market to increase its estimated probability of a December rate increase from 38 percent to 50 percent.14The October and November non-farm payroll reports came in strong and above expectations, raising that probability by the time of the December meeting to about 90 percent. In other words, the Committee used modest time-based guidance to set the stage and then let incoming data do the heavy lifting. In the statement released after the FOMC's most recent meeting in January, the Committee said that, in evaluating future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, it would "assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation."15This language shows that the Committee has moved away from the time-based guidance of the crisis years. Although time-based guidance can create communications challenges, I see other factors as having been more important in recent years. In particular, the challenge of deciding when and how to use unconventional tools--and ultimately when and how to reduce that usage--is a great one. The task of communicating clearly about those decisions is equally great. And the reality of the FOMC's size and diversity, not to mention uncertainty about the evolving structure of the economy and the effects of monetary policy actions, means that we are still far from the ideal world of a fully worked out, clearly specified and transparent consensus on what economists call a "reaction function"--a complete description of how policy will respond to changes in economic conditions. Often when communicating about the path of policy, it will be hard to avoid a combination of the two forms of guidance. For example, the Committee has embraced the view that the equilibrium level of the federal funds rate is currently below its pre-crisis level and expects the funds rate to return only gradually to its longer-run value.16This view is a key aspect of many Committee participants' reaction functions, including mine. Try saying that without referring to time. The authors acknowledge that the distinction between rules and discretion is too simple to capture the problems that monetary policymakers face.17I would say the same of the distinction between time-based and data-based forward guidance. Lessons Learned and Suggested ImprovementsBefore turning to the paper's conclusions, I would like to put the Federal Reserve's communications into a broader context. In recent years, the FOMC has adopted many new and significant communications tools. Since the fall of 2007, policymakers have submitted projections in conjunction with four FOMC meetings each year; in 2012, those projections were augmented to include each participant's path for appropriate monetary policy. In 2011, the Chairman began holding quarterly press conferences. In 2012, the Committee first released its statement on Longer-run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which formalized the FOMC's 2 percent inflation objective and is reaffirmed each year at the January meeting. These and other changes have kept the Federal Reserve among the world's most transparent central banks in its communications with the public. With that as background, I find significant grounds for agreement and further analysis in the paper's concluding section, which lays out lessons learned and suggested improvements. The discussion of what is colloquially known as the "dot plot" included in the SEP is particularly interesting. The dot plot represents each FOMC participant's individual assessment of the path of the federal funds rate over the next three years that is most likely to promote maximum employment and stable prices.18 The dot plot presents a number of challenges. The individual dots are not tied to the individual macroeconomic forecasts presented in the SEP, and no information is provided on the identity of the forecaster--for example, voting members of the Committee are not distinguished from non-voting participants. There is no easy path to the identification of a Committee reaction function. The dots speak as of their date of publication after the FOMC meetings held in March, June, September, and December. Three months pass between SEPs. The economic outlook can change quite significantly, making the reigning dots look out of touch. On occasion, the dot plot and the postmeeting statement have seemed to send conflicting signals. The dot plot reflects individual views of appropriate policy, while the postmeeting statement reflects the consensus of the Committee. The authors weigh these challenges and ponder whether to eliminate the dot plot; some appear to favor that idea.19I doubt that most market participants would welcome the elimination of this chart. The SEP provides a number of benefits. It requires FOMC participants to write down their forecasts for inflation, unemployment, and growth, as well as their assessments of appropriate monetary policy. This exercise helps policymakers to be more systematic. In addition, by observing how the SEP changes over time, the public can better understand how Committee members react to changes in the economy. My view is that the dot plot, on balance, is helpful to market participants and hence to the Committee. As the dot plot enters its fifth year of existence, my hope is that we will be able to capture those benefits while avoiding its shortcomings. I agree with the paper's suggestion of greater emphasis on the degree of uncertainty around the projections, which is much larger than the dispersion of the individual forecasts. As you know, at its January meeting, the Committee discussed adding fan charts to the SEP. Fan charts could help emphasize that the economic outlook is uncertain, and that consequently there is considerable uncertainty around the path of policy. 1.The views expressed here are my own, and not those of the FOMC. See Michael Feroli, David Greenlaw, Peter Hooper, Frederic Mishkin, and Amir Sufi (2016), "Language after Liftoff: Fed Communication Away from the Zero Lower Bound," paper presented at the 2016 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, a conference sponsored by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, February 26; seehttps://research.chicagobooth.edu/igm/events/conferences/2016-usmonetaryforum.aspx.Return to text 2.See Feroli and others, "Language after Liftoff," in note 1, p. 20.Return to text 3.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "FOMC Statement and Board Approval of Discount Rate Requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and San Francisco," press release, December 16, paragraph 4.Return to text 4.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9, paragraph 3.Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 13, paragraph 5.Return to text 6.Some viewed this guidance as merely a forecast of Committee action, designed to better inform the market and reduce uncertainty. Others have argued that such guidance is understood as a promise to which the Committee will be held irrespective of future macroeconomic developments. The Committee never offered a single explanation, and participants may have had different views. Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015) argue that the Federal Reserve's time-based guidance initiated in August 2011 was highly effective in inducing market participants to change their beliefs about the Committee's reaction function and to regard monetary policy as more accommodative. Using Blue Chip survey data, the authors estimate that the perceived weight on resource slack roughly doubled between March 2011 and March 2012. In an August 2011 speech, Chairman Bernanke indicated that the guidance about the federal funds rate path was highly conditional on the outlook, saying, "in what the Committee judges to be the most likely scenarios for resource utilization and inflation in the medium term, the target for the federal funds rate would be held at its current low levels for at least two more years." (Ben S. Bernanke (2011), "The Near- and Longer-Term Prospects for the U.S. Economy," a speech delivered at "Achieving Maximum Long-Run Growth (PDF)," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26, p. 7.)Return to text 7.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 12, paragraph 5.Return to text 8.For example, see Charles L. Evans (2012), "Macroeconomic Effects of FOMC Forward Guidance," speech delivered at the Spring Panel on Economic Activity, Brookings Institution, Washington, March 22; and Alejandro Justiniano, Charles L. Evans, Jeffrey R. Campbell, and Jonas D.M. Fisher (2012), "Macroeconomic Effects of FOMC Forward Guidance (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 1-54.Return to text 9.The thresholds' useful life was fairly short because the unemployment rate fell sharply, from 8.0 percent in December 2012 to 6.2 percent in April 2014, while inflation remained below 2.0 percent.Return to text 10.The December 2012 FOMC statement indicated that, "If the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases." (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 12, paragraph 4.)Return to text 11.Ben S. Bernanke (2015),The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and Its Aftermath(New York: W.W. Norton), p. 532.Return to text 12.See Feroli and others, "Language after Liftoff," in note 1, p. 29.Return to text 13.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 17, paragraph 2.Return to text 14. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, October 28, paragraph 3.Return to text 15.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 27, paragraph 4.Return to text 16.For example, the January 2016 FOMC statement says, "The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run." (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 27, paragraph 4.)Return to text 17.Feroli and others, "Language after Liftoff," in note 1, p. 11; and Ben S. Bernanke and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997), "Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 11 (Spring), pp. 97-116.Return to text 18.In the SEP collected prior to the March and June FOMC meetings, participants submit projections for the current calendar year and two subsequent years; in the September SEP, the forecast horizon is extended out an additional calendar year. Thus, the forecast window does not remain constant for the different SEPs in a given year; Wrightson commentary has suggested that a rolling forecast horizon might be an improvement over the current calendar-year focus (Wrightson ICAP (2016), "January 26-27 FOMC Minutes Recap," February 18).Return to text 19.For instance, Michael Feroli (as quoted in a recent article) said, "I think they have outlived their usefulness and they risk sending a signal that (Fed officials) have a ‘plan' rather than that they are data dependent" (see Ann Saphir (2016), "Fed's ‘Dot Plot' Looks Increasingly out of Touch on Rates," Markets, Reuters, February 14, paragraph 8, http://in.reuters.com/article/us-usa-fed-path-analysis-idINKCN0VN0PU); and in a 2012 speech, former Governor of the Bank of Canada Mark Carney stated, "Overall research has not generally found that publishing a path leads to better outcomes." (Mark Carney (2012), "Guidance," a speech delivered to the CFA Society Toronto, Toronto, Canada, December 11, paragraph 24,www.bankofcanada.ca/2012/12/guidance.Return to text
Federal banking agencies today increased the number of small banks and savings associations eligible for an 18-month examination cycle rather than a 12-month cycle. The changes are intended to reduce regulatory compliance costs for smaller institutions, while still maintaining safety and soundness protections. Under the interim final rules, qualifying well-capitalized and well-managed banks and savings associations with less than $1 billion in total assets may now be eligible for an 18-month examination cycle. Previously, firms with less than $500 million in total assets could be eligible for the extended examination cycle. The examination cycle changes may also apply to qualifying well-capitalized and well-managed U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks with less than $1 billion in total assets. Regulators consider institutions to be well-capitalized and well-managed if they have a composite rating of 1 or 2--the top ratings in the five-point scale indicating the safety and soundness of a bank or savings association. The changes were implemented by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller Currency. The rules increase the number of institutions that may qualify for an 18-month examination cycle by approximately 617, to nearly 5,000 banks and savings associations. In addition, the rules increase the number of U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks that may qualify for an 18-month examination cycle by 26 branches and agencies, to a total of 89. The agencies acted following passage of the Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act by Congress in late 2015. Comments will be accepted for 60 days from publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML
On February 18, 2016, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on February 18, 2016, and will mature on February 25, 2016. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve plans to continue its previously announced periodic testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) with one operation in February. These operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. One operation will be conducted on February 18, 2016, for seven-day term deposits. The operation will offer floating-rate term deposits with the maximum individual award amount set at $5 billion, and the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Term deposits offered in the operation will include an early withdrawal feature and settle on the same day the operation is executed. Complete details will be announced on the day prior to the operation on the Board's website. The Federal Reserve plans to conduct a similar routine TDF test operation each quarter in 2016. The schedule and terms for future test operations will be announced at later dates. Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttp://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced a $131 million penalty against HSBC North America Holdings, Inc. and HSBC Finance Corporation for deficiencies in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. The penalty is being assessed in conjunction with an agreement involving similar deficiencies that HSBC announced Friday with the U.S. Department of Justice, other federal agencies, and the state attorneys general. The penalty assessed by the Board is the maximum amount allowed under the law, taking into account the circumstances of HSBC's unsafe and unsound practices and foreclosure activities. The penalty may be satisfied by providing borrower assistance or remediation in conjunction with the Department of Justice settlement, or by providing funding for nonprofit housing counseling organizations. If HSBC does not satisfy the full penalty amount within two years, the remaining amount must be paid to the U.S. Department of Treasury. The Board will closely monitor compliance by HSBC with the requirements of the order. The terms of the monetary assessment against HSBC are similar to those that were part of the penalties issued by the Board in February 2012 and July 2014 against six other mortgage servicing organizations that reached similar agreements with the U.S. Department of Justice and the state attorneys general. The Board previously issued an enforcement action in April 2011 requiring HSBC to correct its servicing and foreclosure-related deficiencies. That action was among 14 corrective actions issued against Board-supervised mortgage servicers or their parent holding companies for unsafe and unsound practices in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Centrue Financial Corporation, Clayton, Missouri and Centrue Bank, Streator, IllinoisWritten Agreement issued December 18, 2009Terminated February 16, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Asian Financial Corporation and Asian Bank, both of Philadelphia, PennsylvaniaOrder to Cease and Desist issued August 1, 2012Terminated January 19, 2016 New Peoples Bankshares, Inc. and New Peoples Bank, Inc., both of Honaker, VirginiaWritten Agreement issued July 29, 2010Terminated January 20, 2016 Severn Bancorp, Inc., Annapolis, MarylandSupervisory Agreement issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated November 29, 2009Terminated January 21, 2016 Northern States Financial Corporation, Waukegan, IllinoisWritten Agreement issued March 17, 2011Terminated January 22, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday approved the reappointment of 10 Federal Reserve Bank presidents and 10 first vice presidents by their respective boards of directors. Each individual has been approved to serve a new five-year term beginning March 1, 2016. The recently named presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and Dallas, as well as the recently appointed first vice presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Chicago, were approved for terms to February 28, 2021, at the time of their initial appointments. Under section 4 of the Federal Reserve Act, all Reserve Bank presidents and first vice presidents serve five-year terms that expire at the end of February in years ending in 1 or 6. Generally, presidents and first vice presidents who take office in intervening years are initially appointed for the remainder of the current term. Before the expiration of a president's term, the Class B and C directors of each Reserve Bank who are not affiliated with a supervised entity vote on whether to reappoint the president or first vice president to a new term. "The leaders of the Reserve Banks have important jobs and are expected to perform at a high level," said Governor Jerome H. Powell, chairman of the Board's Committee on Reserve Bank Affairs. "The eligible Reserve Bank directors, with significant input from the Board of Governors, conduct a rigorous process to inform their reappointment decisions." The reappointments by the boards of directors are based on performance assessments that include consideration of factors such as the ability of their president to effectively lead the Reserve Bank, the president's performance in achieving the Reserve Bank's and Federal Reserve System's objectives, and the president's ability to effectively represent the Federal Reserve to the public. The performance appraisal of the first vice president considers strategic leadership of the Reserve Bank, with a focus on operational areas and organization development, as well as contributions to System initiatives. Class B and C directors are a diverse group representing a wide range of business and community interests that are affected by Federal Reserve policies. An understanding of how the presidents are viewed in their respective Districts, which may be complemented with additional outreach to constituent representatives, helps to inform the directors' performance reviews. In addition, each president's performance is discussed annually by the chair and deputy chair of each Reserve Bank board and the Board of Governors' Committee on Federal Reserve Bank Affairs, and the performance of each first vice president is discussed by that group and the Bank's president. A list of presidents and first vice presidents, by Federal Reserve District, follows. The Board had previously approved terms to 2021 for Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis president Neel T. Kashkari, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas president Robert S. Kaplan, and for Ellen Bromagen as first vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and James D. Narron as first vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Boston: Eric S. Rosengren, president, and Kenneth C. Montgomery, first vice president New York: William C. Dudley, president, and Michael Strine, first vice president Philadelphia: Patrick T. Harker, president, and James D. Narron, first vice president (Mr. Narron's term begins on April 1, 2016.) Cleveland: Loretta J. Mester, president, and Gregory L. Stefani, first vice president Richmond: Jeffrey M. Lacker, president, and Mark L. Mullinix, first vice president Atlanta: Dennis P. Lockhart, president, and Marie C. Gooding, first vice president Chicago: Charles L. Evans, president, and Ellen Bromagen, first vice president St. Louis: James B. Bullard, president, and David A. Sapenaro, first vice president Minneapolis: Neel T. Kashkari, president, and James M. Lyon, first vice president Kansas City: Esther L. George, president, and Kelly J. Dubbert, first vice president Dallas: Robert S. Kaplan, president, and Helen E. Holcomb, first vice president San Francisco: John C. Williams, president, and Mark A Gould, first vice president For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued an interim final rule that amends Regulation I to implement provisions of the Fixing America's Surface Transportation (FAST) Act. The FAST Act reduced the dividend rate applicable to Reserve Bank depository institution stockholders with total assets of more than $10 billion (large member banks) to the lesser of 6 percent or the most recent 10-year Treasury auction rate prior to the dividend payment. The dividend rate for other member banks remains at 6 percent. Reserve Banks typically pay dividends to member banks in June and December each year. The interim final rule also adjusts the treatment of accrued dividends when a Reserve Bank issues or cancels capital stock owned by a large member bank. The interim final rule is effective upon publication in theFederal Register. The Board will accept comments on the interim final rule for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Comments:View
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the repeal of one regulation and a proposal to repeal a second in order to comply with statutory provisions that transferred certain consumer protection rulewriting authority to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). The Board repealed its Regulation AA (Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices) as proposed in August 2014 and is inviting public comment on the proposed repeal of Regulation C (Home Mortgage Disclosure). The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) repealed the Board's authority to write rules that address unfair or deceptive acts or practices, which were contained in Regulation AA. Regulation AA included the Board's "credit practices rule," which prohibited banks from using certain practices to enforce consumer credit obligations and from including these practices in their consumer credit contracts. The Dodd-Frank Act provides the CFPB separate authority to promulgate rules to identify and prohibit unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices. The Dodd-Frank Act also transferred rulemaking authority for the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act from the Board to the CFPB. The CFPB has issued final rules that supersede the Board's Regulation C. Because all rulemaking authority under HMDA concerning residential or commercial mortgages transferred to the CFPB, the Board is proposing to repeal its Regulation C. Comments on the proposed repeal of Regulation C must be submitted within 60 days from the date of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Regulation AAFederal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Regulation CFederal Registernotice:PDF|HTML
Ina reportthat comes one year after the publication of itsStrategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System, the Federal Reserve on Tuesday detailed the progress made and outlined anticipated steps for moving forward with its initiative to enhance payment system speed, efficiency, and security. To date, the January 2015 initiative has resulted in the creation of two task forces comprised of more than 500 industry participants devoted to bringing about faster and more secure payments in the United States. The task forces have compiled 36 criteria that describe desired attributes of a faster payment system and can be used to assess the effectiveness of potential solutions. Other important accomplishments include efforts to enhance payment system efficiency through work on standards, directories, and business-to-business payment improvements. In addition, joint efforts with industry participants recently resulted in a plan to implement the financial messaging standard ISO 20022 for U.S. wire transfer systems and advanced plans to implement widespread same-day ACH (automated clearing house) settlement. "We have seen many of the strategies and tactics included in the plan come to life through broad, unprecedented stakeholder support," said Esther George, president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City who is leading the initiative. "When implemented, the strategies will contribute to public confidence and the global competitiveness of the U.S. payment system." Federal Reserve Board Governor Jerome H. Powell, who co-chairs the initiative's oversight committee, said: "Our progress this past year is a consequence of the engagement and commitment of a diverse group of payment system stakeholders. Their ongoing collaboration will be essential in creating a payment system that offers greater speed, security and efficiency." Videos of George and Powell discussing the effort to improve the payments system are available online at:www.FedPaymentsImprovement.org. Moving forward, the Federal Reserve will continue to be a leader and a catalyst for improving the payment system, engaging in broad collaboration to benefit all payments participants, including financial institutions, businesses and consumers.
On February 18, 2016, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $5,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. ET to 12:30 p.m. ET, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. ET and 12:00 p.m. ET. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. ET on the notification date. As noted in the Federal Reserve Board's February 12, 2016,release, this operation is part of the continuing program of operational testing of policy tools designed to provide institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit operations. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meeting on January 25, 2016. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 26-27, 2016. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 26-27, 2016:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Energy Transition: Strategies for a New World," 35th Annual IHS CERAWeek, Houston, Texas I would like to thank Daniel Yergin for his kind invitation to speak this evening at the CERAWeek conference. The energy industry--more precisely, the price of oil--is on the minds of almost everyone these days, and this conference is addressing many important issues. I am a macroeconomist, and do not plan on focusing tonight on developments in the energy sector. But from time to time the price of oil becomes a macroeconomic issue, and this is one of those times. So I have been listening intently to the many experts who have already spoken here today, and look forward to the discussion that will follow this speech, in the belief that I will emerge with a better understanding of recent and future developments in the industry. To get things started, I thought I could provide some background on recent monetary policy decisions.1 As you all know, at our December meeting the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, to 1/4 to 1/2 percent.2At our meeting in January, we decided to maintain that range. The increase in December came after seven years during which the FOMC had kept the federal funds rate between 0 and 25 basis points. This ultra-low rate was in keeping with our congressional mandate to pursue a monetary policy that fosters maximum employment and price stability, which we define as 2 percent inflation. Our decision in December was based on the substantial improvement in the labor market and the Committee's confidence that inflation would return to our 2 percent goal over the medium term. Employment growth last year averaged a solid 230,000 per month, and the unemployment rate declined from 5.6 percent to 5.0 percent over the course of 2015--and declined further to 4.9 percent last month. This is close to the unemployment rate generally regarded as the full employment rate of unemployment. Inflation ran well below our target last year, held down by the transitory effects of declines in crude oil prices and also in the prices of non-oil imports. Prices for these goods have fallen further and as you all know, for longer than expected. Once these oil and import prices stop falling and level out, their effects on inflation will dissipate, which is the main reason we expect that inflation will rise to 2 percent over the medium term, supported by a further strengthening in labor market conditions. Of course, with the federal funds target now at between 25 and 50 basis points, and the effective federal funds rate currently almost at the center of that target range, our monetary policy remains accommodative. And, at the time of our January decision, my colleagues and I anticipated that economic conditions would evolve in a manner warranting only gradual increases in the federal funds rate, and that the federal funds rate would likely remain, for some time, below the levels that we expect to prevail in the longer run. I should emphasize, however, that that was an expectation, not a decision, and our future policy actions are by no means predetermined. During the years in which we held the federal funds rate near zero, the Federal Reserve also engaged in large-scale asset purchases to further ease financial conditions and promote economic recovery. Consequently, the Federal Reserve's balance sheet grew from less than $1 trillion in mid-2008 to $4.5 trillion by late 2014. As a result of the size of our balance sheet, the FOMC is employing new tools to implement monetary policy. In particular, to raise the federal funds rate we increased the interest rate we pay on reserve balances that depository institutions hold at the Federal Reserve. We also employed an overnight reverse repurchase facility, through which we interact with a broad range of firms to help provide a soft floor for the federal funds rate consistent with our target range.3These new tools have worked well, and the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates have increased as expected. We will continue to monitor these markets closely, and we can make adjustments to our tools if necessary to maintain control over money market rates. The economic data that have come in since our December interest rate decision suggest that the labor market has continued to improve. Although job gains slowed some last month, over the most recent three months payrolls have increased 230,000 jobs per month on average, as the unemployment rate declined. Moreover, the spending indicators that we have in hand for January point to a pickup in economic growth this quarter. Further, the 12-month change in average hourly earnings has moved up in recent months and stood at 2‑1/2 percent in January. In addition, the rate of core consumer price index inflation over the past 12 months exceeded 2 percent, though this was not true of the core price index of personal consumption expenditures that the Fed monitors closely. However--and there is frequently a "however" in our business--further declines in oil prices suggest that total inflation will likely remain low for somewhat longer than had been previously expected before moving back to 2 percent. In addition, global financial markets have been unusually volatile since the turn of the year. For instance, the S&P 500 volatility index (VIX) rose markedly in early January, though it remains below the levels it reached in August of last year and in 2011, and it last week declined below its average value since the start of the year. The large movements in asset prices likely reflect increased concern about the global outlook, particularly ongoing developments in China and the effects of the declines in the prices of oil and other commodities on commodity-exporting nations. Asset price declines may also reflect a reassessment of the prospects for growth in Europe and Japan, and perhaps also a recognition that U.S. gross domestic product and productivity growth have remained stubbornly low. If the recent financial market developments lead to a sustained tightening of financial conditions, they could signal a slowing in the global economy that could affect growth and inflation in the United States. But we have seen similar periods of volatility in recent years--including in the second half of 2011--that have left little visible imprint on the economy, and it is still early to judge the ramifications of the increased market volatility of the first seven weeks of 2016. As Chair Yellen said in her testimony to the Congress two weeks ago, while "global financial developments could produce a slowing in the economy, I think we want to be careful not to jump to a premature conclusion about what is in store for the U.S. economy." Of course, the FOMC is closely monitoring global economic and financial developments and assessing their implications for the labor market and inflation and the balance of risks to the outlook. Now, with our next FOMC meeting just three weeks away, I expect most of you are less interested in what we did at our previous meetings, and more interested in what we are going to do at the next one. I can't answer that question because, as I have emphasized in the past, we simply do not know. The world is an uncertain place--sometimes more uncertain than at other times--and all monetary policymakers can really be sure of is that what will happen is often different from what we currently expect. That is why the Committee has indicated that its policy decisions will be data dependent, which is to say that we will adjust policy appropriately in light of economic and financial events to best foster conditions consistent with the attainment of our employment and inflation objectives. As you know, in making our policy decisions, my FOMC colleagues and I spend considerable time assessing the incoming economic and financial information and its implications for the economic outlook. But we must also consider some other issues, two of which I would like to mention briefly today. First, most estimates of the full employment rate of unemployment are close to 5 percent. The actual rate of unemployment is now slightly below 5 percent, and the median view of the members of the FOMC is that it will decline further, perhaps even to the vicinity of 4.7 percent. The question is, should we be concerned about that possibility? In my view, a modest overshoot of this sort would be appropriate in current circumstances for two reasons. The first reason is that other measures of labor market conditions--such as the fraction of workers with part-time employment who would prefer to work full time and the number of people not actively looking for work who would like to work--indicate that more slack may remain in the labor market than the unemployment rate alone would suggest. And the second reason is that with inflation currently well below 2 percent, a modest overshoot could actually be helpful in moving inflation back to 2 percent more rapidly. Nonetheless, a persistent large overshoot of our employment mandate would risk an undesirable rise in inflation that might require a relatively abrupt policy tightening, which could inadvertently push the economy into recession. Monetary policy should aim to avoid such risks and keep the expansion on a sustainable track. The second issue is how best to integrate balance sheet policy with interest rate policy. The FOMC has indicated that the Federal Reserve will, in the longer run, hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively--which will require us to reduce the size of our balance sheet substantially. But that statement leaves open the question of when we should begin that process. Because the tools I mentioned earlier--the payment of interest on reserve balances and the overnight reverse repurchase facility--can be used to raise the federal funds rate independent of the size of the balance sheet, we have the flexibility to adjust the size of our balance sheet at the appropriate time. With the federal funds rate still quite low and expected to rise only gradually, there is some benefit to maintaining a larger balance sheet for a time. Doing so should help support accommodative financial conditions and so reduce the risks to the economy in the event of an adverse shock. Consistent with this view, the Committee has decided to continue to reinvest principal payments from its securities portfolio until normalization of the federal funds rate is well under way. The decision about when to cease or begin phasing out reinvestment will depend on how economic and financial conditions and the economic outlook evolve.4 With that background, I thank you for listening, and look forward to continuing the discussion, initially with Dan Yergin. 1.I am grateful to William English, Trevor Reeve, and Stacey Tevlin for their assistance. My comments today reflect my own views and are not an official position of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2015), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 16,www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20151216a.htm.Return to text 3.The Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans are available atwww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm.Return to text 4.See the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans (see note 3) as well as the discussion under the heading "System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy" in the minutes of the September 2015 Committee meeting (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20150917.htm).Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics, Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York I would like to thank the Council on Foreign Relations for the kind invitation to come meet with all of you this morning. I am looking forward to a lively discussion. To get things started, I thought I could provide some background on recent monetary policy decisions.1 As you all know, at our December meeting my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, to 1/4 to 1/2 percent.2This increase came after seven years during which we kept the federal funds rate at what we call the ELB--the effective lower bound. This ultra-low rate was in keeping with our congressional mandate to pursue a monetary policy that fosters maximum employment and price stability, which we define as 2 percent inflation. Our decision in December was based on the substantial improvement in the labor market and the Committee's confidence that inflation would return to our 2 percent goal over the medium term. Employment growth last year averaged a solid 220,000 per month, and the unemployment rate declined from 5.6 percent to 5.0 percent over the course of 2015. Inflation ran well below our target last year, held down by the transitory effects of declines in crude oil prices and also in the prices of non-oil imports. Prices for these goods have fallen further and for longer than expected. Once these oil and import prices stop falling and level out, their effects on inflation will dissipate, which is why we expect that inflation will rise to 2 percent over the medium term, supported by a further strengthening in labor market conditions. I would note that our monetary policy remains accommodative after the small increase in the federal funds rate adopted in December. And my colleagues and I anticipate that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate, and that the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below the levels that we expect to prevail in the longer run. Given the large size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, the FOMC is employing new tools to implement monetary policy. In particular, to raise the federal funds rate we increased the interest rate we pay on reserve balances that depository institutions hold at the Federal Reserve. We also employed an overnight reverse repurchase facility, through which we interact with a broad range of firms to help provide a soft floor for the federal funds rate consistent with our target range.3These new tools have worked well, and the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates have increased slightly, as expected. We will continue to monitor financial market developments closely, and we can make adjustments to our tools if necessary to maintain control over money market rates. At our meeting last week, we left our target for the federal funds rate unchanged. Economic data over the intermeeting period suggested that improvement in labor market conditions continued even as economic growth slowed late last year. But further declines in oil prices and increases in the foreign exchange value of the dollar suggested that inflation would likely remain low for somewhat longer than had been previously expected before moving back to 2 percent. In addition, increased concern about the global outlook, particularly the ongoing structural adjustments in China and the effects of the declines in the prices of oil and other commodities on commodity exporting nations, appeared early this year to have triggered volatility in global asset markets. At this point, it is difficult to judge the likely implications of this volatility. If these developments lead to a persistent tightening of financial conditions, they could signal a slowing in the global economy that could affect growth and inflation in the United States. But we have seen similar periods of volatility in recent years that have left little permanent imprint on the economy. As the FOMC said in its statement last week, we are closely monitoring global economic and financial developments and assessing their implications for the labor market and inflation, and for the balance of risks to the outlook.4 Now, I expect that in a few minutes one of you will ask not about what we did at our last meeting, but rather what we are going to do at the next one. I can't answer that question because, as I have emphasized in the past, we simply do not know. The world is an uncertain place, and all monetary policymakers can really be sure of is that what will happen is often different from what we currently expect. That is why the Committee has indicated that its policy decisions will be data dependent. That is, we will adjust policy appropriately in light of economic and financial events to best foster conditions consistent with the attainment of our employment and inflation objectives. As you know, in making our policy decisions, my FOMC colleagues and I spend considerable time assessing the incoming economic and financial information and its implications for the economic outlook. But we also must consider some other issues, two of which I would like to mention briefly today. First, should we be concerned about the possibility of the unemployment rate falling somewhat below its longer-run normal level, as the most recent FOMC projections suggest? In my view, a modest overshoot of this sort would be appropriate in current circumstances for two reasons. First, other measures of labor market conditions--such as the fraction of workers with part-time employment who would prefer to work full time and the number of people out of the labor force who would like to work--indicate that more slack may remain in labor market than the unemployment rate alone would suggest. Second, with inflation currently well below 2 percent, a modest overshoot actually could be helpful in moving inflation back to 2 percent more rapidly. Nonetheless, a persistent large overshoot of our employment mandate would risk an undesirable rise in inflation that might require a relatively abrupt policy tightening, which could inadvertently push the economy into recession. Monetary policy should aim to avoid such risks and keep the expansion on a sustainable track. In this context, I would point out that at our January meeting, we reaffirmed our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy with an adjustment to clarify that our inflation goal is symmetric.5That is, the Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below our objective. In my view, even if inflation was expected to return to 2 percent over time, persistent deviations from our goal in either direction could cause economic harm and could ultimately unmoor longer-term inflation expectations. Of course, whether the Committee would take action to address a persistent deviation from its inflation objective would depend on the circumstances--and, in particular, on the outlook for employment and inflation and an assessment of the likely lags in the effects of monetary policy. My second topic is how best to integrate balance sheet policy with interest rate policy. The Committee has indicated that the Federal Reserve will, in the longer run, hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. But that statement leaves open the question of when we should begin to reduce the size of our balance sheet. Because the tools I mentioned earlier--the payment of interest on reserve balances and the overnight reverse repurchase facility--can be used to raise the federal funds rate independent of the size of the balance sheet, we have the flexibility to adjust the size of our balance sheet at the appropriate time. With the federal funds rate still quite low and expected to rise only gradually, I think there is some benefit to maintaining a larger balance sheet for a time. Doing so should help support accommodative financial conditions and so reduce the downside risks to the economic outlook in the event of a future adverse shock to the economy. Consistent with this view, the Committee has decided to continue to reinvest principal payments from its securities portfolio until normalization of the federal funds rate is well under way. The decision about when to cease or begin phasing out reinvestment will depend on how economic and financial conditions and the economic outlook evolve.6 Thank you. I would be happy to respond to some questions, starting with those from our moderator today, Tom Keene. 1. I am grateful to William English for his assistance. My comments today reflect my own views and are not an official position of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2015), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 16,www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20151216a.htm.Return to text 3. The Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans are available atwww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm.Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2016), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 27,www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20160127a.htm.Return to text 5. The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, amended effective January 26, 2016, is available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_20160126.pdf.Return to text 6. See the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans (see note 1) as well as the discussion under the heading "System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy" in the minutes of the September 2015 Committee meeting (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20150917.htm).Return to text
Louise L. Roseman, director of the Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, will retire later this year after more than 30 years of service to the Federal Reserve Board, including 17 as director. The division oversees the Reserve Banks' operations, including their provision of payment services to the banking and financial system and fiscal agency services to the Treasury and other government agencies. It also supports the Board's responsibilities as the issuance authority for U.S. currency; develops regulations and policies governing payment, clearing, and settlement systems; supervises systemically important financial market infrastructures; supports efforts to foster the efficiency and integrity of the U.S. payments system more broadly; and conducts research on a variety of payment, clearing, and settlement topics. "Louise's vision and energy during a time of rapid technological innovation have contributed enormously to the Federal Reserve's important mission of fostering a safe and efficient payment system," said Chair Janet L. Yellen. "We thank her for her dedicated service." Ms. Roseman began her career at the Board in 1985 when she joined the division as a program leader. She was appointed to official staff in 1987, promoted to associate director in 1994, and made division director in 1999. She holds a B.A. from Georgetown University and an M.B.A. from George Washington University. The Board will begin a search for her successor. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At "The Lender of Last Resort: An International Perspective," a conference sponsored by the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation, Washington, D.C. I would like to thank Hal Scott for inviting me to address this conference.1 The financial system is built on trust, which, history shows, from time to time breaks down as a financial panic develops. Fortunately, major panics are relatively rare, but as we all know following the Great Financial Crisis, when they do occur they can be extremely destructive of economic activity. During the Great Financial Crisis, the Federal Reserve System worked together with the Treasury and other parts of the U.S. government to limit the damage caused by the crisis. Although the financial crisis inflicted massive damage on the economy and on the public, the damage would have been far greater had the Fed not deployed its lender of last resort powers to deal with the incipient breakdown of the functioning of the U.S. monetary and credit systems. Changes in Regulation and SupervisionIn the wake of the crisis, acting within the framework of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve and the other supervisory agencies have taken a number of steps that reduce the likelihood that lender-of-last-resort loans will be needed. First and foremost, banks and bank holding companies are much better capitalized. Regulatory requirements have been made more stringent, global systemically important banks are subject to substantial additional capital requirements, and capital planning and supervisory stress testing make capital regulation more forward looking--and the importance of the stress tests bears emphasis. Largely as a result of these measures, the common equity capital ratios of the largest U.S. bank holding companies have more than doubled since the crisis. In addition, banking organizations are, for the first time, subject to a numerical liquidity requirement. The requirement ensures that large banking organizations maintain buffers of high-quality liquid assets sufficient to meet cash outflows during a 30-day episode of systemic and idiosyncratic liquidity stress. In addition, the Financial Stability Oversight Council has designated four key nonbanking institutions as "systemically important financial institutions," and these firms are also subject to supervision and regulation by the Federal Reserve. These changes in supervision and regulation, along with the enhancement of resolution mechanisms for financial institutions, have made the financial system more resilient and lessened the probability that a lender of last resort will be needed to deal with financial stresses in the future. Because the regulated firms are much better capitalized, doubts about their financial condition are less likely to arise, making them in turn less likely to lose access to funding in the marketplace. Moreover, their substantial stockpiles of liquid assets should allow them to weather temporary periods of illiquidity without assistance or, if necessary, provide time for the authorities to implement an orderly resolution. While we have likely reduced the probability that lender of last resort loans will be needed in the future, we have not reduced that probability to zero. We could, presumably, require financial institutions to fund illiquid assets entirely with longer-term debt and equity or, equivalently, allow them to use short-term liabilities to fund only safe and highly liquid assets. However, such an approach would be costly in terms of reduced lending to American businesses and households. Moreover, as yields on credit products rise and yields on cash-like instruments decline, lending would become increasingly profitable and would likely move outside the regulated sector, probably leading to a need to widen the regulatory perimeter of the financial system. Lending to Insured Depository InstitutionsAlthough attention following the passage of Dodd-Frank Act has focused on the limitations it places on lender-of-last-resort lending, it must be noted that, if necessary and appropriate, the Federal Reserve has the authority to act as lender of last resort in several ways.Most importantly, the Fed retains the power to extend discount window loans to insured depository institutions--including commercial banks, thrift institutions, credit unions, or U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks.Such loans can be to individual institutions facing funding pressures, or they can be to banks more generally to address broader financial stresses.2 Since the Great Depression, the Fed's actions as lender of last resort were undertaken using its authority to provide discount window funding to insured depository institutions. Such was the case in the Federal Reserve's reaction to the Penn Central default of 1970, the stock market crash of 1987, the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and the initial stages of the recent financial crisis in August 2007. Discount window loans have to be collateralized to the satisfaction of the lending Reserve Bank, and it is noteworthy that all of the Federal Reserve System's lending during the Great Financial Crisis was collateralized and that all the loans have been repaid in full, on time, and with interest. Although the Dodd-Frank Act did not change the Fed's authority to lend to insured depository institutions, it has changed, among other things, the reporting requirements for such loans. The act requires the Fed to publish information on any discount window loan, including the identity of the borrowers, with a two-year lag. This change is consequential, because an important challenge for the Federal Reserve over the years has been the stigma associated with borrowing from the discount window.3Discount window access cannot serve as an effective means to backstop insured depository institutions' liquidity if banks fear that borrowing from the discount window will signal to the public, their competitors, or their counterparties that the bank is in trouble. Prior to Dodd-Frank, the Federal Reserve only published information on discount window borrowing in aggregate, but stigma was nonetheless an issue. And I suspect that the stigma associated with the discount window is even higher, given the public's incorrect association of ordinary discount window borrowing with "bailouts." While the two-year lag should help limit the increase in stigma associated with the increased reporting requirement, the fact that the Fed will no longer be able to assert unequivocally that discount window borrowing is strictly confidential will likely add to the challenge of reducing stigma. That aside, the Fed's ability to act as lender of last resort to insured depository institutions was not significantly impeded by the Dodd-Frank Act. The Shadow Banking SystemDuring a crisis, liquidity pressures can materialize in the shadow banking sector--that is, the set of nonbanks that use a range of markets and instruments to provide financing to borrowers. At the time of their initial difficulties, both Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers were in the shadow banking system. To help improve the resiliency of this sector, a few new regulations have been introduced, including the final rule on risk retention in securitization issued jointly by the Federal Reserve and five other agencies in October 2014 and the new money market fund rules issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in July 2014. Other provisions implemented since the crisis that should help address risks in the nonbank segment of the credit system include the central clearing requirement for standardized over-the-counter derivatives and margin requirements for uncleared swaps, as well as disclosure requirements that provide investors with standardized loan-level information for securitizations backed by certain assets, including residential and commercial mortgages.4More recently, the SEC has also proposed rules to modernize data reporting by investment companies and advisers, as well as to enhance liquidity risk management and disclosure by open-end mutual funds, including exchange-traded funds. In addition, the Federal Reserve can, if needed in an emergency, and with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, lend through a broad-based facility, including to nonbanks, to provide liquidity to financial markets. Indeed, during the financial crisis--which can be thought of as an old-fashioned bank run, but on the shadow banks--the Fed's credit facilities were used in an effort to stop the run in the shadow banking system. Such broad-based facilities were instrumental in ensuring that money market mutual funds were able to liquefy their assets and so meet investor withdrawals, that the markets for critical short-term funding remained open, and that funding remained available for securitizations that were, in turn, funding loans to students, car buyers, small businesses, and others.The facilities were many and varied, and developed as needed, because the U.S. financial system is complex and, as the crisis unfolded, the nature of the next phase was largely unforeseeable.In several of these interventions, the Fed was lending to increase the liquidity of, or activity in, securities markets, in order to maintain the flow of essential credit to businesses and to households.5Had that flow of credit ceased, the financial crisis, the severe recession that resulted, and the consequences for the U.S. economy, and thus every American, would have been far more serious. In November of last year, in a revision to its regulations reflecting the changes to the Federal Reserve's emergency lending authority included in the Dodd-Frank Act, the Board spelled out how the Federal Reserve would design and operate such broad-based emergency lending facilities in the future. Among other things, an emergency facility would be designed to provide liquidity to a market or sector of the financial system and not be for the purpose of assisting a specific firm, or group of firms, in avoiding bankruptcy. "Broad based" is defined to mean that there are at least five potential participants; further, even if many more than five firms were eligible for the facility, it could not be considered "broad based" if its purpose was to assist failing firms avoid bankruptcy or resolution, or to lend to insolvent borrowers. In addition, the interest rates on the loans would be at penalty rates above those on similar forms of credit in normal times, and the loans would be backed by collateral that was sufficient to protect the taxpayer from losses. All of these criteria are consistent with how the Federal Reserve operated its broad-based facilities in the crisis. Lending to Individual Nonbank InstitutionsDuring the crisis, the Federal Reserve also lent to individual nonbank institutions whose default would have been extremely damaging for the financial system and the state of the economy.6The Dodd-Frank Act removed the Federal Reserve's authority to lend to an individual troubled institution.7Instead, the act required large banks and systemically important nonbanks to submit plans under which they could be resolved under bankruptcy in a rapid and orderly manner if they suffered material financial distress. In addition, it established expanded authority for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to resolve a troubled systemic institution in an orderly manner that would not disrupt the rest of the financial system. This expanded power includes the authority to convert some existing creditor claims into equity in a new bridge institution. If liquidity problems arose at the new bridge institution, the FDIC could guarantee the institution's short-term liabilities, or it could act as a lender of last resort using funds provided by the Treasury and ultimately repaid by the institution and, if necessary, the banking industry through assessments. Deciding what authority should be given to a potential lender of last resort requires weighing the costs and benefits including, importantly, moral hazard. Moral hazard costs may be substantial, especially when the potential borrower got itself into trouble by taking on excessive risk, and especially if the loan is seen as expanding the safety net. But the costs of a disorderly default of a large interconnected firm may also be substantial, especially when the financial system is in a fragile state--as was the case in the default of Lehman Brothers. The best way to deal with those types of situations is to prevent them from occurring. Such prevention requires appropriately tight supervision and regulation, consistent with the changes to supervision and regulation introduced in the past five years in the United States. Further, strengthening resolution procedures to the point where they can be used to resolve an insolvent institution without causing runs and exacerbating a potential crisis is an essential component of the reform strategy underlying the Dodd-Frank Act.8 Concluding CommentsOverall, the U.S. financial agencies collectively have substantial lender-of-last-resort authorities to meet future contingencies. The Federal Reserve maintains the ability to provide liquidity to markets during times of unusual financial stress, including the authority to lend to insured depository institutions. Indeed, for the 70 years between the Great Depression and the recent financial crisis, the Fed executed its lender-of-last-resort responsibility exclusively through such loans. Moreover, broad-based facilities of the sort that the Fed operated during the financial crisis generally could still be introduced under our new regulations if they were needed to limit the effect of a future crisis on financial markets and the economy. And while the Federal Reserve no longer can lend to individually troubled nonbanks, the FDIC's expanded resolution authorities should allow it to address troubles at such institutions with sufficiently low risk of cascading disruptions to the rest of the financial system and thus the economy. Handling such situations through resolution has the advantage of ensuring that any costs are primarily incurred by the existing owners and creditors of the troubled firm, but such an approach is currently untried. It is important that the government have the ability to execute the resolution seamlessly and with little or no warning--for example, Bear Stearns informed the Fed on a Thursday that it would default on Friday.9 There are nonetheless three major sources of concern about potential weaknesses in the new framework for financial crisis management that has been introduced since the Great Financial Crisis. The first is its failure to resolve the problem of stigma--that is, the stigma of borrowing from the central bank at a time when the financial markets are on guard, looking for signs of weakness in individual financial institutions at a time of overall financial stress.10Indeed, some of the Dodd-Frank Act reporting requirements may worsen the stigma problem.11 The second is a concern that arises from the nature of financial and other crises. It is essential that we build strong frameworks to deal with potential crisis situations, and Dodd-Frank has done that. But these plans need to ensure that the authorities retain the capacity to deal with unanticipated events, for unanticipated events are inevitable. Retaining the needed flexibility may conflict with the desire to reduce moral hazard to a minimum. But, in simple language: Strengthening fire prevention regulations does not imply that the fire brigade should be disbanded.12 Third, this concern is heightened by a related problem:The new system has not undergone its own stress test.That is, in one sense, fortunate, for the financial system will undergo its fundamental stress test only when we have to deal with the next potential financial crisis. That day will likely come later than it would have without Dodd-Frank and the excellent work done by regulators in the United States and around the world in strengthening financial institutions and the financial system. But it will come, and when it comes, we will need the flexibility required to deal with it. 1.My comments today reflect my own views and are not an official position of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to William Nelson, Scott Alvarez, Rochelle Edge, William English, Michael Gibson, and Mark van der Weide of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance.Return to text 2.The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA) imposes costs and a reporting requirement on the Federal Reserve Board in some cases if Federal Reserve lending to a weak depository institution that ultimately fails raises the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's costs of resolving the institution.Return to text 3.The President's Working Group on Financial Markets and the Financial Stability Forum (since renamed the Financial Stability Board) identified the stigma associated with borrowing from the Federal Reserve's discount window as a significant threat to financial stability. See the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments" (Washington: President's Working Group, March), p. 9; FSF Working Group on Market and Institutional Resilience (2008),Interim Report to the G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors(Basel: Financial Stability Forum, April), p. 8; and FSF Working Group on Market and Institutional Resilience (2008),Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience(Basel: FSF, October), p. 47.Return to text 4.The SEC's rule on disclosure requirements for certain securitizations was adopted by the SEC in August 2014. The intent of these rules is to make it easier for investors to review and access the information they need to make informed investment decisions, including independently conducting due diligence so as to better assess the credit risk of asset-backed securities.Return to text 5.For example, on October 7, 2008, the Federal Reserve established the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF). Under the CPFF, the Federal Reserve lent to a special purpose vehicle that in turn purchased top-rated three-month commercial paper directly from eligible issuers. And on November 25, 2008, the Federal Reserve and Treasury announced the creation of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). Under the TALF, the Federal Reserve extended loans to investors in certain triple-A-rated asset-backed securities (ABS) to promote renewed issuance of ABS, thereby increasing the availability of credit to households and small businesses. See Dietrich Domanski, Richhild Moessner, and William Nelson (2014), "Central Banks as Lenders of Last Resort: Experiences during the 2007-2010 Crisis and Lessons for the Future (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-110 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May).Return to text 6.The Federal Reserve used its authority to lend to individual nonbank institutions two times during the crisis: It lent to Bear Stearns and AIG (American International Group, Inc.). Working with the Treasury and the FDIC, it agreed to lend, but did not in fact extend credit, as part of ring-fence arrangements established for two additional firms, Bank of America and Citigroup. See Domanski, Moessner, and Nelson, "Central Banks as Lenders of Last Resort," in note 5.Return to text 7.The Federal Reserve's authority to lend to depository institutions cannot be used as a backchannel for lending to nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies.Return to text 8.C.A.E. Goodhart (1999), "Myths about Lender of Last Resort,"International Finance,vol. 2 (November), pp. 339-60. See also a forthcoming paper by Goodhart titled "Balancing Lender-of-Last-Resort Assistance with Avoidance of Moral Hazard."Return to text 9.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "Report Pursuant to Section 129 of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008: Loan to Facilitate the Acquisition of the Bear Stearns Companies, Inc. by JPMorgan Chase & Co. (PDF)" (Washington: Board of Governors).Return to text 10.This concern is emphasized in Ben Bernanke's blog post, "Fed Emergency Lending," Brookings Institution, December 3, 2015.Return to text 11.In particular, as I suggested earlier, the additional reporting requirements under the Dodd-Frank Act could increase potential borrowers' concerns that the public, their creditors, or their counterparties could learn about their borrowing and conclude that the bank is in trouble.Return to text 12.I think it would be a serious mistake, as some have suggested, to go beyond the limitations on the Federal Reserve's emergency lending authority that are set out in the Dodd-Frank Act.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the 2016 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York Beginning in 2014, we saw confident predictions of a coming strong divergence in monetary policy among the major economies. To date, there has been less policy divergence in reality than had been predicted. This observation raises the question of whether there may be limits on policy divergence in current circumstances. Such limits might reflect common forces buffeting economies around the world or the powerful transmission of shocks across borders through exchange rate and other financial channels that may have the effect of front-running monetary policy adjustments in the vicinity of the zero lower bound. Put differently, predictions that U.S. monetary policy would chart a notably divergent path have been tempered by powerful crosscurrents from abroad.1 How Different Are Underlying Conditions?Before turning to divergences in policy, it is useful to review briefly the extent of differences in the underlying economic conditions in the major advanced economies. While the recovery from the global financial crisis has been frustratingly slow in every major economy, there nonetheless have been important differences in the pace and extent of healing. Speaking loosely, among the advanced economies, the United States and United Kingdom appear farthest along in closing resource gaps, Japan is next in line, and the euro area has been somewhat slower to recover. In the United States, resource utilization has increased substantially over the past five years. The U.S. unemployment rate is now under 5 percent, compared with 10 percent at its recent peak. Even so, there is evidence that some labor market slack still remains.2The United Kingdom has experienced a rapid drop in unemployment to 5.1 percent, as low as pre-crisis levels, and labor force participation has remained relatively strong. In contrast, unemployment in the euro area was 10-1/2 percent in the fourth quarter, down just 1-3/4 percentage points from its recent peak and still well above pre-crisis levels. Accordingly, market participants have expected policy in the United States and the United Kingdom to become less accommodative, while remaining very accommodative over the medium term in the euro area.3 In Japan, expectations of monetary policy divergence have reflected Japan's long period of disappointments on its inflation target to a greater extent than its remaining resource gap. Japan's unemployment rate is 3.3 percent, already below the previous cyclical trough, and the International Monetary Fund estimates the output gap to have been the same in Japan and the United States in 2015 at 1-1/2 percent. However, with inflation in Japan previously having been near zero for an extended period and inflation expectations under pressure, the Bank of Japan's commitment to increasing inflation expectations and moving inflation up to its 2 percent target has led market participants to expect extremely accommodative monetary policy to persist for quite a while. Currently, however, there are smaller differences among the major economies on measures of realized and expected inflation than there are on resource utilization. In 2015, the 12-month change in total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation in the United States was 0.6 percent, while headline inflation in the United Kingdom, euro area, and Japan were 0.2 percent. All inflation rates are well below target. Of course, to the extent that the downward pressure on global inflation is due to falling oil prices, this pressure would be expected to abate if oil prices stabilize. But even after removing energy prices, core PCE inflation has come in consistently under the Federal Reserve's 2 percent target here in the United States and does not look very different from inflation in economies that are expected to maintain accommodative monetary policy for some time. Core PCE inflation, or inflation excluding food and energy prices, has remained stubbornly in the vicinity of 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent over the past three years in the United States, similar to the United Kingdom and not very different from the roughly 1 percent core inflation in the euro area and Japan. We also see notable similarities in the recent deterioration in market measures of inflation expectations. While in the euro area, swaps-based inflation compensation has fallen about 3/4 percentage point since the middle of 2014 and is now around 1-1/2 percent at the five-year, five-year-ahead horizon, in the United States, swaps-based inflation compensation has fallen 1 full percentage point over the same period and is now at 1-3/4 percent. Japan has experienced a similar decline over this period, while the United Kingdom has seen a much more modest decline. With realized and expected future inflation not showing large differences, the expectation of monetary policy divergence between the United States, on the one hand, and the United Kingdom and the euro area, on the other, must rest to a large extent on remaining differences in resource utilization and expectations that inflation outcomes will diverge as a result of these differences. However, it is important to note that the extent of inflation divergence generated by differences in resource utilization across countries is likely much smaller now than it has been in earlier decades. Recent research suggests a dramatic flattening of the Phillips curve in recent decades.4If this finding continues to hold true, resource utilization would need to differ more sharply across national economies to produce a noticeable difference in inflation. The persistence of relatively soft core PCE inflation readings in the United States, despite a substantial improvement in employment, suggests we should be cautious in relying on the historical relationship between employment gains and stronger inflation in today's economy. Moreover, the softening in market-based measures of inflation expectations and some hints of weakening in survey measures deserve our attention. This deterioration in inflation expectations and a weakened link between labor market tightening and inflation--together with the asymmetry of policy in the vicinity of the lower bound--lead me to put a high premium on evidence that actual inflation is firming sustainably. Putting these pieces of evidence together suggests that if core inflation remains below target in all major advanced economies and inflation expectations remain under pressure in many, I might expect policy divergence to remain more limited than previously predicted. Common ConditionsTo the extent that we are observing limited divergence in inflation outcomes and less divergence in realized policy paths than many anticipated, this could be attributable to common shocks or trends that cause economic conditions to be synchronized across economies. The sharp repeated declines in the price of oil have been a major common factor depressing headline inflation and are also likely feeding into low core inflation, although to a lesser extent.5As noted previously, these price declines have led headline inflation across the globe to behave quite similarly over this time period. Even so, most observers expect this source of convergence in inflationary outcomes to eventually fade and thereafter not affect monetary policy paths over the medium term. In contrast, a more persistent source of convergence may be found in an apparent decline in the neutral rate of interest. The neutral rate of interest--or the rate of interest consistent with the economy remaining at its potential rate of output and inflation remaining at target level--appears to have declined over the past 30 years in the United States and is now at historically low levels.6Similarly, longer-run interest rates appear also to have fallen across a broad group of advanced and emerging market economies, suggesting that neutral rates are at historically low levels in many countries around the world and near or below zero in the major advanced foreign economies.7Although the reasons for the declines in neutral rates are not perfectly understood and may differ across countries, there are some common drivers, such as slower productivity and labor force growth and a heightened sensitivity to risk.8 The very low levels of the shorter run neutral rate reflect in part headwinds from the crisis that are likely to dissipate over time. However, if many of the common forces holding down neutral rates prove persistent, then neutral rates may remain low through the medium term, implying a shallower path for policy trajectories. The global economy is also experiencing a downshift in emerging market growth momentum led by China, which may prove somewhat persistent. Whereas earlier in the recovery there was a striking divergence between the relatively buoyant growth in major emerging economies and depressed growth in advanced economies, lately the extent of divergence has diminished noticeably.9China is undergoing a challenging set of economic transitions. Trend growth has slowed substantially and is expected to slow further, and the composition of growth is shifting away from resource-intensive manufacturing and exports toward a greater share for consumption and services. China's investment has slowed sharply recently after accounting for nearly one-third of global investment over the past three years and about one-half of global consumption in certain metals such as iron ore, aluminum, copper, and nickel. Commodity exporters and close trading partners in Asia will be most affected, but the changes in the composition and rate of growth in a country that has accounted for about one-third of the growth in world output and trade will likely ripple through the global economy much more generally. Amplified SpilloversOf course, policy divergence among major economies could be limited by rapid and strong transmission of foreign shocks across borders. In particular, although the U.S. real economy has traditionally been seen as more insulated from foreign trade shocks than many smaller economies, the combination of the highly global role of the dollar and U.S. financial markets and the proximity to the zero lower bound may be amplifying spillovers from foreign financial conditions. By one rough estimate, accounting for the net effect of exchange rate appreciation and changes in equity valuations and long term yields, over the past year and a half, the United States has experienced a tightening of financial conditions that is the equivalent of an additional increase of over 75 basis points in the federal funds rate.10 The transmission of divergent economic conditions across borders typically occurs though a couple of different channels. First, a decline in demand in one country reduces its demand for imports from other countries. Second, the fall in economic activity would be expected to trigger a more accommodative monetary policy, which helps offset the effect of the shock by both supporting domestic demand and weakening the exchange rate. The weaker exchange rate in turn leads domestic consumers to switch their expenditures away from more expensive foreign imports to cheaper domestic products while increasing the competitiveness of exports. The extent to which monetary policy offsets the shock by dispersing it to trade partners as opposed to strengthening domestic demand depends on the responsiveness of domestic demand relative to the exchange rate. The exchange rate channel, by raising the price of imports in domestic currency, also pushes up domestic inflation and exerts downward pressure on foreign inflation. The strength of spillovers across countries and the extent to which that affects policy divergence across countries depend on a foreign economy's openness to these different channels. The recent experience of Sweden suggests that for highly open economies, the effect of foreign shocks can be extremely powerful.11Sweden's economic growth has been relatively rapid recently, reaching nearly 4 percent over the most recent four quarters. Moreover, the employment gap is estimated to be nearly closed, and there are signs of financial excess in the housing market. In ordinary times, these conditions would be consistent with relatively tight monetary policy. However, inflation has run persistently well below the central bank's 2 percent inflation target. Given the relative openness of Sweden's economy, moving the inflation rate back up to target has been greatly complicated by the sensitivity of Sweden's exchange rate and financial conditions to developments in the euro area, where domestic economic conditions are consistent with much more accommodative policy. As a result, the Riksbank has been pursuing extremely accommodative monetary policy, most recently lowering the interest rate on deposits to minus 0.5 percent and authorizing the Governor and Deputy Governor to intervene in foreign currency markets. Even in the much larger United States economy, with imports accounting for a little over 15 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), spillovers can be quite strong, in part reflecting the international role of U.S. financial markets and the dollar. Since the middle of 2014, with a reassessment of demand growth in the euro area and subsequently in emerging markets and other commodity exporters, the real trade-weighted value of the dollar has increased nearly 20 percent. As a result, in 2014 and 2015, net exports subtracted a little over 1/2 percentage point from GDP growth each year, and econometric models point to a subtraction of a further 1 percentage point this year.12In addition, the dollar's appreciation is estimated to have put significant downward pressure on inflation: Non-oil import prices fell 3-1/2 percent in 2015, subtracting an estimated 1/2 percentage point from core PCE inflation.13 Financial channels can powerfully propagate negative shocks in one market by catalyzing a broader reassessment of risks and increases in risk spreads across many financial markets. Since the beginning of the year, U.S. financial markets have reacted strongly to adverse news on emerging market growth, even though the news on the U.S. labor market has remained positive. In this regard, although China's direct imports from the United States are modest, uncertainty about changes to its exchange rate system and financial imbalances, together with changes in the composition of its growth, have had broader global spillovers that may pose risks to the U.S. outlook. Recent events suggest the transmission of foreign shocks can take place extremely quickly such that financial markets anticipate and indeed may thereby front-run the expected monetary policy reactions to these developments. It also appears that the exchange rate channel may have played a particularly important role recently in transmitting economic and financial developments across national borders. Indeed, recent research suggests that financial transmission is likely to be amplified in economies with near-zero interest rates, such that anticipated monetary policy adjustments in one economy may contribute more to a shifting of demand across borders than a boost to overall demand.14This finding could explain why the sensitivity of exchange rate movements to economic news and to changes in foreign monetary policy appear to have been relatively elevated recently. Financial tightening associated with cross-border spillovers may be limiting the extent to which U.S. policy diverges from major economies. As policy adjusts to the evolution of the data, the combination of heightened spillovers from weaker foreign economies, along with a lower neutral rate, could result in a lower policy path in the United States relative to what many had predicted. PolicyIn circumstances where many economies face common negative shocks or where negative shocks in one country are quickly transmitted across borders, it is natural to consider whether coordination can improve outcomes. Under certain conditions--such as flexible exchange rates, deep and well-regulated financial markets, and flexible product and labor markets--policies designed for the domestic economy can readily offset any spillovers from economic conditions abroad, and policies designed to address domestic conditions can achieve desirable outcomes both within the national economy and more broadly.15 In some circumstances, however, cooperation can be quite helpful. If, for example, economies face a common challenge, coordination can communicate to markets that policymakers recognize the challenge and will work to address it. Reducing uncertainty about the direction of policy and addressing concerns about policies working at cross-purposes can boost the confidence of businesses and households. With intensified transmission effects in the vicinity of the zero lower bound, there is a risk that uncoordinated policy on its own could have the effect of shifting demand across borders rather than addressing the underlying weakness in global demand. The difficult start to the year should be a prompt for greater policy coherence and clarity. This might be a good time for policymakers to reaffirm their commitment to work toward the common goal of strengthening global demand. Similarly, with anemic global demand and interest rates near zero, in some economies there is scope for monetary policy to be more effective with fiscal policy working in the same direction. With potential growth and nominal borrowing rates both low, public investment that increases potential in the longer run and demand in the shorter run could make an important contribution. A joint determination by policymakers across major economies to better deploy policy tools to provide support for global demand could be beneficial. ReferencesBlanchard, Olivier (2016). "The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief PB16-1. Washington: Peterson Institute of International Economics, January. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications," NBER Working Paper Series 21726. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, February,www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/20160210_mprfullreport.pdf. Brainard, Lael (2015a). "Unconventional Monetary Policy and Cross-Border Spillovers," speech delivered at "Unconventional Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies," the 16th International Monetary Fund Jacques Polak Research Conference, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 6. --------- (2015b). "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2015). "Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB," NBER Working Paper Series 21670. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, Matthew Cocci, Sara Shahanaghi, and Micah Smith (2015). "Why Are Interest Rates So Low?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), May 20. Gruber, Joseph, Andrew McCallum, and Robert Vigfusson (2016). "The Dollar in the U.S. International Transactions (USIT) Model," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 8. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future," NBER Working Paper Series 21476. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. International Monetary Fund (2014). "Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates," chapter 3 inWorld Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven. Washington: IMF, April, pp. 81-112. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Kiley, Michael T. (2015a). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. --------- (2015b). "Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2015). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2015-16. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October. I am grateful to Andrew Figura for his assistance in preparing this text. 1.These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.The employment-to-population ratio for prime-age individuals, for example, is nearly 2 percentage points below its 2004-07 average, while part-time work remains elevated and progress on wages has been slow.Return to text 3.See p. 24 of the February 2016Monetary Policy Report(Board of Governors, 2016).Return to text 4.In the United States, for example, Blanchard (2016) estimates that the slope of the Phillips curve has declined by more than two-thirds since the 1970s. Other recent research includes Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015) and Kiley (2015b).Return to text 5.In five of the six quarters since mid-2014, the price of oil has decreased for a cumulative decline of 70 percent.Return to text 6.See Brainard (2015b), Hamilton and others (2015), Kiley (2015a), Laubach and Williams (2015), and Johannsen and Mertens (2016).Return to text 7.See Hamilton and others (2015), Del Negro and others (2015), and chapter 3 ofWorld Economic Outlook(International Monetary Fund, 2014).Return to text 8.While the empirical link between potential growth and the neutral rate is not precisely estimated, the evidence suggests that slower trend growth is associated with lower interest rates; see Laubach and Williams (2015) and Hamilton and others (2015). U.S. labor force growth has slowed from 1 percent from 2001 to 2004 to 1/2 percent over the most recent 4 years. Over the same periods, euro-area growth has slowed from 1.3 percent to 0.4 percent. In Japan the labor force was essentially flat from 2011 to 2015, though this was a slight improvement from a small rate of decline in the early 2000s. Productivity growth over the same periods has slowed from 3.0 percent to 0.5 percent in the United States, from 0.6 percent to 0.2 percent in the euro area, and 1.5 percent to 0.5 percent in Japan. Regarding sensitivity to risk, the risk premium for capital investment appears to have increased since the crisis; see Del Negro and others (2015). A higher risk premium requires a lower risk-free rate to generate an equivalent level of investment.Return to text 9.From the end of 2009 to the end of 2013, growth in important U.S. emerging market trading partners averaged 4.7 percent, while growth in advanced economies averaged 1.8 percent. However, in 2014 emerging country growth slowed to 3.3 percent, compared with 1.6 percent in advanced economies, and for the first three quarters of 2015, annualized growth was 2.5 percent and 1.1 percent, respectively.Return to text 10.These estimates are based on rough rules of thumb regarding the effects on output of changes in long-term interest rates, equity prices, the exchange rate, and the federal funds rate from the FRB/US model and assume a highly persistent change in the federal funds rate. Some private-forecaster estimates of financial tightening--expressed in terms of the federal funds rate--are larger, which may reflect an assumption of a less persistent funds rate change. An alternative estimate from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's DSGE model, which explicitly includes a financial sector, suggests the tightening in financial conditions since mid-2015 is equivalent to an increase in the federal funds rate of roughly 100 basis points.Return to text 11.Imports and exports each account for a little under one-half of Sweden's GDP.Return to text 12.See Gruber, McCallum, and Vigfusson (2016).Return to text 13.See pp. 8-9 of the February 2016Monetary Policy Report(Board of Governors, 2016).Return to text 14.See Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2015).Return to text 15.See Brainard (2015a).Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chair Yellen submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on February 11, 2016. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress. In my remarks today, I will discuss the current economic situation and outlook before turning to monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookSince my appearance before this Committee last July, the economy has made further progress toward the Federal Reserve's objective of maximum employment. And while inflation is expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of the further declines in energy prices, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) expects that inflation will rise to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. In the labor market, the number of nonfarm payroll jobs rose 2.7 million in 2015, and posted a further gain of 150,000 in January of this year. The cumulative increase in employment since its trough in early 2010, is now more than 13 million jobs. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate fell to 4.9 percent in January, 0.8 percentage point below its level a year ago and in line with the median of FOMC participants' most recent estimates of its longer-run normal level. Other measures of labor market conditions have also shown solid improvement, with noticeable declines over the past year in the number of individuals who want and are available to work but have not actively searched recently, and in the number of people who are working part time but would rather work full time. However, these measures remain above the levels seen prior to the recession, suggesting that some slack in labor markets remains. Thus, while labor market conditions have improved substantially, there is still room for further sustainable improvement. The strong gains in the job market last year were accompanied by a continued moderate expansion in economic activity. U.S. real gross domestic product is estimated to have increased about 1-3/4 percent in 2015. Over the course of the year, subdued foreign growth and the appreciation of the dollar restrained net exports. In the fourth quarter of last year, growth in the gross domestic product is reported to have slowed more sharply, to an annual rate of just 3/4 percent; again, growth was held back by weak net exports as well as by a negative contribution from inventory investment. Although private domestic final demand appears to have slowed somewhat in the fourth quarter, it has continued to advance. Household spending has been supported by steady job gains and solid growth in real disposable income--aided in part by the declines in oil prices. One area of particular strength has been purchases of cars and light trucks; sales of these vehicles in 2015, reached their highest level ever. In the drilling and mining sector, lower oil prices have caused companies to slash jobs and sharply cut capital outlays, but in most other sectors, business investment rose over the second half of last year. And homebuilding activity has continued to move up, on balance, although the level of new construction remains well below the longer-run levels implied by demographic trends. Financial conditions in the United States have recently become less supportive of growth, with declines in broad measures of equity prices, higher borrowing rates for riskier borrowers, and a further appreciation of the dollar. These developments, if they prove persistent, could weigh on the outlook for economic activity and the labor market, although declines in longer-term interest rates and oil prices provide some offset. Still, ongoing employment gains and faster wage growth should support the growth of real incomes and therefore consumer spending, and global economic growth should pick up over time, supported by highly accommodative monetary policies abroad. Against this backdrop, the Committee expects that with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace in coming years and that labor market indicators will continue to strengthen. As is always the case, the economic outlook is uncertain. Foreign economic developments, in particular, pose risks to U.S. economic growth. Most notably, although recent economic indicators do not suggest a sharp slowdown in Chinese growth, declines in the foreign exchange value of the renminbi have intensified uncertainty about China's exchange rate policy and the prospects for its economy. This uncertainty led to increased volatility in global financial markets and, against the background of persistent weakness abroad, exacerbated concerns about the outlook for global growth. These growth concerns, along with strong supply conditions and high inventories, contributed to the recent fall in the prices of oil and other commodities. In turn, low commodity prices could trigger financial stresses in commodity-exporting economies, particularly in vulnerable emerging market economies, and for commodity-producing firms in many countries. Should any of these downside risks materialize, foreign activity and demand for U.S. exports could weaken and financial market conditions could tighten further. Of course, economic growth could also exceed our projections for a number of reasons, including the possibility that low oil prices will boost U.S. economic growth more than we expect. At present, the Committee is closely monitoring global economic and financial developments, as well as assessing their implications for the labor market and inflation and the balance of risks to the outlook. As I noted earlier, inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent objective. Overall consumer prices, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, increased just 1/2 percent over the 12 months of 2015. To a large extent, the low average pace of inflation last year can be traced to the earlier steep declines in oil prices and in the prices of other imported goods. And, given the recent further declines in the prices of oil and other commodities, as well as the further appreciation of the dollar, the Committee expects inflation to remain low in the near term. However, once oil and import prices stop falling, the downward pressure on domestic inflation from those sources should wane, and as the labor market strengthens further, inflation is expected to rise gradually to 2 percent over the medium term. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee is carefully monitoring actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. Of course, inflation expectations play an important role in the inflation process, and the Committee's confidence in the inflation outlook depends importantly on the degree to which longer-run inflation expectations remain well anchored. It is worth noting, in this regard, that market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved down to historically low levels; our analysis suggests that changes in risk and liquidity premiums over the past year and a half contributed significantly to these declines. Some survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations are also at the low end of their recent ranges; overall, however, they have been reasonably stable. Monetary PolicyTurning to monetary policy, the FOMC conducts policy to promote maximum employment and price stability, as required by our statutory mandate from the Congress. Last March, the Committee stated that it would be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it had seen further improvement in the labor market and was reasonably confident that inflation would move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. In December, the Committee judged that these two criteria had been satisfied and decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 1/4 percentage point, to between 1/4 and 1/2 percent. This increase marked the end of a seven-year period during which the federal funds rate was held near zero. The Committee did not adjust the target range in January. The decision in December to raise the federal funds rate reflected the Committee's assessment that, even after a modest reduction in policy accommodation, economic activity would continue to expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators would continue to strengthen. Although inflation was running below the Committee's longer-run objective, the FOMC judged that much of the softness in inflation was attributable to transitory factors that are likely to abate over time, and that diminishing slack in labor and product markets would help move inflation toward 2 percent. In addition, the Committee recognized that it takes time for monetary policy actions to affect economic conditions. If the FOMC delayed the start of policy normalization for too long, it might have to tighten policy relatively abruptly in the future to keep the economy from overheating and inflation from significantly overshooting its objective. Such an abrupt tightening could increase the risk of pushing the economy into recession. It is important to note that even after this increase, the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative. The FOMC anticipates that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate. In addition, the Committee expects that the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below the levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. This expectation is consistent with the view that the neutral nominal federal funds rate--defined as the value of the federal funds rate that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential--is currently low by historical standards and is likely to rise only gradually over time. The low level of the neutral federal funds rate may be partially attributable to a range of persistent economic headwinds--such as limited access to credit for some borrowers, weak growth abroad, and a significant appreciation of the dollar--that have weighed on aggregate demand. Of course, monetary policy is by no means on a preset course. The actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on what incoming data tell us about the economic outlook, and we will regularly reassess what level of the federal funds rate is consistent with achieving and maintaining maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. In doing so, we will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In particular, stronger growth or a more rapid increase in inflation than the Committee currently anticipates would suggest that the neutral federal funds rate was rising more quickly than expected, making it appropriate to raise the federal funds rate more quickly as well. Conversely, if the economy were to disappoint, a lower path of the federal funds rate would be appropriate. We are committed to our dual objectives, and we will adjust policy as appropriate to foster financial conditions consistent with the attainment of our objectives over time. Consistent with its previous communications, the Federal Reserve used interest on excess reserves (IOER) and overnight reverse repurchase (RRP) operations to move the federal funds rate into the new target range. The adjustment to the IOER rate has been particularly important in raising the federal funds rate and short-term interest rates more generally in an environment of abundant bank reserves. Meanwhile, overnight RRP operations complement the IOER rate by establishing a soft floor on money market interest rates. The IOER rate and the overnight RRP operations allowed the FOMC to control the federal funds rate effectively without having to first shrink its balance sheet by selling a large part of its holdings of longer-term securities. The Committee judged that removing monetary policy accommodation by the traditional approach of raising short-term interest rates is preferable to selling longer-term assets because such sales could be difficult to calibrate and could generate unexpected financial market reactions. The Committee is continuing its policy of reinvesting proceeds from maturing Treasury securities and principal payments from agency debt and mortgage-backed securities. As highlighted in the December statement, the FOMC anticipates continuing this policy "until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way." Maintaining our sizable holdings of longer-term securities should help maintain accommodative financial conditions and reduce the risk that we might need to return the federal funds rate target to the effective lower bound in response to future adverse shocks. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.