Governor Jerome H. Powell At the "Understanding Fedspeak" event cosponsored by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution and the Center for Financial Economics at Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C. Watch on-demand Thanks to David Wessel and the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution for putting together this event.1Today I will share my own views on the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) public communications, which are designed to serve three important purposes. The first is to provide the transparency that enables the Congress and the public to hold the Committee accountable for its decisions on monetary policy. The second is to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. If the public understands the central bank's views on the economy and monetary policy, then households and businesses will take those views into account in making their spending and investment plans; policy will be more effective as a result. And the third is to show the full range of FOMC participants' views, even if doing so may sometimes make it difficult for the public to identify a consensus view. In my view, acknowledgment of this diversity of views is important in sustaining the public's support over time for the Federal Reserve as an institution--what Jon Faust refers to in his paper as our "democratic legitimacy."2In my comments, I will also react to Jon's thought-provoking and well-reasoned paper. The Modern EraI will start with a brief tour of the modern era of FOMC communications, beginning with the issuance of the first postmeeting statement in February 1994.3That statement contained four sentences and noted that the policy action was being announced immediately "so as to avoid any misunderstanding of the Committee's purposes."4The Committee took additional steps to enhance transparency over the next two decades by putting its target for the federal funds rate into the statement (July 1995); releasing statements after every meeting rather than only after meetings at which the Committee had changed its policy (May 1999); including voting information along with an explanation of dissents in the statement (March 2002); adding the first explicit forward-guidance language to the statement--the "considerable period" language (August 2003); and accelerating the release of the minutes after an FOMC meeting (December 2004).5 The pace of change accelerated notably after Ben Bernanke became Chairman in 2006. At that time, the Fed was said to be a bit of a communications laggard compared with some other central banks. Chairman Bernanke's agenda would move the FOMC to the forefront of transparency and accountability in modern central banking. In October 2007, after extensive discussions and internal trial runs, the FOMC published its first Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which built on the macroeconomic forecasts from the semiannualMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress.Since then, SEP projections have been expanded to include longer-run values for real gross domestic product growth, the unemployment rate, headline PCE (personal consumption expenditures) price inflation, and the federal funds rate; assessments of uncertainty and risks to the economic outlook; and, of course, the federal funds rate projections, or "dot plot," added in January 2012.6An extensive write-up of the projections is included as an addendum to the meeting minutes. Finally, and perhaps most important, since April 2011, the Chair has held a quarterly press conference following the FOMC meetings at which SEP projections are collected. In January 2012, the Committee first released its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which is reaffirmed annually. This consensus statement serves as a quasi-constitutional document that clarifies that the Committee's inflation objective is 2 percent as measured by the annual change in the PCE price index, that this objective is symmetric, that the maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors affecting the structure and dynamics of the labor market, and that the Committee will take a balanced approach to promote its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation under circumstances in which the Committee judges that those objectives are not complementary. Compared with a decade ago, FOMC participants express their views more frequently through speeches and interviews, and our communications vehicles reveal a greater diversity of viewpoints. In FOMC meetings, as readers of our transcripts know, FOMC participants now speak longer than they did before 2006, and they typically make their remarks prior to hearing the policy views of the Chair. Since September 2010, the minutes have included paragraphs that reflect the views on monetary policy expressed by all meeting participants, not just those who vote on the policy decision. These changes, taken together with the SEP and the dot plot, have given greater emphasis to the diversity of views of Fed policymakers. DiscussionThe large size and unique structure of the FOMC have important implications for our communications. The Committee has seats for up to 19 participants, up to 12 of whom hold votes at any given time. Governors are appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate. Reserve Bank Presidents are appointed by the Banks' private-sector board members who are not affiliated with commercial banks, subject to approval by the Board of Governors. This unique federated structure was designed to ensure a diversity of views, among other purposes. My strong view is that this institutionalized diversity of thinking is a strength of our System. My own experience is that the best outcomes are reached when opposing viewpoints are clearly and strongly presented before decisions are made. The Committee's diversity shows through most clearly at times such as these, when economic conditions have been particularly challenging and when there have been significant policy disagreements. Our communications are intended to enable the public to better understand how the Committee sees the economic situation and outlook, as well as what the Committee is likely to do if incoming data differ from that outlook--the Committee's "reaction function." My sense is that market participants and other members of the public focus instead mainly on the timing of the next policy change or on how many policy moves will occur in a given year. It also seems that the public may not fully appreciate the uncertainty that surrounds the outlook. In addition, market participants often say that there are too many voices saying too many different things about policy--the cacophony problem. The dot plot has been a poor predictor of the Committee's actual policy path, and some have questioned its usefulness. However, markets do not appear to be unusually uncertain about FOMC decisions.7 In theory, our communications about monetary policy can be roughly divided into those that express the consensus and those that show the diversity of views. Today I will focus on the latter. Specifically, are communications that illustrate the diversity of views about the likely policy path--particularly the dot plot and public commentary by FOMC participants other than the Chair--currently serving us well? And if not, how can we make improvements? Questions of how much to say about the likely path of policy were extensively debated in the public sphere in the years leading up to the Bernanke era, and by the FOMC while Ben was Chairman.8The benefits of greater transparency are typically thought to include more efficient pricing of financial assets and a closer alignment between the market's views and those of the Committee.9Transparency should allow asset prices to respond immediately to incoming economic data, which would foster progress toward the Committee's objectives. Those who supported the publication of some form of policy rate path generally saw it as part of a forecast-based approach to policymaking, in which policy plans depend in a complex way on policymakers' outlooks, risk assessments, and objectives.10The whole forward interest rate curve matters for financial conditions, not just the overnight rate. Monetary policy was therefore thought to be made more effective by communication of the full expected path of policy, which could then be incorporated into private-sector expectations and longer-term interest rates. But all along, there have been other voices urging caution and asking, in effect, "How much transparency is too much?" As Don Kohn noted in 2005 remarks, "more is not necessarily always better" when it comes to Fed communication.11Critics have often argued that too much discussion of the likely path of policy could be taken as a commitment to a particular path and timing and could ultimately constrain the Committee from pursuing what it views to be the optimal path. Indeed, to the extent that the Committee's talk about the path of policy is given weight, that talk may leave "too little scope for private assessments of economic developments to show through" in market prices.12 Jon notes in his paper that communications about monetary policy generally received high marks from 2008 through early 2013, and he focuses his analysis on the challenging period since mid-2013. I am also going to skip over the years 2013-14, which included the "taper tantrum" and the relatively uneventful taper itself. I will focus instead on the years 2015-16, which seem to me to be the most relevant to the challenges the Committee faces today. I will pay particular attention to the dot plot, the cacophony issue, and the need to do a better job of explaining uncertainty. The Dot PlotThe dot plot is not a consensus forecast of the Committee. Rather, the dots represent each individual participant's assessment of the appropriate policy path. The Committee considered the use of a consensus forecast in 2012 but abandoned the effort after struggling to reach agreement on its parameters.13 As you can see fromfigure 1, the median dots have moved down from SEP to SEP. The December 2014 SEP median dots showed increases of 350 basis points over the years 2015-2017. In the event, there was one 25 basis point rate increase in 2015, and the September 2016 SEP median shows one more in 2016 and two in 2017--for a total of 100 basis points.Figures 2and3display rate expectations derived from financial market prices and forecasts made by financial market participants, respectively. These market paths have also declined significantly over the period. And the path estimated from overnight index swaps (figure 2) has been substantially below the SEP median. It does not appear that markets have uncritically accepted the dots, let alone taken them as a commitment.14 Some argue that the downward march of the dots has damaged the Committee's credibility. For me, the story is both more complicated and more interesting. Like Jon, I do not think of the dot plot as a useful predictor of near-term policy moves. But that is not to say that the dot plot is without value. Indeed, changes in the SEP and the dot plot over time have been quite revealing about the evolution of policymakers' views about the path of policy. In recent years, FOMC participants have significantly revised their views about the values to which key economic variables will converge over the longer run. The same is true of many other economic forecasters. Since the beginning of 2012, participants' views about the longer-run annual growth potential of the economy have dropped from 2.45 percent to 1.85 percent(figure 4).15Much of the downward revision in estimates of longer-run potential growth reflects the implications of demographic trends and the slowdown in productivity growth.16These structural factors have also weighed on participants' assessments of the longer-run neutral federal funds rate--the rate that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy were operating near its potential.17The median assessment of the longer-run neutral federal funds rate declined from 4.25 percent in 2012 to 2.90 percent in September of this year, with 60 basis points of that shift occurring just since September 2015(figure 5). The persistence of low inflation despite faster-than-expected reductions in unemployment has also led participants to lower their estimates of the longer-run normal unemployment rate; the median estimate has declined from 5.60 percent in January 2012 to 4.85 percent in September 2016(figure 6). Taken together, these revisions explain a good part of the downward movement of the dots. One way to see that is through the application of a policy rule, such as a Taylor rule.18Simple policy rules, as they are sometimes called, incorporate key factors for monetary policy, including the natural rate of unemployment, the neutral rate of interest, and deviations of inflation and unemployment from their long-run values. As they prepare for FOMC meetings, FOMC participants routinely see policy recommendations from a variety of rules, including several Taylor rule variations. While these rules are useful as benchmarks, in my view they should not be excessively relied on for policy decisions.19 The red solid line infigure 7shows the policy prescription using the original 1993 Taylor rule together with the September SEP dots for the federal funds rate.20The Taylor rule prescription has been derived using the median value for core PCE price inflation, the unemployment rate, and the longer-run normal unemployment rate from the September 2016 SEP. The intercept in this Taylor rule represents the longer-run real interest rate--or r*--which is set to 2 percent. If we replace that intercept with the median of the longer-run r* implied by the most recent SEP, which is 0.9 percent, we see that the rule prescribes much lower settings for policy interest rates than the unadjusted rule (the blue dashed line in figure 7). The lower intercept does not completely close the gap between the Taylor rule prescription and the dots. However, many observers believe that the neutral real interest rate is currently well below its longer-run value. The language that has appeared in the Committee's postmeeting statement since December 2015 that "the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run" is consistent with this view.21 We can estimate a short-run, time-varying r* using a standard reduced-form IS (investment and saving) equation that relates the unemployment gap to its own lagged value and the lagged real interest rate gap. We use the median of FOMC participants' projections from the September SEP in this exercise. The IS specification employed here is similar to that used in Laubach-Williams (2003) and is shown infigure 8.22Using these short-run, time-varying estimates of r* as intercepts in our Taylor rule gives us the purple dashed-dotted line infigure 9. This rule now tells us that the median dot remains slightly below the adjusted rule's prescription at the end of 2016 and 2017 but is back in line by the end of 2018. As Don Kohn recently noted, "We have been in uncharted waters with unreliable anchors."23The downward march of the dots shows that policymakers have been learning, and our understanding of the economy has been evolving, as we navigate the treacherous shoals of the post-crisis economy. The revisions in the longer-run values and the short-run, time-varying r* estimates provide a framework for understanding policymakers' evolving views of the economy and of appropriate monetary policy. And the dots for 2016 and 2017 lie below the purple dashed-dotted line in figure 9, showing that FOMC participants see an even more gradual path of rate increases than suggested by the short-run r* estimates. This lower path may be related to global economic weakness and risk-management considerations at the effective lower bound. Of course, all of this would have happened in the absence of an SEP or a dot plot. The new communications tools have made the process more transparent to the public. In this sense, the dot plot is more messenger than message. CacophonyI often hear that there are too many voices offering too much diversity of views about the likely path of policy--the cacophony problem. Reserve Bank Presidents and Governors are expected to publicly discuss their views on the economy and policy. Indeed, our policy on the external communications of FOMC participants states that "the Committee's public accountability is strengthened by open discussion of Committee participants' views about the economic outlook as well as their judgments about the appropriate course of monetary policy."24Central banking often comes across as obscure and complicated, and we try to help the public understand what we do. But there is more to it than that. Jon Faust's paper captures well the framers' vision of an institutionalized diversity of perspectives. In my view, the public expression of our diverse views helps sustain public support for the Federal Reserve as a public institution. Those members of the public who disagree with our policy should know that their concerns are given voice in our deliberations. But there is a tradeoff here that needs to be managed: On the one hand, the effectiveness of policy is thought to depend on the public's understanding of the Committee's consensus. On the other hand, the expression of diverse views may sometimes make it difficult for the public to see that consensus. Jon sees this public discussion about policy as mainly a form of negotiation. In my view, motivations are simpler and more obvious. Many of us enjoy getting out of the office to speak to outside groups. We appear to enjoy talking to print journalists, and some of us like going on television. With the proliferation of media of all kinds, there is a need for content, and we have been willing suppliers. In my view, these public appearances are mostly not about gaining leverage in a negotiation. There is a single FOMC participant who has most of the leverage in our policy discussions. Observers would be well advised to listen carefully to what she says. I strongly agree with Jon that it is wise not to read too much about the path of policy into all of this communication. FOMC participants other than the Chair speak only for themselves and customarily make that clear at the beginning of their remarks. Their commentary is not intended to express the consensus or to predict its evolution. As Jon notes, during the Greenspan era, there was very little discussion of the likely path for the policy rate by FOMC participants, including the Chairman. The proliferation of forward policy guidance during the crisis utterly broke that equilibrium. Many of us seem to be trained to a new habit, which is to offer one's views about the near-term path for policy, typically at the end of a speech on the outlook. While such communication can serve a useful purpose, I have come around to the view that focusing too much on the precise timing of policy moves may be adding to confusion and frustration about our communications. I am trying to avoid this problem in my own remarks. UncertaintyAll economic forecasts are subject to considerable uncertainty. There is always a wide range of plausible outcomes for important economic variables, including the federal funds rate. In her remarks at Jackson Hole in August, Chair Yellen showed the median path for the federal funds rate from the June SEP surrounded by a 70 percent confidence interval based on the historical accuracy of private and government forecasts.25I reproduce that figure here(figure 10), updated for the September 2016 SEP.26Note that the tan confidence interval in the figure is much wider than the disparity of views as represented by the central tendency of the projections (the black dashed lines). This uncertainty is a fundamental aspect of our world, and it should probably feature more prominently in our communications. ConclusionTo sum up, the FOMC and individual participants communicate a great deal these days--much more than in the past. Some of those communications are designed to express the consensus, and some are designed to show the diversity of views. In my view, communications should do more to emphasize the uncertainty that surrounds all economic forecasts, should downplay short-term tactical questions such as the timing of the next rate increase, and should focus the public's attention instead on the considerations that go into making policy across the range of plausible paths for the economy. 1.The views I express here are my own.Return to text 2.See Jon Faust (2016), "Oh, What a Tangled Web We Weave: Monetary Policy Transparency in Divisive Times," paper prepared for "Understanding Fedspeak," an event cosponsored by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution and the Center for Financial Economics at Johns Hopkins University, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, November 30.Return to text 3.For a review FOMC communications, see Mark A. Wynne (2013), "A Short History of FOMC Communication (PDF)," Economic Letter, vol. 8 (Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, September).Return to text 4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1994),FOMC statement, press release, February 4, paragraph 3.Return to text 5.The expedited release shortened the lag between an FOMC meeting and the publication of the meeting minutes between two and five weeks. See Deborah J. Danker and Matthew M. Luecke (2005), "Background on FOMC Meeting Minutes (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 91 (Spring), pp. 175-79.Return to text 6.The "dot plot" is a figure that provides individual policymaker assessments of appropriate monetary policy as defined by the value of the federal funds rate target or the midpoint of the federal funds rate target range at the end of each calendar year of the SEP forecast.Return to text 7.See, for example, David Mericle (2016),US Daily: The Fed and the Markets: A Failure to Communicate?(New York: Goldman Sachs, September 20).Return to text 8.See Alan S. Blinder, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, Jakob De Haan, and David-Jan Jansen (2008), "Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and Evidence,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 46 (December), pp. 910-45.Return to text 9.See Ben S. Bernanke (2004), "Central Bank Talk and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Japan Society Corporate Luncheon, New York, October 7.Return to text 10.See Ben S. Bernanke (2004), "The Logic of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the National Economists Club, Washington, December 2.Return to text 11.See Donald L. Kohn (2005), "Central Bank Communication," speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Philadelphia, January 9, paragraph 5.Return to text 12.Quote taken from Kohn, "Central Bank Communication," paragraph 12, in note 10. This point has been emphasized in work by Stephen Morris and Hyun Shin. See, for example, Jeffery D. Amato, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin (2002), "Communication and Monetary Policy,"Oxford Review of Economic Policy, vol. 18 (December), pp. 495-503.Return to text 13.According to the minutes from the October 22-23, 2012, FOMC meeting, "In their discussion, participants agreed that FOMC communications could be enhanced by clarifying the linkage between participants' economic forecasts, including the underlying policy assumptions, and the Committee's policy decision as expressed in the postmeeting statement. However, most participants judged that, given the diversity of their views about the economy's structure and dynamics, it would be difficult for the Committee to agree on a fully specified longer-term path for monetary policy to incorporate into a quantitative consensus forecast in a timely manner, especially under present conditions in which the policy decision comprises several elements." See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, October 23-24, 2012," press release, November 14, paragraph 52.Return to text 14.The expected policy rate paths shown in figures 1, 2, and 3 are not entirely comparable. The SEP paths are median values of the modal projections of individual participants for the end of the calendar year. The overnight index swap (OIS) paths are estimated using a spline approach; each line corresponds to the estimated path on the day before the release of SEP projections. OIS paths are mean forecasts of market participants and may be influenced by variations in risk premiums over time. The primary dealer survey paths are medians of modal forecasts, and the survey responses are collected about a week before the SEP projections are released.Return to text 15.Other forecasters--for instance, Blue Chip and the Survey of Professional Forecasters--have also revised down their estimates for longer-run real gross domestic product (GDP) growth. See Jerome H. Powell (2016), "Recent Economic Developments, the Productive Potential of the Economy, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, May 26. In making these comparisons, I use the midpoint of the central tendency for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate.Return to text 16.See John G. Fernald (2015), "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," in Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014,vol. 29 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 1-51; and Etienne Gagnon, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016), "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).Return to text 17.For further discussion of the neutral nominal federal funds rate, see Janet L. Yellen (2015), "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.Return to text 18.See Fernanda Nechio and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2016), "Has the Fed Fallen behind the Curve This Year?" FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-33 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November).Return to text 19.For example, FRB/US simulations using the Taylor (1993) rule for the period 2010-15 show substantially higher unemployment and lower inflation than was actually realized. For more information about the Taylor (1993) rule, see John B. Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214.Return to text 20.The SEP policy projections are for the midpoint of the federal funds rate target range at the end of a calendar year. The Taylor (1993) rule is defined as Rt= 2 + πt+ 0.5(πt– 2) + 0.5Yt. In this expression, R is the federal funds rate, π is the percent change in the core PCE price index from four quarters earlier, and Y is the output gap. The rule used here is in terms of the unemployment gap instead of the output gap. The output gap is approximated using Okun's law; specifically, Yt= 2.0(U* – Ut), where U is the unemployment rate and U* is the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, or NAIRU.Return to text 21.See, for example, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, November 2, paragraph 4.Return to text 22.For a discussion of the short-run, time-varying estimates of r* using projections from the SEP, see Michelle Bongard and Benjamin K. Johannsen (2016), "The Neutral Rate and the Summary of Economic Projections," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 28). These authors combine the IS specification used here with SEP projections to calculate implied values for r*. See also Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams (2003), "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Return to text 23.See Donald Kohn (2016), "How Should Central Bankers Talk about Future Monetary Policy? Lessons from the Crisis and Beyond (PDF)," (Washington: Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, November).Return to text 24.The FOMC Policy on External Communications of Committee Participants was adopted in June 2011 and is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_ExtCommunicationParticipants.pdf; for the quoted text, see p. 1.Return to text 25.The reason for the confidence interval is that the economy is frequently buffeted by shocks and thus rarely evolves as predicted. See Janet L. Yellen (2016), "The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26.Return to text 26.The confidence interval equals the median SEP path for the federal funds rate plus or minus average root mean squared prediction errors of the three-month Treasury bill rate (subject to a lower bound of 12.5 basis points), for horizons from zero to three years ahead, based on forecast errors made over the past 20 years. For general information on the methodology used to construct confidence intervals using historical forecasting errors, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), "Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).Return to text
Consumer Financial Protection BureauFederal Reserve Board of GovernorsOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), Federal Reserve Board, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) today issued a final rule detailing the method that will be used to make annual inflation adjustments to the threshold for exempting small loans from special appraisal requirements. The final rule also applies the calculation method to the exemption threshold for 2017. The threshold will remain at $25,500, based on the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) in effect on June 1, 2016. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 amended the Truth in Lending Act to add special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans, including a requirement that creditors obtain a written appraisal based on a physical visit to the home's interior before making a higher-priced mortgage loan. The rules implementing these requirements contain an exemption for loans of $25,000 or less and also provide that the exemption threshold will be adjusted annually to reflect increases in the CPI-W. The calculation method adopted in the final rule will allow the thresholds to keep pace with the CPI-W. Among other clarifications, the final rule details that if there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the agencies will not adjust the exemption threshold from the prior year. The attached notice will be published shortly in theFederal Register.
Consumer Financial Protection BureauFederal Reserve Board of Governors The Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) today issued a final rule detailing the method that will be used to adjust the thresholds for exempting certain consumer credit and lease transactions from the Truth in Lending Act and Consumer Leasing Act. The Dodd-Frank Act requires that the exemption thresholds in the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act be adjusted annually based on the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). The calculation method adopted in the final rule will allow the thresholds to keep pace with the CPI-W. Among other clarifications, the final rule details that if there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the agencies will not adjust the exemption thresholds from the prior year. The final rule also applies the calculation method to the thresholds for exempt credit and lease transactions for 2017. The thresholds will remain at $54,600 based on the CPI-W in effect on June 1, 2016. The protections of the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act generally apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases at or below the thresholds. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property (such as mortgages) are subject to the Truth in Lending Act regardless of the amount of the loan. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 generally transferred rulemaking authority under the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to the CFPB. However, the Federal Reserve Board retains authority to issue rules for certain motor vehicle dealers. Therefore, the agencies are issuing these notices jointly. The attached notices will be published shortly in theFederal Register.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday announced changes that will begin in 2017 to itsBeige Bookpublication. The modifications will standardize specific core topics included in each of the 12 Federal Reserve Bank District reports, provide a more consistent presentation of the national summary, and enhance the design of the publication. The national summary, along with each District report, will consistently cover three core topics: overall economic activity, employment and wages, and prices. Each District report will continue to include other topics or industry-specific reports of particular interest in that District. Additionally, the national summary will include highlights from each District. TheBeige Bookcharacterizes regional economic conditions and prospects across the 12 Federal Reserve Bank Districts based upon a variety of information gathered from businesses and community organizations in each District. Its qualitative nature creates an opportunity to identify dynamics and emerging trends in the economy that may not be readily apparent in available economic data. TheBeige Bookis generally released on the Wednesday two weeks prior to each Federal Open Market Committee meeting. The firstBeige Bookin the new format will be released on January 18, 2017. A template of the new format is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday, announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by BOK Financial Corporation, Tulsa, Oklahoma, to acquire MBT Bancshares, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire Missouri Bank and Trust Company of Kansas City, both of Kansas City, Missouri. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on November 10, 2016, announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by First Midwest Bancorp, Inc., Itasca, Illinois, to merge with Standard Bancshares, Inc. and thereby indirectly acquire Standard Bank and Trust Company ("SB&T"), both of Hickory Hills, Illinois. The Board also approved applications under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by First Midwest Bank, Itasca, Illinois, to merge with SB&T and to establish and operate branches at the locations of SB&T's main office and branches. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Chicago Shore Corporation and Security Chicago Corporation, both of Chicago, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated October 28, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Fayette County Bank, St. Elmo, IllinoisPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated October 31, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday issued a final rule that amends Regulation I to implement provisions of the Fixing America's Surface Transportation (FAST) Act. The final rule is the same as the interim final rule the Board issued in February. The FAST Act reduced the dividend rate applicable to Reserve Bank depository institution stockholders with total assets of more than $10 billion (large member banks) to the lesser of 6 percent or the most recent 10-year Treasury auction rate prior to the dividend payment. The dividend rate for other member banks remains at 6 percent. Reserve Banks typically pay dividends to member banks in June and December each year. The final rule, which takes effect January 1, 2017, also adjusts the treatment of accrued dividends when a Reserve Bank issues or cancels capital stock owned by a large member bank. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday ordered JPMorgan Chase & Co. to pay a $61.9 million civil money penalty for unsafe and unsound practices related to the firm's practice of hiring individuals referred by foreign officials and other clients in order to obtain improper business advantages for the firm. In levying the fine on JPMorgan Chase, the Federal Reserve Board found that the firm's Asia-Pacific investment bank operated an improper referral hiring program. The firm offered internships, trainings, and other employment opportunities to candidates who were referred by foreign government officials and existing or prospective commercial clients to obtain improper business advantages. The Federal Reserve found that the firm did not have adequate enterprise-wide controls to ensure that referred candidates were appropriately vetted and hired in accordance with applicable anti-bribery laws and firm policies. The Federal Reserve's order requires JP Morgan Chase to enhance the effectiveness of senior management oversight and controls relating to the firm's referral hiring practices and anti-bribery policies. The Federal Reserve is also requiring the firm to cooperate in its investigation of the individuals involved in the conduct underlying these enforcement actions and is prohibiting the organizations from re-employing or otherwise engaging individuals who were involved in unsafe and unsound conduct. The Federal Reserve is imposing the fine and requiring the firm to modify its practices concurrently with actions by the U.S. Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday published a report on debit card transactions in 2015, including summary information on the volume and value, interchange fee revenue, certain issuer costs, and fraud losses. The report is the fourth in a series to be published every two years pursuant to section 920 of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA). The Board's Regulation II (Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing), which implements this provision of the EFTA, provides that a debit card issuer subject to the interchange fee standard (a covered issuer) may not receive an interchange fee that exceeds 21 cents plus 5 basis points (0.05%) multiplied by the value of the transaction, plus a 1-cent fraud-prevention adjustment, if eligible. The regulation does not apply to debit card issuers with consolidated assets of less than $10 billion, certain government-administered debit cards, and certain prepaid cards. The interchange fee standard became effective on October 1, 2011. As in prior years, covered issuers' costs of authorizing, clearing, and settling (ACS) debit card transactions, excluding issuer fraud losses, varied greatly across respondents in 2015. The median issuer had an average ACS cost of 12.3 cents and the issuer at the 75th percentile had an average ACS cost of 30.5 cents. Issuers with the highest debit card transaction volume generally had the lowest ACS costs per transaction. The overall average ACS cost per transaction in the industry was 4.2 cents per transaction, down from 4.6 cents per transaction in 2013. The Board estimated debit-card fraud losses to all parties (merchants, cardholders, and issuers) increased by 44 percent from 2013 to $2.41 billion in 2015, with an average loss of 10.3 basis points (0.103%) as a share of transaction value as compared to 8.0 basis points (0.08%) in 2013. The median covered issuer's average fraud loss as a share of transaction value was 6.6 basis points (0.066%), up from 5.1 in 2013. The median covered issuer had average fraud prevention and data security costs of 1.9 cents per transaction. Sixty-six percent of covered issuers had average ACS costs, including issuer fraud losses, below 21 cents plus 5 basis points (0.05%) of the value of a transaction (the base component of the interchange fee standard) in 2015. This proportion is slightly higher than the 64 percent of covered issuers with average ACS costs below the maximum interchange fee in 2013. Covered issuers with average ACS costs below the maximum interchange fee in 2015 processed more than 99 percent of all reported covered transactions, the same proportion as in 2013. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Board Votes 2015 Interchange Fee Revenue, Covered Issuer Costs, and Covered Issuer and Merchant Fraud Losses Related to Debit Card Transactions (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced it is broadening the scope of post-employment restrictions applicable to Federal Reserve Bank senior examiners and officers. By law, senior bank examiners are prohibited for one year from accepting paid work from a financial institution that they had primary responsibility for examining in their last year of Reserve Bank employment. This post-employment restriction has applied primarily to central points of contacts (CPCs) at firms with more than $10 billion in assets. The revised policy expands the number of Reserve Bank examiners subject to this one-year post-employment restriction to include CPCs, deputy CPCs, senior supervisory officers (SSOs), deputy SSOs, enterprise risk officers, and supervisory team leaders. The new policy will more than double the number of senior examiners subject to this post-employment restriction from about 100 employees to about 250 employees. In addition, a new policy prohibits former Federal Reserve Bank officers from representing financial institutions and other third parties before current Federal Reserve System employees for one year after leaving their Federal Reserve position. The new policy also imposes a one year ban on current Reserve Bank employees discussing official business with these former officers. The restriction on former officers will be effective on December 5, 2016, and the revised senior examiner policy will be effective on January 2, 2017. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. SR 16-16 / CA 16-7: Special Post-Employment Restriction for Senior Examiners Board Votes
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and growth of economic activity has picked up from the modest pace seen in the first half of this year. Although the unemployment rate is little changed in recent months, job gains have been solid. Household spending has been rising moderately but business fixed investment has remained soft. Inflation has increased somewhat since earlier this year but is still below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up but remain low; most survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance, in recent months. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further. Inflation is expected to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory effects of past declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. The Committee continues to closely monitor inflation indicators and global economic and financial developments. Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent. The Committee judges that the case for an increase in the federal funds rate has continued to strengthen but decided, for the time being, to wait for some further evidence of continued progress toward its objectives. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting further improvement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Stanley Fischer; Jerome H. Powell; Eric Rosengren; and Daniel K. Tarullo. Voting against the action were: Esther L. George and Loretta J. Mester, each of whom preferred at this meeting to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1/2 to 3/4 percent. Implementation Note issued November 2, 2016
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At "Do We Have a Liquidity Problem Post-Crisis?", a conference sponsored by the Initiative on Business and Public Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Watch live:https://www.brookings.edu/events/do-we-have-a-liquidity-problem-post-crisis/ Market liquidity is the ability to rapidly execute sizable securities transactions at a low cost and with a limited price impact.1The high degree of liquidity in U.S. capital markets historically has contributed to the efficient allocation of capital through lower costs and a mix of bank- and market-based finance that supports the flexibility of these markets.2Regulatory changes may have altered financial institutions' incentive to provide liquidity, raising concerns brought into sharp relief by several "flash events" over the past few years. At the same time, any changes in observed liquidity are also likely accompanied by other related changes--such as in technology--and a more complete assessment of these shifts is important when we think about the effects on liquidity of changes in financial regulations that were induced by the global financial crisis.3 This afternoon, I will first review some of the concerns raised by market participants and others about market liquidity as well as highlight the challenges associated with finding clear evidence that substantiates these concerns. I will then discuss whether potential impairment of liquidity might exacerbate problems related to fire sales and leverage. Finally, I will make the case that any changes in market liquidity resulting from regulatory changes should be analyzed in the broader context of the overall safety of the financial system. This perspective naturally emphasizes potential tradeoffs between the possibly adverse effect regulations may have on market liquidity and their positive effect on the stability of the financial system. Market Participants' Concerns 1. Decline in dealers' inventoryMarket participants have cited a decline in dealers' inventories as a possible source of decreased liquidity.Figure 1shows that primary dealers' inventories of fixed-income securities, which are predominantly used for market making, declined sharply after the Lehman Brothers failure, from about $1.3 trillion to about $800 billion, and have since fallen further to about $700 billion. The recent decline might be due in part to regulations, such as the Volcker rule and the Supplementary Leverage Ratio, aimed at making the financial system safer and sounder, as well as to changes firms may have made on their own, perhaps in reaction to the experience of the financial crisis. Regardless of the causes of the change, market participants have expressed a concern that the decline in inventories reflects in part a reduced willingness or capacity of the primary dealers to make markets--which may in turn lead to lower liquidity. However, whether markets are in fact less liquid depends on both the degree to which the decrease in primary dealers' inventories affects their willingness to provide liquidity and the extent to which nonbank firms such as hedge funds and insurance companies fill any lost market-making capacity.4 2. Decline in trade size and turnoverMarket participants also often cite the decline in average trade size and turnover--the volume of trades relative to the total amount of bonds outstanding--as evidence of reduced liquidity.Figure 2shows that average trade size in the corporate bond market has indeed declined since 2006 but has been relatively stable in the past four years. Nevertheless, this decrease may reflect a number of factors, including changes in technology or the types and preferences of institutions engaged in trades, so it may not indicate a reduction in market liquidity. Certainly, the length of this trend, roughly a decade, seems on its face more consistent with a secular trend such as technological change. Turnover in the corporate bond market has declined as well, though this evidence is also not a definitive sign of reduced market liquidity. The decline in turnover is not driven by a reduction in trading volume, but it is the result of a robust growth of the denominator, debt outstanding. 3. Liquidity during times of stressMarket participants further express concern about the potential for market liquidity to become less resilient during times of stress, when it is needed the most. However, evidence on this front is difficult to gather. Some argue that market liquidity is resilient because financial markets appear to have functioned fairly well during recent episodes of high market volatility, such as following the Brexit vote or earlier this year, when oil prices were low and stock market volatility was high. Others argue that it is not. According to a recent study, the cost of trading distressed corporate bonds appears to be higher now than in the recent past.5Specifically, the authors find that, before the crisis, the cost of a $1 million bond transaction increased about 0.7 percent following a downgrade, but--after the Volcker rule--the cost following a downgrade rose 2.4 percent. This analysis, however, is limited to episodes of distressed borrowers rather than a systemwide stress. 4. Flash eventsIn addition, recent flash events--such as the sharp movement in Treasury prices on October 15, 2014; the rapid rise and decline of the euro-dollar exchange rate on March 18, 2015;6and the swing in sterling on October 7, 2016--have led some to assert that market liquidity has become less resilient. Researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York have argued that spikes in volatility and sudden declines in liquidity have become more frequent in both Treasury and equity markets.7The Commodity Futures Trading Commission also points out that flash events are more common now.8Market participants suggest that the rapid growth in high-frequency trading in equity, foreign exchange, and U.S. Treasury markets, along with broader concerns about less resilient liquidity, potentially explains these flash events. Nevertheless, a report on the October 15, 2014 event by the staff of the Treasury Department, Federal Reserve, and market regulatory agencies found no single factor that caused the sharp swing in prices.9 A Broader Review of the Evidence 1. Trading costs are lowEven though flash events appear to be more common, it is certainly too soon to declare that a broad reduction in market liquidity has occurred.Figure 3plots realized bid-ask spreads for investment-grade corporate bonds over time (the black dashed line) and speculative-grade corporate bonds (the red solid line). Prior to the financial crisis, the cost of trading corporate bonds was low--on average, bid-ask spreads were about 1 percent of the price of the bond for investment-grade bonds and about 2 percent for speculative-grade bonds. This measure of trading costs skyrocketed during the financial crisis but has returned to the range seen in the few years prior to the crisis. Alternative measures of trading costs, such as price impact measures, which attempt to capture the effect of transactions on market prices, follow a similar pattern. Transaction costs seem to suggest liquidity has improved. One caveat, however, is that measures of aggregate transaction costs in the corporate bond market may underestimate embedded liquidity costs. In preliminary work, Choi and Huh suggest that transactions in which dealers act simply as brokers, rather than as intermediaries that hold assets on their balance sheets, could reflect price concessions that dealers make to entice counterparties into the other side of a trade so that the dealers will not need to hold the traded assets.10Price concessions, in turn, lower traditional measures of trading costs, making trading seem inexpensive, when in reality these concessions are fees the dealers pay to some investors for providing liquidity. Moreover, as dealer inventories have declined over the past few years, this downward distortion to aggregate trading cost measures may have increased. To address this problem, Choi and Huh try to isolate transactions in which corporate bond investors are looking for liquidity (in other words, are looking to trade) and then construct measures of transaction costs for only such trades. The paper's results are preliminary but appear to suggest transaction costs have increased somewhat in recent years. 2. Trading volume is highAnother commonly used measure of liquidity is trading volume.Figure 4shows trading volume in the corporate bond market. This measure is important because low trading volumes may indicate that high transaction costs have deterred investors from making trades, a phenomenon that transaction cost measures would clearly miss because they are calculated from actual trades. The trading volumes depicted in the figure show no obvious signs of a current problem with market liquidity. In 2006, investors traded an average of $12 billion a day. During the height of the financial crisis, trading volume decreased to $8 billion a day, but, by 2009, volumes appeared to have fully recovered. Today trading volumes are at about $19 billion a day. On balance, the evidence presented in these two figures seems to suggest that market liquidity has not deteriorated in recent years--subject, of course, to the caveat I just discussed about the possibility that our measures of bid-ask spreads could be distorted by the increasing role of investors as suppliers rather than demanders of liquidity.11 As an aside, the market liquidity figures shown are only for the corporate bond market, but we see similar patterns in the equity and Treasury markets.12That is, we do not find convincing evidence that liquidity has markedly declined in those markets. Policy Issues Related to Market LiquidityWhile the evidence for changes in market liquidity does not point clearly to a reduction, I have highlighted some recent research that indicates the possibility that market liquidity has fallen. To date, observed changes in liquidity do not suggest that shifts in liquidity are having a notable effect on the cost of trading. Nonetheless, the potential for liquidity to evaporate in times of stress deserves careful scrutiny--along with broader risks to financial stability associated with changes in markets. One area where policy concerns have arisen is related to the potential for fire sales in bond markets, which could compound the risks associated with leverage in the financial sector. Bond markets have grown considerably, and market-based finance has intensified over the past years, making market liquidity even more important.13In addition, mutual funds that offer daily redemption rights have grown relative to the size of corporate bond markets. As shown infigure 5, assets under management in investment-grade and high-yield corporate bond mutual funds (the solid blue area) have hovered around 25 to 30 percent of the amount of outstanding corporate bonds in recent years, up from about 15 percent before the crisis.i Reduced market liquidity might exacerbate fire sale risks from leverage at financial institutions or from first-mover advantage at mutual funds. Leveraged institutions are more sensitive to changes in asset prices. Adverse movements in asset prices, margin calls, and higher haircuts may force them to sell assets to obtain cash and delever, affecting other market participants through declining asset prices and increased margin calls. In addition, leverage may closely interact with liquidity risk at mutual funds. Open-end mutual funds are characterized by the so-called first-mover advantage: Investors can redeem daily from the funds that hold assets that are less liquid, while liquidation costs are borne by investors remaining in the fund. If a decline in bond prices leads to sizable fund withdrawals, the first-mover advantage could accelerate redemptions and second-round price declines. In addition, investors may perceive leveraged funds that experience stress as riskier, possibly becoming more inclined to redeem from these funds. This situation could be worse than in the past if market liquidity deteriorates and dealers are less willing to buy and hold bonds in inventory to cushion the price decline induced by fire sales. However, thanks to recent regulation and supervisory changes, including higher capital requirements and stress tests, leverage at the largest intermediaries is much reduced relative to pre-crisis norms--and, as a result, vulnerabilities from potential fire sale risks are less significant. From this perspective, a small reduction in liquidity from regulatory changes--even if present, which is not obvious--may be a reasonable price to pay for greater safety. I will now place changes in liquidity into the broader context of financial stability. Tradeoff between Liquidity and Regulations to Achieve a Safer Financial SystemIt is possible that regulations aimed at correcting vulnerabilities in the financial system--like the Supplementary Leverage Ratio, together with other factors--have altered the business model of dealer firms and, thus, liquidity. While the evidence for a reduction in market liquidity is far from clear, let us for the moment accept this possibility and consider the potential effects on financial stability. Regulatory changes, even those that may have reduced market liquidity, likely have enhanced financial stability on balance. Recent evidence indeed points in favor of enhanced financial stability. Regulatory capital ratios for banks and insurance companies remain high, which, as previously mentioned, would mitigate fire sales and their effect on the solvency and functioning of these institutions. Leverage at intermediaries is much reduced relative to pre-crisis norms, and gross leverage at hedge funds, based on the partial information available, has not changed much in recent years. Research from economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shows that the decline in leverage, among other factors, has substantially reduced potential fire sale externalities in the banking and broker-dealer sectors.14Thus, the regulatory changes appear to be having a positive effect on financial system stability, and these benefits may outweigh the potential costs of a possible reduction in liquidity. Regulatory changes are in train for the asset management industry, whose vulnerabilities have been under examination by the Financial Stability Oversight Council and the Financial Stability Board.15The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has recently approved rules to modernize and enhance the reporting and disclosure of information by registered investment companies and to enhance liquidity risk management by open-end funds, including mutual funds and certain exchange-traded funds.16The SEC has also proposed rules that would put new limits on registered funds' gross notional derivative exposures, enhance the requirements for asset segregation in derivatives transactions, and include new risk-management requirements for the use of derivatives.17 ConclusionOverall, liquidity is adequate by most measures, in most markets, and most of the time.18Bid-ask spreads and price-impact measures point toward liquidity that is good by historical standards, and we have not observed declines in market liquidity in recent episodes of high market volatility. Nevertheless, the market structure is changing, and trades in certain situations and in certain market segments might have become more costly. Also, flash events may be more frequent today, and the dynamics of a system with frequent flash events are likely to become complicated. Moreover, some regulatory changes are only now being phased in. In light of these changes and the evolving structure of financial markets, it will be important to monitor and continue to analyze the state of market liquidity. As we monitor, we should continue to emphasize how the evolution of market liquidity interacts with broader changes to affect the efficient allocation of capital and financial stability. And we should always bear in mind the possibility that new financial developments could change the dynamics of market responses to unanticipated economic developments. ReferencesAdrian, Tobias, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt (2015). "Has Liquidity Risk in the Treasury and Equity Markets Increased?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), October 6. Bao, Jack, Maureen O'Hara, and Xing (Alex) Zhou (2016). "The Volcker Rule and Market-Making in Times of Stress," working paper, September. Bessembinder, Hendrik, Stacey Jacobsen, William Maxwell, and Kumar Venkataraman (2016). "Capital Commitment and Illiquidity in Corporate Bonds," working paper, July. Choi, Jaewon, and Yesol Huh (2016). "Customer Liquidity Provision in Corporate Bond Markets," working paper, September. Duarte, Fernando, and Thomas M. Eisenbach (2013). "Fire-Sale Spillovers and Systemic Risk (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 645. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October (revised February 2015). Duffie, Darrell (2012).Market Making under the Proposed Volcker Rule (PDF),report to the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association and submission to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Stanford, Calif.: Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, January. Financial Stability Board (2016).Proposed Policy Recommendations to Address Structural Vulnerabilities from Asset Management Activities (PDF),consultative document. Basel, Switzerland: FSB, June. Financial Stability Oversight Council (2016).Update on Review of Asset Management Products and Activities (PDF).Washington: FSOC, April. Massad, Timothy (2015). "Remarks of Chairman Timothy Massad before the Conference on the Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, October 21. Powell, Jerome H. (2015). "Structure and Liquidity in Treasury Markets," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, August 3. Trebbi, Francesco, and Kairong Xiao (2015). "Regulation and Market Liquidity," NBER Working Paper Series 21739. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2015).Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 (PDF).Washington: Treasury, Board of Governors, FRBNY, SEC, and CFTC, July. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2015a). "Open-End Fund Liquidity Risk Management Programs; Swing Pricing; Re-Opening of Comment Period for Investment Company Reporting Modernization Release (PDF)," proposed rule and re-opening of comment period, releases 33-9922 and IC-31835, files S7-16-15 and S7-08-15. Washington: SEC, October. -------- (2015b). "Use of Derivatives by Registered Investment Companies and Business Development Companies (PDF)," proposed rule, release IC-31933, file S7-24-15. Washington: SEC, December. 1.This is the definition of market liquidity presented in chapter 2 of the IMF'sGlobal Financial Stability Report,September 2015, p. 50.Return to text 2.In this speech, I am discussing market liquidity, not funding liquidity.Return to text 3.I am grateful to Chiara Scotti and Clara Vega of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 4.Bessembinder, Jacobsen, Maxwell, and Venkataraman (2016) find that bank dealers are less willing to provide liquidity now than in the recent past, while nonbank dealers are more willing. Duffie (2012) argues that the negative effect the Volcker rule may have on market liquidity in the short run may disappear in the long run as nonbanks step in to provide liquidity. Duffie (2012) also mentions that the migration of liquidity provision from banks to nonbanks, which are not regulated, may have potentially important adverse consequences for financial stability.Return to text 5.See Bao, O'Hara, and Zhou (2016).Return to text 6.See Powell (2015) for a discussion of recent flash events and other changes in the behavior of bond prices.Return to text 7.See Adrian and others (2015).Return to text 8.See Massad (2015).Return to text 9.See U.S. Treasury and others (2015).Return to text 10.See Choi and Huh (2016).Return to text 11.Trebbi and Xiao (2015) analyze multiple corporate bond liquidity measures and conclude that there is no evidence of deterioration in liquidity due to regulation.Return to text 12.Secured funding spreads have increased, suggesting higher intermediation costs in the repo (repurchase agreement) market.Return to text 13.A market-based system is one where securities markets share center stage with banks in allocating capital, in contrast to a bank-based system, where banks play a leading role.Return to text 14.See Duarte and Eisenbach (2013).Return to text 15.See Financial Stability Oversight Council (2016) and Financial Stability Board (2016).Return to text 16.The SEC approved the proposed rule on October 13, 2016. See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2015a).Return to text 17.See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2015b).Return to text 18.I thank Jerome Powell for this statement.Return to text i.Note: Update December 21, 2016: The original version of this speech, referring to figure 5, stated that “In addition, mutual funds that offer daily redemption rights hold a greater share of bonds than investors who buy and hold. As shown in figure 5, the share of investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds held at mutual funds (the solid blue area) has hovered around 25 to 30 percent in recent years, up from about 15 percent before the crisis.” The figure shows assets under management by corporate bond mutual funds, not such funds’ holdings of corporate bonds, relative to outstanding corporate bonds. The text has been revised to correctly describe the figure.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At "A Conversation with Stanley Fischer," sponsored by the Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York Watch live:http://www.cfr.org/monetary-policy/conversation-stanley-fischer/p38477 Notwithstanding a number of shocks over the past year, the U.S. economy is performing reasonably well. Job gains have been robust in recent years, and the unemployment rate has declined to 4.9 percent, likely close to its long-run sustainable level. After running at a subdued pace during the first half of the year, gross domestic product growth has picked up in the most recent data, and inflation has been firming toward the Federal Open Market Committee's 2 percent target.1 Although the economy has moved back to the vicinity of the Committee's employment and inflation targets--suggesting that the cyclical drag on the economy has been greatly reduced, if not largely eliminated--along some dimensions this has not been a happy recovery. Unease with the economy reflects a number of longer-term challenges, challenges that will require a different set of policy tools than those used to address nearer-term cyclical shortfalls in growth. Prominent among these challenges are low equilibrium interest rates and sluggish productivity growth in the United States and abroad. I will first touch on low interest rates before turning to productivity. The federal funds rate and policy rates in other advanced economies remain very low or even negative. Longer-term rates are also low by historical standards, even taking into account the increase of the past two weeks. Such low interest rates, together with only tepid growth, suggest that the equilibrium interest rate--that is, the rate that neither boosts nor slows the economy--has fallen. Why does this matter? Importantly, low interest rates make the economy more vulnerable to adverse shocks by constraining the ability of monetary policy to combat recessions using conventional interest rate policy--because the effective lower bound on the interest rate means that monetary policy has less room to reduce the interest rate when that becomes necessary. Also, low equilibrium rates could threaten financial stability by encouraging a reach for yield and compressing net interest margins, although it is important to point out that so far we have not seen evidence that low rates have notably increased financial vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system. More fundamentally, low equilibrium real rates could signal that the economy’s long-run growth prospects are dim. Why are interest rates so low?2In a speech last month, I identified a number of factors that have worked to boost saving, depress investment, or both. Among the factors holding down interest rates is the sluggishness of foreign economic growth. Another is demographics, with saving being higher as a result of an increase in the average age of the U.S. population. Also, investment recently has been weaker than might otherwise be expected, perhaps reflecting uncertainty about longer-run growth prospects, as well as the decline in investment in the energy sector as a result of the fall in the price of oil. Finally, and most important, weak productivity growth has likely pushed down interest rates both by lowering investment, as firms lower their expectations for the marginal return on investment, and by increasing saving, as consumers lower their expectations for income growth and borrow less and/or save more as a consequence. Understanding the recent weakness of productivity growth is central to addressing the longer-run challenges confronting the economy. Productivity growth over the past decade has been lackluster by post-World War II standards. Output per hour increased only 1-1/4 percent per year, on average, from 2006 to 2015, compared with its long-run average of 2-1/2 percent from 1949 to 2005. This halving of productivity growth, if it were to persist, would have wide-ranging consequences for living standards, wage growth, and economic policy more broadly. A number of explanations have been offered for the decline in productivity growth, including mismeasurement in the official statistics, depressed capital investment, and a falloff in business dynamism, with reality likely reflecting some combination of all of these factors and more. We should also consider the possibility that weak demand has played a role in holding back productivity growth, although standard economic textbooks generally trace a path from productivity growth to demand rather than vice versa. Chair Yellen recently spoke on the influence of demand on aggregate supply.3In her speech, she reviewed a body of literature that suggests that demand conditions can have persistent effects on supply.4In most of the literature, these effects are thought to occur through hysteresis in labor markets. But there are likely also some channels through which low aggregate demand could affect productivity, perhaps by lowering research-and-development spending or decreasing the pace of firm formation and innovation. I believe that the relationship between productivity growth and the strength of aggregate demand is an area where further research is required. I will conclude by reiterating one aspect of the low interest rate and low productivity growth problems that I have mentioned previously--the fact that, for several years, the Fed has been close to being "the only game in town," as Mohamed El-Erian described it in his recent book.5But macroeconomic policy does not have to be confined to monetary policy. Certain fiscal policies, particularly those that increase productivity, can increase the potential of the economy and help confront some of our longer-term economic challenges. While there is disagreement about what the most effective policies would be, some combination of improved public infrastructure, better education, more encouragement for private investment, and more effective regulation all likely have a role to play in promoting faster growth of productivity and living standards. By raising equilibrium interest rates, such policies may also reduce the probability that the economy, and the Federal Reserve, will have to contend more than is necessary with the effective lower bound on interest rates. 1. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Stanley Fischer (2016), "Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Causes and Implications," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, October 17.Return to text 3. See Janet L. Yellen (2016), "Macroeconomic Research after the Crisis," speech delivered at "The Elusive 'Great' Recovery: Causes and Implications for Future Business Cycle Dynamics," 60th annual economic conference, held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 14.Return to text 4. See, for example, Olivier Blanchard, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015), "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/230 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, November); and Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2015), "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (March), pp. 71-109.Return to text 5. See Mohamed A. El-Erian (2016),The Only Game in Town: Central Banks, Instability, and Avoiding the Next Collapse(New York: Random House).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for October 11 and October 31, 2016. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on November 1-2, 2016. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 1-2, 2016:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the The Economic Club of Indiana, Indianapolis, Indiana Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. My plan is to discuss the U.S. economy from three different perspectives. I will start by taking stock of the current expansion--a business cycle point of view. Then I will shift the focus to some of the longer-term challenges we face in coming years. I will conclude with a discussion of monetary policy. As always, the views I express here today are mine alone. The Current State of the EconomyAs you know, the Congress has tasked the Federal Reserve with achieving stable prices and maximum employment--the dual mandate. Today, we are not far from achieving those goals. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has an objective of 2 percent for inflation, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures. The Committee sees this objective as symmetrical, so that minor deviations above or below 2 percent are treated alike.1Inflation has consistently run below 2 percent since 2011, and is now at 1.2 percent over the past 12 months(figure 1). This headline measure of inflation has recently been held down by falling energy and food prices. We also monitor core inflation, which excludes the volatile energy and food components because they often send a misleading signal about underlying inflation pressures. Core inflation is running at 1.7 percent over the past 12 months. Both measures have gradually moved upward toward 2 percent. U.S. inflation trended steadily lower after the Volcker disinflation of 1981 to 1982 and has been low and reasonably stable for many years. In fact, for the past several years inflation has run below policy targets in many parts of the world, including here in the United States. Many of us are old enough to remember when the only challenge was to keep inflation low. But too-low inflation can also be a serious problem. Below-target inflation increases the real value of debts owed by households and businesses and reduces the ability of central banks to respond to downturns. The public's expectations about inflation are thought to be an important driver of actual inflation. Many measures of U.S. inflation expectations--both from surveys and from market-based readings--are still well below their pre-crisis levels, although some have moved up as of late. The only way to ensure that inflation expectations remain safely anchored near the FOMC's target is to keep inflation close to that target on a consistent basis. So, while the current shortfall may seem small, it is important that inflation continue to move up to 2 percent, as I expect it will. The FOMC does not have a numerical goal for maximum employment because the long-run sustainable level of employment changes over time and is determined mainly by nonmonetary factors that are outside the Fed's control, such as evolving labor market practices, demographics, social change, and fiscal and regulatory policies. Nonetheless, four times each year FOMC participants write down their estimates of the longer-run normal level of the unemployment rate (the natural rate); at the September FOMC meeting the median estimate was 4.8 percent, very close to the current unemployment rate of 4.9 percent. Other labor market measures are also healthy, including payroll job creation and labor force participation. Employers have been adding roughly 180,000 jobs per month so far this year--a pace a little below that of the past several years but significantly higher than underlying growth in the labor force(figure 2). Despite these strong job gains, the unemployment rate has flattened out this year after several years of sharp declines, thanks to welcome developments in labor force participation(figure 3). The labor force participation rate represents the percentage of adults aged 16 and over who are in the labor force, which is defined to include only those who are employed or actively looking for work. When people enter or reenter the labor force and begin to search for a job, that is generally a good thing even though at the margin their entry tends to increase the unemployment rate (or prevent it from declining). Beginning in the 1960s, labor force participation rose steadily as women entered the paid workforce(figure 4). That trend ran its course as participation peaked around 2000 and has declined steadily since then as a result of the aging of our population and other longer-run trends, notably the decline in participation by men in the heart of their working-age years. Going forward, many analysts expect labor force participation to decline at a trend rate of roughly 0.3 percent per year as a result of these factors. However, participation fell much more sharply than that after the financial crisis. Some of those who left the labor force went back to school, but others moved onto disability, took early retirement, or just became discouraged and stopped seeking work. The sharp drop raised fears that the crisis might leave behind permanent damage to our labor force. Fortunately, since late 2013, the participation rate has remained about flat and thus has gradually moved back close to its estimated longer-term trend.2On net, people have been entering and remaining in the labor market as job prospects have brightened, offsetting the natural decline from population aging. Surveys of households and firms also suggest that we are near full employment(figure 5). For example, respondents are now more likely to say that jobs are plentiful than that they are hard to get--a response that has generally been seen when the economy is near full employment. Job vacancies are running at high levels, and firms report that it is getting harder to find employees to fill open positions. Moreover, wages are now rising faster than inflation, and faster than output per hour. Taken together, labor market indicators show an economy that is on solid footing and close to our mandate of maximum employment. It is interesting to compare this expansion to past U.S. expansions, and also to recoveries of other countries since the end of the Global Financial Crisis. The picture is a mixed one. The current recovery has been under way since June 2009--nearly seven and a half years. It will soon be the third longest of the 20 recoveries since the founding of the Federal Reserve in 1913. GDP, or output, is now 11 percent higher than its pre-crisis peak. Employment is now 6.5 million higher than its pre-crisis peak. But this expansion has also had the slowest pace of GDP growth of any postwar recovery(figure 6). Given steady but modest growth, we have seen surprisingly large gains in employment and, until this year, a rapid reduction in the unemployment rate. Even though GDP growth has been slow, job gains during this recovery have been stronger than those during the previous expansion--the so-called jobless recovery of the early 2000s. The combination of weak growth and strong hiring in this expansion implies small increases in output per hour, or productivity. In fact, productivity has been increasing at a dismal pace, compared with virtually any period in the postwar era. I will return to productivity and growth in a moment. More positively, our current recovery compares fairly well with those of other advanced economies(figure 7). Output has increased faster, and unemployment has declined faster, in the United States than in other major advanced economies. And the Fed's challenges in getting inflation back up to 2 percent are similar to, but not as severe as, those faced by some other major monetary authorities. Turning to the near-term outlook, after a slow patch in the first half of this year, growth has clearly strengthened. I expect that the economy will continue on its path of the last few years, with real GDP growth of about 2 percent, strong job gains, a tightening labor market, and inflation moving up toward our 2 percent objective. The main risks I see to that outlook are from abroad. Growth and inflation are low around the world. With interest rates so low, we are not well positioned to respond to negative shocks, whatever the source. Longer-Run ChallengesProductivity and Growth Let's turn to longer-run challenges, and start by asking why growth has been so slow, and how fast we are likely to grow going forward. This next slide shows the five-year trailing average annual real GDP growth rate(figure 8). By this measure, growth averaged about 3.2 percent annually through the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. But growth began to decline after 2000 and then nose-dived with the onset of the Global Financial Crisis in 2007 and the slow expansion that followed. Since the financial crisis ended in 2009, forecasters have gradually reduced their estimates of long-run trend growth from about 3 percent to about 2 percent--a seemingly small difference that would make a huge difference in living standards over time.3 How much of this decline is just a particularly bad business cycle, and how much represents a long-run downshift? To get at that question, let's take a deeper look at the growth slowdown. We can think of economic growth as coming from two sources: more hours worked (labor supply) or higher output per hour (productivity). Hours worked mainly depends on growth in the labor force, which has been slowing since the mid-2000s as the baby-boom generation ages. As you can see, the labor force is now growing at only about 0.5 percent per year(figure 9). Another way to see this is through the sustained increase in the ratio of people over 65 to those who are in their prime working years(figure 10). This long-expected demographic fact has now arrived, and it has challenging implications for our potential growth and also for our fiscal policy.4 The unexpected part of the growth slowdown reflects weak productivity growth rather than lower labor supply. Labor productivity has increased only 1/2 percent per year since 2010--the smallest five-year rate of increase since World War II and about one-fourth of the average postwar rate(figure 11). The slowdown in productivity has been worldwide and is evident even in countries that were little affected by the crisis(figure 12). Given the global nature of the phenomenon, it is unlikely that U.S.-specific factors are mainly responsible. A portion of the productivity slowdown is undoubtedly due to low levels of investment by businesses. The financial crisis and the Great Recession left firms with excess capacity, reducing incentives to invest. If businesses expect slower growth to continue, that will also hold down investment. The other important factor is the decline in what economists call total factor productivity, or TFP, which is the part of productivity that is not explained by capital investment or increases in the skills of the labor force. TFP is thought to be mainly a function of technological innovation and efficiency gains. There is no consensus about the future direction of productivity.5The pessimists argue that the big paradigm-changing innovations, such as electrification or the advent of computers, are behind us. If that is so, then our standard of living will increase more slowly going forward. The optimists think that this slowdown is only a passing phase and that the age of robots and machine learning will transform our economy in coming decades. Still others argue that we are currently underestimating productivity and output because of the real difficulties we face in measuring GDP in a modern economy. For example, how do we measure the value-added of free digital services like Facebook or Twitter?6 The future is, as always, uncertain. But I would sum up the growth discussion as follows. Growth in the labor force has slowed, and we can estimate it with reasonable confidence to be only about 0.5 percent. Growth in productivity is both more important and much harder to predict. Productivity varies significantly over time, as figure 11 showed. If productivity growth returns to, say, 1.5 percent, then the U.S. economy could grow at about 2.0 percent over the long term. Actual growth may turn out to be weaker or stronger, and the choices we make as a society will have something to say about that. Why Are Long-Term Interest Rates So Low? Let's turn to the related question of why long-term interest rates are so extraordinarily low in advanced economies around the world. The yield on our own benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury security has increased lately, but at 2.3 percent it is still far below what was normal before the financial crisis. In fact, this next chart shows that, as growth and inflation have fallen, longer term interest rates have fallen as well over the past 35 years(figure 13). So why are long-term interest rates so low? Many of you will no doubt be thinking, "They are low because you people at the Fed set them low!" While there is an element of truth there, that is not the whole story. The FOMC has considerable control over short-term interest rates. We have much less influence over long-term rates, which are set in the marketplace. Long-term interest rates represent the price that balances the supply of saving by lenders and demand for funds by borrowers, such as businesses needing to fund their capital expenditures. Lenders expect to receive a real return and to be compensated for inflation and for the risk of nonpayment. Meanwhile, borrowers adjust their demand for funds based on their changing assessment of the risks and expected returns of their investment projects. When desired saving rises or investment demand falls, then long-term interest rates will decline. Today's very low level of long-term rates suggests that both of these factors are at play. Both expectations of slower growth and the aging of our population are having significant effects on desired saving and investment and are thus important causes of lower interest rates. If the economy is expanding more slowly, then the level of investment needed to meet demand will be lower. The lower path of growth reduces future income prospects of households, and they will tend to raise their saving. The pending retirement of baby boomers means higher saving, because people tend to save the most in the years just before their retirement. In addition, the lower rate of return on capital owing to lower productivity growth will lead to less investment and lower interest rates. As with productivity, the factors behind the fall in U.S. interest rates include an important global component, as rates are low around the world. Indeed, although our rates are near historical lows, U.S. Treasury rates are among the highest among the major advanced economy sovereigns(figure 14). Is This the New Normal? What can we do to prevent low growth, low inflation, and low interest rates from becoming the new normal? We need to focus on ways to increase our long-term growth and spread that prosperity as broadly as possible. I hasten to add that these policies are, for the most part, outside the purview of the Federal Reserve. We need policies that support productivity growth, business hiring and investment, labor force participation, and the development of skills. We need effective fiscal and regulatory policies that inspire public confidence. Increased spending on public infrastructure may raise private-sector productivity over time, particularly with the growth of the stock of public infrastructure near an all-time low.7Greater support for public and private research and development, and policies that improve product and labor market dynamism may also be fruitful.8Monetary policy can contribute by supporting a strong and durable expansion in a context of price stability. Monetary PolicyThe low interest rate environment presents special challenges for monetary policy. In setting our target for the federal funds rate, a good place to start is to identify the rate that would prevail if the economy were at 2 percent inflation and full employment--the so-called neutral rate. "Neutral" in this context means that the rate is neither contractionary nor expansionary. If the fed funds rate is lower than the neutral rate, then policy is stimulative or accommodative, which will tend to raise growth and inflation. If the fed funds rate is higher than the neutral rate, then policy is tight and will tend to slow growth and reduce inflation. But we can only estimate the neutral rate, and those estimates are subject to substantial uncertainty. Before the crisis, the long-run neutral rate was generally thought to be roughly stable at around 4.25 percent. Since the crisis, estimates have steadily declined, and the median estimate by FOMC participants stood at 2.9 percent in September. Many analysts believe that the neutral rate is even lower than that today and will only return to its long-run value over time.9The low level of the neutral interest rate has several important implications. First, today's low rates are not as stimulative as they seem--consider that, despite historically low rates, inflation has run consistently below target and housing construction remains far below pre-crisis levels. Second, with rates so low, central banks are not well positioned to counteract a renewed bout of weakness. Third, persistently low interest rates can raise financial stability concerns. A long period of very low interest rates could lead to excessive risk-taking and, over time, to unsustainably high asset prices and credit growth. These are risks that we monitor carefully. Higher growth would increase the neutral rate and help address these issues. Turning to the outlook for monetary policy, incoming data show an economy that is growing at a healthy pace, with solid payroll job gains and inflation gradually moving up to 2 percent. In my view, the case for an increase in the federal funds rate has clearly strengthened since our previous meeting earlier this month. Of course, the path of rates will depend on the path of the economy. With inflation below target, relatively slow growth, and some slack remaining in the economy, the Committee has been patient about raising rates. That patience has paid dividends. But moving too slowly could eventually mean that the Committee would have to tighten policy abruptly to avoid overshooting our goals. ConclusionTo wrap up, since the end of the Great Recession in 2009, our economy has recovered slowly but steadily. Today, we are reasonably close to achieving full employment and our 2 percent inflation objective. But we face real challenges over the medium and longer terms. Our aging population will mean slower growth, all else held equal. If living standards are to continue to rise, we need policies that will support productivity and allow our dynamic economy to generate widespread gains in prosperity. 1.See the FOMC's "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF)," FOMC, January 26, 2016.Return to text 2.The current participation rate is within the range of estimates cited in Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197-275.Return to text 3.See Jerome H. Powell (2016), "Recent Economic Developments, the Productive Potential of the Economy, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C., May 26.Return to text 4.Congressional Budget Office (2016),The 2016 Long-Term Budget Outlook(PDF), (Washington: CBO, July).Return to text 5.On the pessimistic end of the spectrum are analysts such as Robert Gordon,The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War(Princeton University Press, 2016). Among the optimists are Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee,The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies(W. W. Norton & Company, 2014).Return to text 6.See David M. Byrne, John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf (2016), "Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or Measurement Problem?"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,March 4.Return to text 7.See, for example, Abdul Abiad, Davide Furceri, and Petia Topalova (2014), "IMF Survey: The Time Is Right for an Infrastructure Push,"World Economic Outlook(Washington: International Monetary Fund, October).Return to text 8.See, for example, International Monetary Fund (2016), "Acting Now, Acting Together,"Fiscal Monitor(Washington: IMF, April); Ryan A. Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2016), "Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward,"American Economic Review, vol. 106 (May), pp. 203-07; Steven Davis and John Haltiwanger (2014), "Labor Market Fluidity and Economic Performance," NBER Working Paper Series 20479 (Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research, September); The Department of the Treasury Office of Economic Policy, the Council of Economic Advisers, and the Department of Labor (2015), "Occupational Licensing: A Framework for Policymakers (PDF)" (Washington: The White House, July).Return to text 9.See, for example, Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John Williams (2016), "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2016-11 (August); Benjamin K. Johannsen and Elmar Mertens (2016), "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9), http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.1703.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the 17th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C. Watch Live With today's data in the news, I will first say a few words about labor market conditions before moving on to discuss the economic outlook and monetary policy.1 The labor market has, by and large, had a pretty good year. Including this morning's release for October, payrolls have increased an average of 181,000 per month this year, a slower pace than last year but enough to keep the unemployment rate flat at about 5 percent. The unchanged unemployment rate reflects a positive, though perhaps transitory, development--mainly a pickup in labor force participation. The rise in participation may reflect the effects of the modest pickup in wages we are now seeing, with the rate of increase in the employment cost index having risen from an annual rate of about 2 percent last year to 2-1/4 percent so far this year. Over the course of the past two years, a variety of negative shocks have affected the U.S. economy, but employment has resumed robust growth after each temporary slowdown: This recovery has been and continues to be powerful in terms of one of our two main targets--employment--and it is my view that the labor market is close to full employment. It is nonetheless interesting to ask what level of payroll gains would maintain an unemployment rate of roughly 5 percent. Unsurprisingly, the level of payroll gains consistent with an unchanged unemployment rate is highly dependent on developments in labor force participation. If labor force participation was to remain flat, job gains in the range of 125,000 to 175,000 would likely be needed to prevent unemployment from creeping up. However, if labor force participation was to decline, as might be expected given demographic trends, the neutral rate of payroll gains would be lower. If we assumed a downward trend in participation of about 0.3 percentage point per year, in line with estimates of the likely drag from demographics, job gains in the range of 65,000 to 115,000 would likely be sufficient to maintain full employment. Last week we received some encouraging news on output growth. After a slow first half, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased almost 3 percent in the third quarter. However, the details were a little less exciting than the headline number. Household spending growth slowed, and residential investment declined. Business investment in equipment fell for the fourth consecutive quarter. A surge in exports supported growth; however, much of the increase was in shipments of soybeans, while exports of other goods remained tepid. Growth was also supported by a buildup in inventories, breaking a streak of five quarters in which inventories contributed negatively to growth, the longest such run in more than 50 years. Overall, I expect GDP growth to continue at a moderate pace, supported by household spending, renewed business investment, and the waning effects of past dollar appreciation on export growth. I will now turn to inflation. Headline PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation has moved up this year, with the 12-month change reaching 1.2 percent in September. As the transitory effects of the earlier fall in oil prices and rise in the dollar fade, PCE inflation can be expected to rise further toward our 2 percent target, supported by higher core PCE inflation, which ran at a 1.7 percent pace in September. As you know, earlier this week, we decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent. As was noted in the Federal Open Market Committee's statement, our assessment is that the most recent data have further strengthened the case for increasing the target range for the federal funds rate.2The markets put a probability of above 70 percent on the rate being increased in December. So far I've been discussing our near-term economic prospects. But the more interesting and important questions relate to the next few years rather than the next few months. They relate in large part to the secular stagnation arguments that were laid out yesterday in Larry Summers' Mundell-Fleming lecture--in particular the behavior of the rate of productivity growth. The statement that the problem we face is largely one of demand--and we do face that problem--seems to imply either that productivity growth is called forth by aggregate demand, or a Say's Law of productivity growth, namely that productivity growth produces its own demand. That is not an issue that can be answered purely by theorizing. Rather, it will be answered by the behavior of output and inflation as we approach and perhaps to some extent exceed our employment and inflation targets. 1. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016),"Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,"press release, November 2.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At "Evolution of Work," a convening cosponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Freelancers Union, New York, New York Watch live athttps://www.facebook.com/newyorkfed/ I would like to thank Bill Dudley and Sara Horowitz for inviting me to participate in today's conference. The subject we are tackling today--the evolution of work--is a particular interest of mine and is a matter of great importance to the Federal Reserve. The Congress has mandated the Federal Reserve to implement monetary policy so as to promote maximum employment and stable prices. Our dual mandate recognizes the importance of work in enabling people to contribute to the financial security of their family and the prosperity of their community and the country overall. Moreover, there is a long-standing recognition that secure and dignified work provides a key sense of purpose and worth. Understanding the changing nature of employment in today's economy is not only central to the mission of the Federal Reserve, but also goes to the core of who we are as providers for our families and productive members of society.1 In contrast to traditional work arrangements, in which an employee has a durable employment relationship with a single primary employer, a large and growing proportion of the workforce is working through contracting, temporary arrangements, on-call arrangements, or as freelancers being hired for episodic "gigs." Broadly speaking, contingent arrangements are more transitory than traditional arrangements, in the extreme consisting of a single transaction or gig. They often provide considerably greater flexibility than long-term employment contracts, allowing workers and employers to move in and out of work relationships easily. Depending on the nature of the employment relationship, this enhanced flexibility could have benefits and costs that accrue to workers and employers very differently. Although they have always been a feature of the American economic landscape, there has been a sharp increase in the prevalence of contingent working arrangements over the past decade, and it is too early to tell how much of this acceleration is a cyclical phenomenon associated with the Great Recession or reflects a structural trend. The growing share and variety of contingent work has important implications for policy and puts a premium on data and research exploring this topic. For monetary policy, the growth of contingent work affects the way we assess maximum employment and the way we interpret important labor market outcomes, such as the level of part-time employment and aggregate hours worked. Depending on the contractual arrangements, it may also have important implications for economic security and the behavior of households as consumers and savers. Richer and timely data and analysis could help guide employers, workers, and public officials toward outcomes where benefits and risks are better understood and managed. What Do We Know about Contingent Work?Official measures of the changing nature of work have not kept pace with the evolution of the economy. But thanks to some cutting-edge researchers, several of whom are present today, there is a growing foundation of analysis. Last year, Larry Katz and Alan Krueger conducted a version of the Contingent Worker Survey (CWS) to track alternative and nonstandard work arrangements using the RAND American Life Panel.2Their findings are striking: Over the past decade, contingent workers have increased by roughly one-half and now make up 16 percent of the workforce. This rapid increase is in marked contrast to the preceding decade, when contingent workers remained at a relatively stable 10 percent of the workforce, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics' (BLS) CWS.3They conclude that all of the net growth in aggregate employment in the decade leading up to 2015 can be accounted for by contingent work arrangements, which means there has been no net employment growth in traditional work arrangements. Given that this period spanned the Great Recession and the first five years of a slow recovery, it naturally raises the question of how much of the large recent shift toward contingent work is attributable to cyclical factors, as opposed to structural forces that may be here to stay.4 Long before the advent of firms such as Uber and TaskRabbit, ‎many individuals worked in contingent arrangements, such as freelancing and contracting, and it is these groups that have increased their share of the workforce most notably over the past decade. The largest increase in contingent work over this time has been among workers whose services are contracted out by another company, which rose from 0.6 percent to 3.1 percent of the workforce. There was also a large increase in workers who are independent contractors, consultants, or freelancers, whose share grew from 6.9 percent in 2005 to 8.4 percent in 2015. On-call workers expanded from 1.7 percent to 2.6 percent of the workforce.5 Over this same period, technological platforms have emerged that are transforming the way people identify, schedule, and engage in contingent work and are also helping people to monetize their assets to generate income. These developments, under the rubric of the "gig," "on-demand," "platform," or "sharing" economy, have the potential to be transformative. Although the data are still relatively sparse, it appears that the number of workers using online platforms to secure gigs is still small but is growing quickly.6Katz and Krueger found that workers who provide services through three online intermediaries accounted for only 0.5 percent of all workers in 2015. Diana Farrell and Fiona Greig (2016) reach a similar conclusion, using a unique and rich data set.7 The Federal Reserve Board fielded a survey to better understand the many ways adults are generating income, regardless of their employment status and the frequency of these activities. The survey uses an expansive concept of contingent work, capturing all of the activity individuals are undertaking to generate income. The Enterprising and Informal Work Activity survey, or EIWA, suggests that more than a third--36 percent--of the adult population undertook informal paid work activity either as a complement to, or as a substitute for, more traditional and formal work arrangements.8Similarly, a survey undertaken by Upwork and the Freelancers Union that also uses an expansive definition of contingent work finds that 35 percent of the labor force engages in freelance work.9 The Upwork survey provides further insight by subdividing the 35 percent of the labor force who have done some form of informal work over the past 12 months into five categories. In the categories most comparable with the Katz and Krueger CWS categories, roughly 12 percent of the workforce identify as independent contractors who do not have an employer and engage in project-by-project work, whereas between 2 and 3 percent are traditional contract or temporary workers who have a single employer or project at a time and whose work status is temporary. By contrast, roughly half of the Upwork respondents do informal work in addition to traditional employment relationships; almost 10 percent derive their income from multiple different types of arrangements, including both traditional employment relationships and freelancing, while about 9 percent report having a full-time traditional job and "moonlighting" to gain additional income on top of that. The group that derives income from multiple different types of jobs has evidenced the fastest growth over the last few years covered by the survey. In addition, 2.5 percent identify as business owners. Finally, the EIWA survey provides valuable insights into the use of recent technologies in informal work. The EIWA survey suggests that over the previous six months, roughly 11 percent of adults in the United States have engaged in paid services using an online platform, such as arranging transportation activities with companies such as Uber, arranging work opportunities on sites like Care.com, Amazon Mechanical Turk, or TaskRabbit, generating projects through companies such as Fiverr, selling goods and crafts on sites such as eBay and Etsy, and renting rooms or homes through services like Airbnb, among others.10This figure is much larger than the Katz and Krueger finding of 0.5 percent, partly because the EIWA survey was fielded to all adults regardless of their formal employment status, asked aboutallonline paid services, and used a six-month look-back period, rather than the past week. Who Is Engaging in Contingent Work and Why?Together, these recent surveys of informal work paint a varied picture of the universe of informal work arrangements, along with participants' motivations for engaging in them. Nineteen percent of informal workers in the EIWA survey, for example, were engaged in three or more online and/or offline informal paid work activities in the prior six months, and 25 percent indicated that informal and contingent work activities have been "very much" or "somewhat" a regular and consistent source of their monthly income. Results regarding the ages of workers attracted to nontraditional work vary: Katz and Krueger find that the share of contingent work arrangements increases with age, while the Upwork study finds that freelancing is more prevalent among the young. The earnings experiences of contingent workers appear to span a wide range. Katz and Krueger find that those engaged in contingent work tend to be concentrated in the highest income quintiles. But while independent contractors and contract workers earn relatively high wages, on-call and temporary-help work tends to occur among workers in lower wage quintiles. One common theme that emerges is the desire to earn extra money, which is a primary motivation for 74 percent of part-time, and 68 percent of full-time, freelancers in the Upwork survey. Similarly, in the EIWA survey, 65 percent of informal workers reported that earning income was their main reason for engaging in informal and contingent work, and the EIWA provides many examples that corroborate this result.11A full-time restaurant cook in his 50s, reports that he does yard work and sells items both online and offline to earn extra income and to help family members. He averages 60 hours per month from side and gig work and reported that these earnings constitute 75 percent of his household's monthly earnings. Similarly, a respondent in her 20s works part time as a dental hygienist and supplements this employment with about 8 hours per month of additional gig work. She said that the gig work somewhat mitigated the effect of the Great Recession, which found her working fewer hours, with stagnant wages and a loss of benefits. For others, work-life balance considerations seem to play a significant role in choosing contingent work arrangements. For example, a mother in her 20s reported spending 12 hours per month selling self-crafted items online, babysitting, and completing online tasks, collectively providing about 20 percent of her family's income. She reported that her main reason for participating in the gig economy is to be home with her daughter. Many others find themselves in highly variable work arrangements not by preference but because of the requirements of their employers. As employers have outsourced noncore tasks to contract firms and moved to technologically enabled "just-in-time" scheduling of employees, contract workers and on-call workers have had to adjust to variable and sometimes unpredictable hours. As these stories indicate, there are a variety of reasons workers engage in alternative and nonstandard work arrangements. Many individuals use the flexibility and enhanced connectivity of new technology-enabled platforms to pursue expanded opportunities. While some supplement their traditional job, using their free time to earn extra income, others cobble together contingent work arrangements or gigs to generate necessary income in the absence of traditional work opportunities. Still others move into contingent work arrangements due to their employers' work requirements. While some workers seem to appreciate the greater opportunities contingent work arrangements provide, others engage in this work out of necessity because they appear unable to obtain a full-time traditional work arrangement that meets their needs. Overall, the Upwork study finds that 63 percent of freelancers say they are pursuing this type of work by choice, while 37 percent do it out of necessity. It is unclear whether this outcome would hold true of the more tightly defined population in the Katz and Krueger survey. Implications of a Growing Gig EconomyIf market forces and technology are driving the growing prevalence of gig work, these trends will likely continue, and policymakers must better understand these changes. A natural starting point is measurement. There is some good news on this front, as the BLS is preparing to field a CWS in May 2017 for the first time since 2005. Better data should help deepen our understanding of how the growth of contingent work is changing the behavior of workers and employers and what these developments imply for the overall economy and household welfare. From a macroeconomic perspective, we should be attuned to the possibility that the growth in flexible work arrangements may alter the natural rate of employment and how the labor market reacts to shocks as we assess the cyclical behavior of important aggregates--such as labor force participation, employment, hours worked, and underemployment. One possibility is that new technologies, by lowering the barriers to workforce entry, could raise employment and labor force participation. Because there are fixed costs to obtaining and maintaining a job--such as searching for the job, learning about the job, and traveling to the job site every workday--the traditional work arrangement embeds incentives for individuals to work only one job, thus minimizing these fixed costs. And for those individuals who desire to work relatively few hours, these fixed costs in the past may have led to a decision to remain out of the labor force. But if technology makes it less costly for individuals to find work, manage multiple work relationships, and flexibly work more or fewer hours as their schedule permits, this could significantly increase workers' options and have important effects on labor market behavior. Importantly, any such increases in participation and employment would likely be structural, not cyclical, enabling the economy to run at a sustainably higher level. New technologies could also make it easier for individuals' actual hours to match their desired hours of work in a day or a week. Instead of seeing hours per week bunched around 40, we may see greater variation in the hours that individuals work. Lower barriers to workforce entry may make it more attractive for more individuals to work only a few hours a week if they desire--and can afford--to do so. At the same time, by making it easier to find additional work, new technologies may lead to more individuals working greater-than-full-time hours every week. In addition, we may see individuals changing the number of hours they work more frequently, as these changes become less costly. Both the EIWA and Upwork surveys confirm that gig work does, indeed, lower barriers to workforce entry and increase hours and flexibility for some individuals. The increasing prevalence of gig work may also affect the unemployment rate and productivity. To the extent that gigs provide an easy entryway to employment, unemployment may decrease. However, if gig work is less stable, it may increase job loss. The net effect on unemployment is, thus, unclear. Regarding productivity, gig work could lower aggregate productivity to the extent that it requires less human capital or specialized knowledge than traditional jobs, or if it primarily increases hours worked by lower-skilled individuals. That said, gig work, especially when enabled by new technologies, may allow hours to respond more flexibly to changes in demand and individuals to more easily connect with many different clients or employers. As a result, workers' downtime and the time required to acquire new clients and manage existing clients may decrease, in which case resource utilization and productivity may increase. It is also possible that the increasing prevalence of gig work will cause the cyclical behavior of unemployment, participation, and the workweek to change, with implications for how we assess the amount of slack. We know that contingent work increases when the economy worsens. If new technologies make it easier to find gig work, then we could see unemployment rise less in recessions, to the extent that gig workers are counted as employed. However, it could be that individuals who are able to avoid unemployment through contingent work would still be underemployed if it is difficult to cobble together enough gigs to achieve full-time employment. This would likely show up as lower average workweeks and higher levels of involuntary part-time employment during downturns. As a result, cyclical changes in resource utilization could be reflected less in movements in the unemployment rate and more in variation in hours per worker. Beyond the behavior of macroeconomic variables, it is unclear how the growth of different types of gig work affects the welfare of workers. Welfare should increase in cases where gig work meets the needs of workers by providing a low-barrier means of accessing employment and by allowing workers to better match actual hours worked with desired hours of work, especially if the gig work is available at times and in places where traditional work opportunities are in short supply. There is some evidence that this has, indeed, been the case. For example, 24 percent of informal workers in the EIWA survey indicated that contingent work had offset their spells of unemployment, loss of working hours, loss of benefits, or frozen wages in their formal employment "very much" or "somewhat." In addition, three-fourths of Uber drivers say that the greater control over their work schedules that Uber allows has made their lives better.12 However, there are likely many workers who would prefer regular full-time traditional work to contingent work, particularly if much of the power in determining hours worked in alternative work arrangements belongs to the employer. Technological advances have enabled firms to use just-in-time strategies for their employees, making them in effect on-call workers. This is a rising trend in industries such as retail and food preparation. Several recent articles describe the challenges faced by these just-in-time workers, who must conform their hours to the daily and even hourly ebbs and flows of business, often not knowing whether they will have work on a given day until they call in that morning to inquire.13These arrangements can leave workers scrambling to patch together child care, elder care, and transportation to meet the often unpredictable demands of their workplace, while making it difficult to engage in regularly scheduled activities to enhance their income and opportunities, such as a second job or career training. While such workers often are not given full-time work, they often must make themselves available to work full-time hours. According to one survey, 71 percent of retail workers in New York stated that their hours fluctuated from week to week, while half said their employers could change their hours at will.14It is also notable that the increase in contingent work over the past decade has coincided with an increase of one-third in the share of employees working part time but who would prefer to work full time from 3 percent prior to the Great Recession to close to 4 percent today. In addition, contingent workers may receive lower wages, less training, and fewer benefits than their counterparts with traditional jobs. Typically, the wages of low-skilled employees within a company are boosted by social norms regarding pay equity, and nonpecuniary benefits are often equalized across a company's employees, in certain cases as mandated by law.15However, the wages that contractors receive are unlikely to reflect the same equity considerations. Moreover, contingent work generally does not offer employer-based benefits and workplace protections that come with traditional employment opportunities, like overtime compensation, minimum wage protections, health insurance, family leave, employer-sponsored retirement plans, workers' compensation, and paid sick leave. As a result, for some, contingent work may entail greater risks than in traditional full-time employment, with more variable and less predictable hours and earnings. The Upwork study notes that one of freelancers' biggest concerns is managing income variability and benefits. For lower-income workers, unpredictable fluctuations in income can lead to severe hardship. The Federal Reserve Board's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, for example, finds that 46 percent of households report that they would need to borrow money or sell something in order to pay an unexpected expense of $400.16 These findings suggest that employers, policymakers, and workers should seek ways to help individuals better manage the risks inherent in most forms of contingent work. For example, we may need to enhance social safety net programs, such as unemployment and disability insurance, to better support some types of contingent work. Another possibility is to make benefits, such as health insurance and retirement saving, portable across different employers. We may also want to encourage the additional saving that many contingent workers need to ensure that their basic consumption needs are not sacrificed when demand for their work declines, perhaps by providing monetary or other types of incentives. Closing ThoughtsThe apparent trend toward contingent work has recently coincided with new advances in technology that can potentially amplify this trend and push it in new directions. We are still at an early stage in these developments, and it is too soon to say how these changes will play out. But the effects on the labor market could be long lasting and significant. Taking into account the potentially varied effects of the rising prevalence of gig work on household welfare, public policy should strive to maximize the benefits of the greater flexibility and lower entry barriers provided by advances in technology, while addressing the risks that currently accompany many forms of gig employment. Going forward, better data will be necessary, along with detailed research and analysis, in order to enable workers, employers, and policymakers to guide these changes in the labor market in a direction that ensures the benefits are broadly shared and the risks are well understood and well managed. ReferencesAnsel, Bridget (2015). "The Pitfalls of Just-in-Time Scheduling," Washington Center for Equitable Growth, January 27. Bracha, Anat, and Mary A. Burke (2014). "Informal Work Activity in the United States: Evidence from Survey Responses (PDF)," Current Policy Perspectives 14-13. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, December. Bracha, Anat, Mary A. Burke, and Arman Khachiyan (January 2015). "Changing Patterns in Informal Work Participation in the United States 2013-2015 (PDF)," Current Policy Perspectives 15-10. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October. Carrillo, Dani, Kristen Harknett, Allison Logan, Sigrid Luhr, and Daniel Schneider (2016). "On-Call Job, On-Call Family: The Necessity of Family Support among Retail Workers with Unstable Work Schedules (PDF)," Working Paper 2016-11. Washington: Washington Center for Equitable Growth, November. Farrell, Diana, and Fiona Greig (2016).Paychecks, Paydays, and the Online Platform Economy: Big Data on Income Volatility.New York: JPMorgan Chase Institute, February, https://www.jpmorganchase.com/corporate/institute/document/jpmc-institute-volatility-2-report.pdf. Hall, Jonathan V., and Alan B. Krueger (2015). "An Analysis of the Labor Market for Uber's Driver-Partners in the United States (PDF)," Working Paper 587. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section, January. Harris, Seth D., and Alan B. Krueger (2015). "A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The 'Independent Worker (PDF),' " Discussion Paper 2015-10. Washington: Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution, December. Katz, Lawrence F., and Alan B. Krueger (2016). "The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in the United States, 1995-2015 (PDF)," working paper, March. Manyika, James, Susan Lund, Jacques Bughin, Kelsey Robinson, Jan Mischke, and Deepa Mahajan (2016).Independent Work: Choice, Necessity, and the Gig Economy.San Francisco: McKinsey Global Institute, October, available at http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/independent-work-choice-necessity-and-the-gig-economy. Robles, Barbara J., and Marysol McGee (2016). "Exploring Online and Offline Informal Work: Findings from the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities (EIWA) Survey (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-089. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Upwork and Freelancers Union (2016). "Freelancing in America: 2016," survey results, October 6, available at https://www.upwork.com/i/freelancing-in-america/2016. U.S. Government Accountability Office (2015).Contingent Workforce: Size, Characteristics, Earnings, and Benefits.Washington: GAO, April, available athttp://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-15-168R. Wessler, Seth Freed (2014). "Shift Change: 'Just-in-Time' Scheduling Creates Chaos for Workers," NBC News, May 10, http://www.nbcnews.com/feature/in-plain-sight/shift-change-just-time-scheduling-creates-chaos-workers-n95881. I am grateful to Stephanie Aaronson, Dave Buchholz, Andrew Figura, Joseph Firschein, Arturo Gonzalez, Barbara Lipman, Barbara Robles, Marysol Weindorf, and Alison Weingarden for their assistance in preparing this text. 1.These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.The Contingent Worker Survey is the main survey used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for tracking alternative and nonstandard work. The survey was last fielded in 2005.Return to text 3.See Katz and Krueger (2016).Return to text 4.The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) study of the contingent workforce shows an increase of 5 percentage points in the share of contingent work arrangements, although this shift took place from 2006 to 2010. The GAO's definition of contingent work covers a much larger share of the workforce, 40.4 percent in 2010, than the CWS. See U.S. Government Accountability Office (2015). In the same vein, a 2014 survey by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston found that roughly 44 percent of its survey's respondents participated in some informal paid work activity during the previous two years. See Bracha and Burke (2014).Return to text 5.See Katz and Krueger (2016).Return to text 6.See Harris and Krueger (2015).Return to text 7.By contrast, studies conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in 2013 and 2015 found that approximately one in four respondents--or more than half of informal work participants--say they earned money through informal work activities conducted online. See Bracha, Burke, and Khachiyan (2015).Return to text 8.See Robles and McGee (2016). Some informal workers in the EIWA would not meet the definition of employment in the Current Population Survey (CPS) either because they did not do work in the CPS reference week (the EIWA asks about activities over the past six months, not during the reference week) or because they would not categorize the covered activities (such as the occasional selling of goods or renting of property) as work.Return to text 9.The Upwork survey encompasses an expansive set of contingent work arrangements, even if only intermittent, over the past 12 months, and the EIWA encompasses a similar scope over the past 6 months, while Katz and Krueger confine their focus to the Current Population Survey reference week, similar to the BLS CWS. In addition, the Upwork definition is similar to the EIWA in counting as informal workers those individuals with traditional full- or part-time work whoalsoengage in some informal work, in contrast to Katz and Krueger and the BLS CWS, which try to differentiate those workers who predominantly engage in contingent work.Return to text 10.A study by the McKinsey Global Institute suggests that 15 percent of independent workers in the United States and the European Union participate in online informal work activities. See Manyika and others (2016).Return to text 11.The responses to the survey were anonymous and confidential.Return to text 12.See Hall and Krueger (2015).Return to text 13.See Ansel (2015) and Carrillo and others (2016).Return to text 14.The 2011 survey was conducted by the Retail Action Project, cited in Wessler (2014).Return to text 15.Regulations stipulated by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act and the Affordable Care Act generally mandate equal benefits provision of pension and health insurance plans across employees.Return to text 16.The survey is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/shed.htm.Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At "CPBS 2016 Pacific Basin Research Conference," sponsored by the Center for Pacific Basin Studies at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California It is a pleasure for me to return to the Center for Pacific Basin Studies here at the San Francisco Fed. The global economy is at a critical juncture today. According to the International Monetary Fund's latestWorld Economic Outlook, global gross domestic product (GDP) is set to grow at only 3.1 percent this year, the lowest rate of growth since the Global Financial Crisis. Investment and productivity remain subdued, despite extremely low and even negative interest rates in many economies.1One key aspect of global weakness that is of particular relevance to emerging Asian economies is the sharp slowdown in global trade. This slowdown represents a notable departure from the "normal" times of the past few decades, and is the subject of my remarks today.2 More specifically, I will discuss four topics. First, I will review the main features of the global trade slowdown and summarize the evidence on its potential causes. Second, I will examine the special role that structural changes in China appear to be playing in the trade slowdown. Third, I will turn to the implications of this slowdown for economic growth in the region. And, finally, I will offer some views on how Asian economies can respond to the slowdown by rethinking their "export-led growth" paradigm. Documenting the Global Trade Slowdown and Its Likely CausesTo set the scene, I will review the main features of the recent global trade slowdown. As you can see on thefirst slide, growth in world trade rebounded after the Great Recession but has slowed substantially since 2011. On a real inflation-adjusted basis, world imports have grown at an average annual rate of less than 3-1/2 percent since 2011, about half the 7 percent pace seen in the eight years prior to the Global Financial Crisis.3As illustrated in the nextslide, trade is no longer outpacing GDP growth. The share of real world imports in world GDP has been flat at just under 30 percent since 2011 after nearly doubling between 1985 and 2007.4This sustained slowing of real trade relative to GDP is quite unusual: Since 1870, trade has generally grown faster than production, outside of wartime and recessionary periods. Trade has been sluggish almost everywhere. Real trade growth has been lower over the 2011-15 period compared with the 2000-07 period for every G-20 country outside of Japan, where trade growth was constant. Thethird slideshows that the fall in real import growth in emerging Asia has been particularly pronounced from over 10 percent in the first period to just about 3 percent in the second. But import growth has declined in Latin America and the advanced economies as well. The nextslideshows the differential between real import growth and real GDP growth for the same two periods. For emerging Asia, the differential went from positive to substantially negative, indicating that real import growth slowed to well below real GDP growth. In advanced foreign economies, the differential was just about zero in the more recent period, indicating that real import growth barely kept pace with GDP growth. Trade relative to GDP has held up better, though, in the United States and Latin America. Is the trade slowdown just another manifestation of slow growth, or is it an independent concern? That depends on the reasons for the slowdown. Weak global growth is surely part of the explanation, as emphasized by several recent empirical studies, including a special chapter on the topic in the latest IMFWorld Economic Outlook.5As can be seen inslide 5, global GDP growth has fallen from an average of 3.5 percent before the Global Financial Crisis to about 2.5 percent since its end. But weak global growth alone does not explain why trade has slowed to about the same pace as GDP after growing faster than GDP for decades. Part of the reason could be that the particular expenditure categories in which international trade flows are concentrated have become especially weak. A stark case in point is the Global Financial Crisis, when plummeting demand for investment and durable goods--two highly traded expenditure categories--contributed to the sharp 4 percentage point fall in the ratio of world trade to GDP. The special weakness in some components of demand has persisted beyond the crisis and could also explain some of the recent sluggishness in trade relative to GDP. In particular, as you can see from the middle two bars of slide 5, the slowdown in world investment growth--from about 4.5 percent growth before the Global Financial Crisis to only about 3 percent growth since 2011--has been more pronounced than the slowdown in world GDP growth or in world consumption. But the differences are not huge, suggesting that this explanation can go only so far. Indeed, research suggests that other factors are also important in accounting for the slowdown in world trade.6One such factor is the deceleration in the pace of trade liberalization policies. From the early 1990s through the mid-2000s, trade barriers were coming down rapidly, including the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1994, the 2001 entry of China into the World Trade Organization, and the 2005 expiration of the multifibre agreement restricting textile imports to the United States and European Union. These changes resulted in the most rapid increases in the trade-to-GDP ratio since 1870. As the pace of trade liberalization has slowed in recent years, perhaps reflecting limits to further gains from trade agreements, it is only natural that the trade-to-GDP ratio should flatten out as well. Another related factor is the maturation of global value chains. Increased fragmentation of production across international borders--a natural outgrowth of the gains from specialization--meant more trade for any given value of final production, thus adding to the major expansion in gross trade flows in the 1990s and 2000s. As shown in thenext slide, global value chain participation, as measured by the share of foreign value added in world exports, increased substantially during this period. It is quite plausible that the process of increased fragmentation of production across borders is subject to "diminishing returns" and has its natural limits. Consistent with this notion, the trend toward greater product fragmentation has slowed in recent years. Finally, of course, China looms large in any discussion of the global trade slowdown. Not only is China's trade being affected by all of the factors just discussed, but on-going structural changes within the Chinese economy, including rebalancing toward domestic demand, are exerting an independent effect on world trade flows. So, let's look next at China in more detail.7 ChinaAfter years of rapid export-led growth, China is now among the world's leaders in both exports and imports. China's exports now account for 14 percent of the world's total, compared with only 4 percent 15 years ago. At the same time, China's industrialization and export model has greatly increased its own demand for imports of raw materials, intermediate inputs, and parts and components. In recent years, however, growth in both Chinese imports and Chinese exports has slowed markedly. These developments have had a significant effect on global trade. One simple way to measure that effect is to consider what would have happened if China's trade had not decelerated. As shown inslide 7, under a counterfactual in which China's trade growth had not slowed relative to its GDP since 2011, global trade would still be growing as a share of GDP.8 China has, of course, been subject to many of the forces I have already discussed. One notable trend, shown by the black line inslide 8, is that Chinese processing exports--that is, re-exports from assembled imported parts and components--as a share of China's total exports have been falling steadily for several years. This trend in part reflects weak global demand, as weaker demand for final goods and services from the advanced economies should have led Chinese processing exports to fall disproportionately. It is also consistent with the deceleration of global supply chain formation. Although global factors have undoubtedly played a role, however, the evidence suggests that a substantial part of the slowdown in Chinese trade reflects developments that are specific to the Chinese economy and that are likely to exert a lasting imprint on global trade.9First, the rapid expansion of China's manufacturing base over the past 15 years--made possible by vast reserves of cheap, rural labor--may simply be reaching its natural limit. Accordingly, we would expect China's manufacturing exports to slow. Second, China is moving up the sophistication ladder by producing some higher value-added parts and components itself, instead of importing them. One manifestation of this phenomenon is the higher domestic value-added in Chinese exports in recent years, shown by the gray bars in this slide, relative to the period before the Global Financial Crisis. Another manifestation can be seen inslide 9, which shows the decline in the share of parts and components in China's total manufactured imports from about 65 percent in 2005 to under 50 percent in 2014.10These two pieces of evidence suggest that the shift away from parts and components in Chinese imports is not just due to lower orders tied to weak import demand in the advanced economies, but also due to the rising productivity and sophistication of the Chinese labor force, which is enabling China to move to higher value-added exports. As China moves up the sophistication ladder, you would also expect other countries to take a greater role in the lower steps of the ladder. We do have evidence that some other countries with cheaper labor, such as Vietnam and Bangladesh, are playing more of a role as exporters in the low-value added parts of the Asian supply chain. Anecdotal evidence suggests, though, that some of this shift is also taking place within China, as low-value-added production shifts to low-wage areas in China's interior.11 The third important structural change affecting Chinese trade is the progress China is making in moving away from its export-led model of economic growth and rebalancing its economy toward domestic demand. As shown inslide 10, investment, which in much of the pre‑crisis period was supporting high exports, has been falling as a share of the economy in recent years while the consumption share has been rising. Note, though, that the consumption share remains well below its value in the early 2000s. In addition, as can be seen inslide 11, as part of its rebalancing, Chinese production has been shifting away from manufacturing to services. Thanks in part to these developments, China's current account surplus (not shown here) has fallen sharply as a share of its GDP over the past several years.12 These are welcome developments as China's huge trade surplus created an unsustainable situation, contributing both to internal imbalances within the Chinese economy and to global imbalances. But the rebalancing toward domestic demand will likely put a damper on China's trade for some time as resources shift away from trade-intensive manufacturing. In principle, this drag on China's trade could be partly or even completely offset by stronger imports by Chinese consumers. Evidence of a shift toward imports of consumer goods, however, is limited thus far, and further substantial progress depends on the Chinese authorities' ability to remove distortions that currently depress consumption and boost saving. It may well be, however, that the rising power of the Chinese consumer will in time propel another long round of rapid increases in world trade. Implications for Growth in the RegionHaving examined developments in world and Chinese trade, let me turn to the implications of these trends for economic growth in the emerging Asia region. There is little doubt that for many years China and other emerging Asian economies have benefited from rapid expansion of trade.13Greater trade can provide a host of economic benefits, including enabling the pursuit of comparative advantage, fostering more competition (which leads to more efficiency), generating technological and knowledge spillovers, and facilitating import of key capital goods. These factors enhance productivity and growth and result in the availability of a greater variety of goods to consumers at lower prices. It is safe to say that over the years, the Asian economies have benefited from their high degree of export orientation through all of these transmission mechanisms.14A number of academic studies have found a causal link between openness and growth.15A simple scatter plot of economic growth across countries over the period from 2000 to 2007 against their export orientation, presented inslide 12, is telling: More trade-intensive economies have grown significantly faster over this period, and the fast-growing emerging Asian economies shown by the red dots have generally been among the most export-oriented. How did greater focus on trade develop in Asia? At first, increased export orientation in Asia was achieved by taking advantage of low-cost, low-skilled labor to produce low value-added products for foreign markets. Over time, countries such as Japan and South Korea moved up to higher value-added exports, in part through technological and knowledge spillovers. Later, with the rise of China, many emerging Asian economies became integrated into global supply chains, with China acting as the endpoint of a giant Asian assembly line. Given that trade benefited the Asian economies on the way up, it seems natural that the slowdown in global trade, whatever its causes, could lead to some loss of dynamism and growth in the region. For China, the shift away from trade dependence is partly a reflection of policy choice, with rebalancing seen as a way to sustain growth in the face of some exhaustion of the heavy export/investment model. But many other Asian economies' fortunes are tied to those of China, so developments in China will have important implications for growth in these economies. One natural question is how the rise in domestic content of Chinese exports is affecting countries that rely heavily on supplying parts and components to China. To document this reliance, your nextslideshows that the share of parts and components in other Asian economies' exports to China (the middle green bars) is much greater than their share in exports to the rest of the world (the right blue bars). Over time, this share has fallen from about 70 percent in 2005 to 60 percent in 2014, without the share of parts and components in exports to the rest of the world increasing. This evidence, combined with the evidence I presented earlier on trends in Chinese processing exports, suggests that other economies in Asia are being adversely affected both by less final global demand for Chinese exports and by less use of imported parts and components by China in the production of any given amount of final goods exports. And the effects of these shifts in supply chains are being offset only very slowly and to only a very limited extent by China importing more goods for domestic consumption.16Accordingly, it is doubtful that, at least so far, China is fully replacing advanced-economy demand as an engine of growth for the rest of emerging Asia. One way to look more concretely at this issue is to estimate an equation for the growth for emerging Asia ex. China that separately controls for the effects of Chinese growth and advanced-economy growth. This approach lets us see the direct contribution of Chinese growth to that of its neighbors at the margin, apart from the indirect effect due to China's exports to advanced economies. The results of such an exercise, based on 10-year rolling regressions, are presented inslide 14. Note that in the first half of the 2000s, the effect of advanced-economy growth on emerging Asia ex. China (shown on the left) steadily rises from near zero to a one-to-one effect by 2005, whereas the coefficient on Chinese growth (on the right) hovers around 0.25 and is statistically insignificant. These results suggest that the effect of the rise in China on the rest of emerging Asia in the 2000s mainly reflected China's role as a "conduit" for trade with the advanced economies. However, after the Global Financial Crisis, we see the coefficient on advanced-economy growth move down some, whereas the coefficient on China's growth rises to 0.5 and becomes statistically significant. But the direct effect of advanced-economy growth is still larger than the direct effect of Chinese growth, consistent with the idea that it is still early days for the rebalancing of China's economy and that China will only slowly supplant the role of advanced economies as drivers of emerging Asian growth. Rethinking the "Export-Led Growth" ParadigmThat brings me to the final topic of my remarks today, which is how emerging Asia can respond to the global trade slowdown and the structural changes taking place in China. Some of the structural changes I have discussed suggest that the recent deceleration of trade relative to GDP will likely persist and that we may expect global trade to grow perhaps about as fast as, but not substantially faster than, global GDP growth for the foreseeable future. Under these circumstances, emerging Asian countries may not be able to look to their export sectors as the key source of dynamism for their economies. So what's an Asian economy to do? I would argue that, instead of trying to restore growth through enhancing external surpluses, under the circumstances it makes more sense for emerging Asia to focus on domestic demand as an engine of its growth, and to allow their trade and current account surpluses to shrink. When looking at these economies in aggregate, as shown in your nextslide, current account surpluses narrowed greatly after the Global Financial Crisis but rebounded substantially thereafter.17However, as you can see inslide 16, we have seen some narrowing of current account balances as a share of GDP in several emerging Asian economies, although in some others, such as South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand, the surpluses have increased. Encouraging domestic demand and allowing for downward adjustment of these surpluses in emerging Asia, with more balances turning into deficits, would provide a much-needed injection of demand into the global economy and also support economic growth in the region by providing another source of growth in place of the lessened impetus from external demand. A shift toward external deficits in Asia would be advantageous, considering the low level of external financing costs at present. Many observers are raising the possibility of a "new normal" for the global economy, in which moderate global demand, low productivity growth, and slow trade may persist for some time, keeping interest rates in the advanced economies "low for long." To be sure, bond yields have moved up recently, but they remain quite low by historical standards. Accordingly, the cost of external finance to Asian economies has fallen, which should support strong private capital flows to emerging markets. Normally, we would worry about volatility of these flows and how they might exacerbate risks of financial instability, particularly as U.S. monetary policy normalizes. But we should also bear in mind that many emerging market economies (EMEs), particularly in Asia, have improved their macroeconomic fundamentals over the past two decades; that they have built an adequate war chest of reserves, with no pending need to further reserve accumulation for precautionary purposes; and that their currencies are much more flexible, which acts as an adjustment mechanism to shocks and also lessens the possibility of fluctuations in reserves due to currency intervention. These factors have made the emerging Asian economies much less vulnerable. Given all this, dare we imagine a world in which private capital inflows to EMEs could prove self-sustaining, are not offset by reverse flows of official capital, and would finance long-term profitable investment that would help support growth in these economies while also supporting global growth? In essence, these capital inflows would finance the shift from export-led growth to domestic-led growth required by the slowdown in global trade. And, with little or no official outflows, EMEs would have total capital net inflows as well, consistent with running current account deficits instead of current account surpluses. As pointed out recently by former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke, the availability of profitable capital investments in one part of the world can help defeat secular stagnation in another part.18 Of course, these developments may take time. The point is that at this current juncture of the global economy, it is all the more important for emerging Asian economies--and, indeed, emerging market economies more broadly--to enhance domestic demand while pursuing prudent policies. It would be good to do this for the sake of the global economy, but emerging Asian economies should do this for their own sakes as well. (Thank you.I would be happy to take a few questions.) ReferencesAthukorala, Prema-Chandra, and Nobuaki Yamashita (2006). "Production Fragmentation and Trade Integration: East Asia in a Global Context,"North American Journal of Economics and Finance,vol. 17 (3), pp. 233-56. Baldwin, Robert E. (2004). "Openness and Growth: What's the Empirical Relationship? (PDF)" in Robert E. Baldwin and L. Alan Winers, eds.,Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the Economics.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, February, pp. 499-525. Bernanke, Ben (2015). "Why Are Interest Rates So Low, Part 2: Secular Stagnation," Brookings Institute, March 31. The Economist (2015). "A Tightening Grip: Rising Chinese Wages Will Only Strengthen Asia's Hold on Manufacturing,"The Economist,March 14, www.economist.com/news/briefing/21646180-rising-chinese-wages-will-only-strengthen-asias-hold-manufacturing-tightening-grip. European Central Bank (2016). "Understanding the Weakness in Global Trade. What is the New Normal? (PDF)" European Central Bank Occasional Paper Series No. 178, September. Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer (1999). "Does Trade Cause Growth?"American Economic Review,vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99. Gaulier, Guillaume, Walter Steingress, and Soledad Zignago (2016). "The Role of China in the Trade Slowdown,"Rue de la Banque,Banque de France, No. 30 (September). Glick, Reuven, and Ramon Moreno (1997). "The East Asian Miracle: Growth because of Government Intervention and Protectionism or in Spite of It?"Business Economics,vol. 32 (April), pp. 20-5. Haltmaier, Jane T., Shaghil Ahmed, Brahima Coulibaly, Ross Knippenberg, Sylvain Leduc, Mario Marazzi, and Beth Anne Wilson. (2007). "The Role of China in Asia: Engine, Conduit, or Steamroller? (PDF)" International Finance Discussion Papers 904. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Hoekman, Bernard, ed. (2015).The Global Trade Slowdown: A New Normal? (PDF)VoxEU.org eBook. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, June. International Monetary Fund (2016a).World Economic Outlook,chapter 2:Global Trade: What's behind the Slowdown?Washington, D.C.: IMF, October. ------ (2016b).World Economic Outlook, chapter 4:Spillovers from China's Transition and from Migration. Washington, D.C.: IMF, October. Lewis, Logan, and Ryan Monarch (2016). "Causes of the Global Trade Slowdown," IFDP Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). Lui, Silvia, Rebecca Riley, Dawn Holland, Ali Orazgani, and Pawel Paluchowski (2013). "Long Run Income Elasticities of Import Demand (PDF)," BIS Research Paper No. 144. London: National Institute of Economic and Social Research. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2016). "Cardiac Arrest or Dizzy Spell: Why Is World Trade So Weak and What Can Policy Do about It? (PDF)" OECD Economic Policy Papers, No. 18. Washington, D.C.: OECD, September. Page, John (1994). "The East Asian Miracle: Four Lessons for Development Policy," in Stanley Fischer and Julio Rotemberg, eds.,NBER Macroeconomic Annual, vol. 9 (January), pp. 219-82. Setser, Brad (2016). "The Return of the East Asian Savings Glut," CFR Discussion Paper. Council on Foreign Relations, October. World Bank (1993).The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy. New York: Oxford University Press. 1. TheWorld Economic Outlook'sheadline growth numbers aggregate global growth, using PPP-based GDP weights. They also compute growth using GDP weights based on market exchange rates, according to which global growth this year is projected to be even lower, at 2.4 percent.Return to text 2. The views I express here are my own.Return to text 3. In principle, data on either world exports or world imports could be used to study global trade, though the two differ in practice. My remarks here focus on import data, which are generally regarded as more reliable at the country level.Return to text 4. The share ofnominalworld imports tonominalGDP has actually been declining since 2011, with a particularly sharp drop in 2015, reflecting steep declines in commodity prices.Return to text 5. International Monetary Fund (2016a); see also Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2016), European Central Bank (2016), and Hoekman (2015).Return to text 6. See, for example, European Central Bank (2016), Hoekman (2015), Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2016), and Lewis and Monarch (2016).Return to text 7. Another explanation that has been put forward for much of the decline in world trade relative to world GDP is an increased weight of EMEs in the contribution to global growth together with the property that EMEs have lower income elasticities of trade than advanced economies do. (See European Central Bank, 2016.) However, more broadly, the literature does not seem to suggest that income elasticities are significantly lower for EMEs (for example, Lui and others, 2013). Also, while trade financing constraints--another potential explanation--played some role during the severe trade slowdown during the Global Financial Crisis, trade financing does not appear to have become more difficult since 2011 and likely has not been a significant factor in the slowdown in recent years.Return to text 8. See Lewis and Monarch (2016) for more details.Return to text 9. A recent note from the Banque du France--Gaullier, Steingress, and Zignago (2016)--argues that the long run elasticity of world trade to income is unity, and that structural changes in China go a long way in explaining both the sharp rise in the elasticity in the years before the Global Financial Crisis and the subsequent decline in the post-crisis years as China rebalances toward domestic demand.Return to text 10. This share has been computed by updating the methodology followed in Haltmaier and others (2007), which, in turn, extended the methodology of Athukorala and Yamashita (2006).Return to text 11. See, for example, The Economist (2015).Return to text 12. Over the past couple of years, though, China's current account surplus has turned up again, especially as a share of world GDP.Return to text 13. See, for example, Glick and Moreno (1997), Page (1994), and World Bank (1993).Return to text 14. Some--Page (1994), for example--have argued that industrial policies favoring certain export industries have also played an important role in Asia's success, but it seems to be generally agreed that industrial support was only maintained conditional on successful performance on world markets.Return to text 15. See, for example, Frankel and Romer (1999) and Baldwin (2004).Return to text 16. The arguments laid out here are consistent with the findings in the chapter on spillovers from China's transition presented in the latest IMFWorld Economic Outlook(2016b). This chapter concludes that for many countries the effect of China's transition and rebalancing toward a more sustainable growth model will entail short-run negative spillovers, but there will be potential gains to the global economy over the longer term.Return to text 17. See Setster (2016) for a detailed discussion of the return of the East Asian savings glut.Return to text 18. See Bernanke (2015).Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the 20th Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile, Santiago, Chile (via videoconference) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. I am grateful for the invitation to speak to you today about how U.S. monetary policy affects the global economy and how foreign economic events affect U.S. monetary policy. Given the importance of the United States in international trade and in the global financial system, the monetary policy actions of the Federal Reserve influence the global economy through a wide range of trade and financial channels. As I will discuss, each foreign economy may be affected quite differently by U.S. monetary policy actions, and each may view spillovers from U.S. monetary policy as desirable or undesirable. Even so, I am reasonably confident that the spillovers from ongoing U.S. monetary policy normalization will generally prove manageable for foreign economies.1 While most of my discussion will focus on monetary policy spillovers, I will begin by underscoring a different aspect of the interconnectedness of the U.S. economy--namely, how foreign developments have an important influence on U.S. output and inflation, and hence on the conduct of U.S. monetary policy. How Foreign Developments Influence U.S. Monetary PolicyThe U.S. economy is affected significantly by foreign developments through both trade and financial channels. Given that about one-eighth of the goods and services produced in the United States are exported, a sizable component of U.S. aggregate demand depends on foreign consumption and investment decisions, and hence ultimately on the economic health of foreign economies. The high degree of interconnectedness between domestic and foreign financial intermediaries--banks, the nonbank financial sector, and insurers, among others--means that developments in foreign financial markets tend to reverberate quickly back to the United States, including through changes in asset prices and risk tolerance. The pronounced tightening of U.S. financial conditions during the euro-area sovereign debt crisis that occurred from 2011 to 2012 illustrated the strength of these financial ties. During the past couple of years, foreign developments have at times been a substantial headwind for the U.S. economy. Although financial conditions have improved markedly in the advanced foreign economies and their monetary policy has been highly accommodative, these economies have yet to break out from the tepid growth they have experienced since the global financial crisis. Growth in the emerging market economies has also been disappointingly slow. For example, gross domestic product (GDP) growth in Latin America declined to zero last year, far below the 3 to 4 percent growth rates achieved in the first few years of this decade.2The emerging market economies (EMEs) have weathered several bouts of financial market turbulence, including earlier this year, due to market concerns about economic growth in China and about its exchange rate system. With foreign growth relatively weak, the prospect of a gradual normalization of U.S. monetary policy contributed to a large appreciation of the dollar since mid-2014, with the real effective exchange value of the dollar rising around 17 percent. These global developments materially slowed progress toward the Federal Reserve's employment and inflation objectives. The sizable appreciation of the dollar has been a substantial drag on U.S. exports over the past two years, and hence subtracted from economic growth. The stronger dollar, in concert with lower oil and other commodity prices, has also markedly reduced import price inflation and has been a factor keeping inflation well below the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent goal.3These developments have influenced the FOMC's decisions to maintain a very accommodative monetary policy longer than members of the FOMC had expected in 2014 and through the end of 2015. Financial market conditions have generally improved relative to earlier in the year, with even the initial market turbulence following the Brexit vote appearing fairly short lived. I am cautiously optimistic that the drag on the U.S. economy and inflation from past dollar appreciation may have mostly worked itself out, and that foreign economies are on a somewhat more secure footing that poses smaller downside risks to the U.S. economy. It is also possible that foreign economies may outperform forecasts, which would provide a boost to U.S. employment prospects and also to inflation. While forecasts are inherently uncertain, we will, as always, pay close attention to foreign developments, given their significant consequences for the U.S. economy, and take such developments into account in determining the appropriate stance of U.S. monetary policy. Key Channels through Which U.S. Monetary Policy Affects Foreign EconomiesI have focused thus far on the effects of global developments on the U.S. economy and financial markets and argued that these developments may have an important influence on U.S. monetary policy actions. I will next consider how U.S. monetary policy actions tend to affect foreign economies. Spillovers from the policy actions of major central banks, including especially those of the Federal Reserve, have been the focus of analysis and debate for decades and have attracted considerable attention since the global financial crisis.4Foreign economies were affected when the Fed engaged in unconventional monetary policy stimulus and will likely experience some effects of the Fed's ongoing normalization of policy. The Federal Reserve's focus on supporting domestic objectives for inflation and employment has sometimes been criticized as having potentially undesirable effects on the global economy. The unconventional policies that the Federal Reserve implemented following the global financial crisis, and particularly our large-scale asset purchases, have been characterized by some observers as supporting the U.S. economy by putting downward pressure on the dollar and thus hurting our trading partners.5 My reading of the evidence is that, overall, Federal Reserve policies during that period probably boosted foreign economic output. Itisindeed likely that the depreciation of the dollar that accompanied U.S. asset purchases and forward guidance reduced foreign net exports and thus weighed on foreign GDP through the exchange rate channel. However, our accommodative policies also increased U.S. domestic demand, a second key channel of transmission that operated to boost the net exports of our foreign trading partners. Empirical estimates suggest that these countervailing effects roughly canceled each other out, on average, for our trading partners so that their net exports were not very much affected.6Moreover, insofar as our unconventional policies reduced global interest rates and boosted asset prices--a third channel that tended to expand foreign as well as domestic demand--these actions were probably mildly stimulative for the global economy. It may be helpful to provide some ballpark numerical estimates of how these different channels are likely to play out in determining the overall spillovers to foreign GDP by drawing on the research of my Federal Reserve colleagues.7Specifically, they considered the spillovers from a hypothetical easing of Fed policy scaled to cause the yield on a 10-year U.S. Treasury note to fall 25 basis points.8This easing by the Fed raises U.S. GDP about 0.5 percent, and--based on event-study analysis--causes the U.S. dollar to depreciate by about 1 percent or perhaps a bit less. While foreign exports are hurt due to the implied appreciation of foreign currencies--reducing foreign GDP about 0.15 percent, according to their estimates--foreign exports are boosted by nearly the same amount due to the policy-induced expansion of U.S. domestic demand. Thus, the overall effect on foreign GDP arising through these two trade channels is negligible. However, given that the fall in U.S. interest rates tends to reduce foreign interest rates--at least on average--by around half as much, my colleagues concluded that U.S. monetary stimulus likely has noticeable positive spillovers to foreign economies. Of course, there is considerable variation in how Fed policy actions--whether easing or tightening--affect the output of different foreign economies. Economies with more open capital accounts and that keep their exchange rate relatively stable against the dollar experience larger positive effects on their GDP of an expansionary Fed monetary policy action. The larger positive spillovers reflect the fact that their own interest rates move more in lockstep with U.S. interest rates, while the effects on their traded goods sector from the exchange rate channel are smaller. For example, Hong Kong, which has pegged its currency to the U.S. dollar at a fixed exchange rate since 1983, is an extreme illustration of an economy in which Fed actions pass through almost one to one to domestic interest rates. Conversely, spillovers from U.S. policy actions tend to be smaller to economies that have flexible exchange rates and adjust their policy rates based on domestic conditions; or, alternatively, to economies with less open capital accounts such as China. Most of the advanced foreign economies eventually welcomed the positive spillovers to their domestic output that were due to U.S. unconventional monetary policy easing. Because these economies generally experienced slower recoveries than the United States as well as undesirably low inflation, their central banks also wanted to pursue highly accommodative policies and took complementary actions--including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases--to spur economic recovery. By contrast, the Fed's monetary easing presented the EMEs with more difficult tradeoffs. Output in many EMEs expanded rapidly during the recovery from the global financial crisis, fueled by strong capital inflows and a boom in oil and commodity prices. Given that the Fed's easing raised equity prices and strengthened the demand for risky assets around the globe, it probably contributed to the growing resource pressures in some of these economies. EMEs had to choose between an accommodative monetary policy that was more in line with the United States and other advanced economies versus a tighter policy stance likely to cause their exchange rates to appreciate markedly and possibly cause a relatively sharp contraction in the tradable sectors of their economies. While the more accommodative stance had the attractive feature that it would lessen the hurt to the export sector, the downside was that it was more likely to lead to overheating and high inflation that could be costly to correct. My sense is that most EME central banks had considerable latitude to keep inflation near target and output near potential through maintaining a relatively tight policy, and thus to limit spillovers from easing by the advanced economies. But while I think that there is a strong case for focusing on a limited set of objectives, including to ensure that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored, it is also important to recognize the tough tradeoffs faced by EME central banks given their understandable desire to avoid causing a sharp slowdown in exports. The tradeoff faced by EME central bankers helps illustrate some of the challenges posed by monetary policy divergence between the United States and other economies closely tied to it through economic and financial channels. Notwithstanding these challenges, I should underscore that the Federal Reserve's aggressive monetary easing contributed to a faster stabilization and recovery of the U.S. economy. This benefited the global economy by mitigating a major source of downside risk, thus improving global risk sentiment and confidence. Moreover, the Fed's monetary policy actions were reinforced by many steps to help safeguard the U.S. financial system and increase its resilience to shocks. These efforts included strengthening the banking system's capital buffers, implementing stress tests, reforming short-term wholesale funding markets, and developing swap lines with foreign central banks to help alleviate shortages of dollar liquidity during periods of financial stress. While ultimately aimed at the well-being of U.S. households and firms in pursuit of our domestic objectives, these efforts to improve U.S. financial stability also had favorable externalities for the global financial system and thus helped the global recovery. U.S. Monetary Policy Going Forward: Prospective DivergencePolicy divergence remains a familiar theme today, but the focus has obviously shifted to the consequences of a tightening in U.S. monetary policy on the rest of the global economy. In my view, the Fed appears reasonably close to achieving both the inflation and employment components of its mandate. Accordingly, the case for removing accommodation gradually is quite strong, keeping in mind that the future is uncertain and that monetary policy is not on a preset course. By contrast, the major foreign economies--including the advanced foreign economies and many EMEs--are at a different state of their business cycle and likely to maintain a high level of accommodation for some time or even ease further. So there is likely to be considerable policy rate divergence for some time. What are the likely consequences of this divergence for the foreign economies? The "taper tantrum" that occurred in the middle of 2013 is interpreted by many observers as illustrating how monetary tightening by the Federal Reserve can exert a strong contractionary effect on our foreign trading partners through its effect on global financial conditions, just as the high level of Fed accommodation after the financial crisis provided a net boost to the global economy. Indeed, the large rise in U.S. bond yields during this episode precipitated a nearly commensurate rise in interest rates in many foreign economies and caused the prices of risky assets to fall globally. EMEs with weak fundamentals experienced sharp capital outflows, an abrupt tightening of financial conditions, and large exchange rate depreciations.9The EME experience in 2013 seemed reminiscent of past episodes of U.S. tightening--including in the 1980s and again in the mid-1990s--that had sizable adverse spillovers to EMEs, particularly in Latin America. I am reasonably optimistic that the spillovers from ongoing U.S. normalization will be manageable for the foreign economies, including the EMEs. While there will almost inevitably be some bumps along the road, there are a number of reasons why I think that that policy normalization will not cause sizable disruptions for our trading partners: While there are good grounds to expect that spillovers from U.S. monetary policy actions will be manageable for most of our trading partners, events may unfold differently than expected. To illustrate, a noticeably faster U.S. recovery would require a more rapid removal of U.S. accommodation and could exert noticeably larger spillovers abroad by putting more upward pressure on foreign interest rates and by inducing larger depreciations of foreign currencies. Despite greater policy divergence, many of our trading partners would receive a net boost to their GDP provided that the stimulus to their exports--from stronger U.S. demand and a weaker domestic currency--was sufficient to offset possible tightening in their financial conditions. But other economies might be hurt as a weaker currency could lead to balance sheet deterioration and rising risk spreads, especially if their central banks were called on to tighten monetary policy to keep inflation at bay. While such uncertainty is a constant feature of the landscape we confront as policymakers, both the U.S. and global economies will be served best if we keep our own houses in order and ensure that policy rates are adjusted as appropriate to achieve our inflation and employment objectives. In my view, the prospects of a continued steady expansion in the U.S. economy are maximized to the extent that we proceed with a gradual removal of accommodation. Such a gradual approach to tightening policy will also help mitigate the risk of undesirable spillovers abroad--including by reducing the risk of having to tighten more abruptly later on--and in turn promote a stronger global economy. ReferencesAmmer, John, Michiel De Pooter, Christopher Erceg, and Steven Kamin (2016). "International Spillovers of Monetary Policy," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 8. Basu, Kaushik, Barry Eichengreen, and Poonam Gupta (2014). "From Tapering to Tightening: The Impact of the Fed's Exit on India," Policy Research Working Paper Series 7071. Washington: World Bank Group, October. Bernanke, Ben (2015). "Federal Reserve Policy in an International Context (PDF)," Mundell-Fleming lecture presented at the 16th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 5. Coulibaly, Brahima (2012). "Monetary Policy in Emerging Market Economies: What Lessons from the Global Financial Crisis? (PDF)" International Finance Discussion Papers 1042. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System February. Fischer, Stanley (2015). "The Transmission of Exchange Rate Changes to Output and Inflation," speech delivered at "Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the Post-Crisis Period," a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, November 12. Fleming, J. Marcus (1962). "Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under Floating Exchange Rates,"International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, vol. 9 (November), pp. 369-80. Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013). "On the International Spillovers of U.S. Quantitative Easing (PDF)," Working Paper Series 1557. Frankfurt: European Central Bank (June). Gruber, Joseph, Andrew McCallum, and Robert Vigfusson (2016). "The Dollar in the U.S. International Transactions (USIT) Model," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 8. International Monetary Fund (2016).World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand: Symptoms and Remedies(PDF).Washington: IMF, October. Irwin, Douglas A. (2012). "The French Gold Sink and the Great Deflation of 1929-32,"Cato Papers on Public Policy, vol. 2. Washington: Cato Institute. Mundell, Robert A. (1963). "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates,"Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science, vol. 29 (November), pp. 475-85. Neely, Christopher J. (2015). "Unconventional Monetary Policy Had Large International Effects,"Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 52 (March), pp. 101-11. Rogers, John H., Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright (2014). "Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Multi-Country Review,"Economic Policy, vol. 29 (October), pp. 749-99. Sahay, Ratna, Vivek Arora, Thanos Arvanitis, Hamid Faruqee, Papa N'Diaye, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, and an IMF Team (2014). "Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from the Taper Tantrum (PDF)," IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/14/09. Washington: International Monetary Fund, September. 1.I am grateful to Christopher Erceg of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.These estimates are taken from table A1 of the Statistical Appendix of the October 2016World Economic Outlookand report GDP growth for Latin America and the Caribbean.Return to text 3.My 2015 speech "The Transmission of Exchange Rate Changes to Output and Inflation" provides some quantitative assessment of how changes in the dollar affect U.S. output and inflation, including estimates from the staff's empirical model of U.S. trade described in a recent IFDP Notes article by Gruber, McCallum, and Vigfusson (2016).Return to text 4.Exchange rate issues leading up to the Great Depression were prominent, particularly vis-à-vis the French franc, which was returned to the gold standard at what was seen at the time as a highly favorable rate (Irwin, 2012). The pioneering analysis of Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962) provides the standard framework for post-World War II analysis of the channels through which monetary policy actions are transmitted abroad. In recent years, there has been a rapidly expanding empirical literature assessing spillovers from Federal Reserve policy actions, including those from unconventional policies such as large-scale asset purchases--for example, Fratzscher, DeLuca, and Straub (2013); Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014); and Neely (2015).Return to text 5.Bernanke (2015) discusses some of these critiques of Fed policy in the context of a more general analysis of how Fed policies have affected the global economy since the financial crisis.Return to text 6.See Ammer and others (2016) for both a detailed discussion of these channels and estimates of the effects of U.S. monetary policy actions on foreign economies.Return to text 7.See the discussion in section II of Ammer and others (2016).Return to text 8.The policy rate would have to decline by much more than 25 basis points in order to induce the yield on a 10-year U.S. Treasury note to fall by this amount.Return to text 9.See Sahay and others (2014).Return to text 10.Basu, Eichengreen, and Gupta (2014) describe how India's economy and financial markets were affected by the taper tantrum.Return to text 11.Coulibaly (2012) draws on a large cross-country data set to investigate empirically the factors that have allowed EMEs greater scope to pursue countercyclical monetary policies, and it highlights the importance of both inflation targeting and financial reforms that enhance transparency.Return to text 12.The median assessment of FOMC participants in the September 2016 Summary of Economic Projections puts the longer-run level of the nominal federal funds rate at a bit under 3 percent.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C. Chairman Coats, Ranking Member Maloney, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today. I will discuss the current economic outlook and monetary policy. The Economic OutlookThe U.S. economy has made further progress this year toward the Federal Reserve's dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Job gains averaged 180,000 per month from January through October, a somewhat slower pace than last year but still well above estimates of the pace necessary to absorb new entrants to the labor force. The unemployment rate, which stood at 4.9 percent in October, has held relatively steady since the beginning of the year. The stability of the unemployment rate, combined with above-trend job growth, suggests that the U.S. economy has had a bit more "room to run" than anticipated earlier. This favorable outcome has been reflected in the labor force participation rate, which has been about unchanged this year, on net, despite an underlying downward trend stemming from the aging of the U.S. population. While above-trend growth of the labor force and employment cannot continue indefinitely, there nonetheless appears to be scope for some further improvement in the labor market. The unemployment rate is still a little above the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' estimates of its longer-run level, and involuntary part-time employment remains elevated relative to historical norms. Further employment gains may well help support labor force participation as well as wage gains; indeed, there are some signs that the pace of wage growth has stepped up recently. While the improvements in the labor market over the past year have been widespread across racial and ethnic groups, it is troubling that unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics remain higher than for the nation overall, and that the annual income of the median African American household and the median Hispanic household is still well below the median income of other U.S. households. Meanwhile, U.S. economic growth appears to have picked up from its subdued pace earlier this year. After rising at an annual rate of just 1 percent in the first half of this year, inflation-adjusted gross domestic product is estimated to have increased nearly 3 percent in the third quarter. In part, the pickup reflected some rebuilding of inventories and a surge in soybean exports. In addition, consumer spending has continued to post moderate gains, supported by solid growth in real disposable income, upbeat consumer confidence, low borrowing rates, and the ongoing effects of earlier increases in household wealth. By contrast, business investment has remained relatively soft, in part because of the drag on outlays for drilling and mining structures that has resulted from earlier declines in oil prices. Manufacturing output continues to be restrained by the weakness in economic growth abroad and by the appreciation in the U.S. dollar over the past two years. And while new housing construction has been subdued in recent quarters despite rising prices, the underlying fundamentals--including a lean stock of homes for sale, an improving labor market, and the low level of mortgage rates--are favorable for a pickup. Turning to inflation, overall consumer prices, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, increased 1-1/4 percent over the 12 months ending in September, a somewhat higher pace than earlier this year but still below the FOMC's 2 percent objective. Much of this shortfall continues to reflect earlier declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Core inflation, which excludes the more volatile energy and food prices and tends to be a better indicator of future overall inflation, has been running closer to 1-3/4 percent. With regard to the outlook, I expect economic growth to continue at a moderate pace sufficient to generate some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a return of inflation to the Committee's 2 percent objective over the next couple of years. This judgment reflects my view that monetary policy remains moderately accommodative and that ongoing job gains, along with low oil prices, should continue to support household purchasing power and therefore consumer spending. In addition, global economic growth should firm, supported by accommodative monetary policies abroad. As the labor market strengthens further and the transitory influences holding down inflation fade, I expect inflation to rise to 2 percent. Monetary PolicyI will turn now to the implications of recent economic developments and the economic outlook for monetary policy. The stance of monetary policy has supported improvement in the labor market this year, along with a return of inflation toward the FOMC's 2 percent objective. In September, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent and stated that, while the case for an increase in the target range had strengthened, it would, for the time being, wait for further evidence of continued progress toward its objectives. At our meeting earlier this month, the Committee judged that the case for an increase in the target range had continued to strengthen and that such an increase could well become appropriate relatively soon if incoming data provide some further evidence of continued progress toward the Committee's objectives. This judgment recognized that progress in the labor market has continued and that economic activity has picked up from the modest pace seen in the first half of this year. And inflation, while still below the Committee's 2 percent objective, has increased somewhat since earlier this year. Furthermore, the Committee judged that near-term risks to the outlook were roughly balanced. Waiting for further evidence does not reflect a lack of confidence in the economy. Rather, with the unemployment rate remaining steady this year despite above-trend job gains, and with inflation continuing to run below its target, the Committee judged that there was somewhat more room for the labor market to improve on a sustainable basis than the Committee had anticipated at the beginning of the year. Nonetheless, the Committee must remain forward looking in setting monetary policy. Were the FOMC to delay increases in the federal funds rate for too long, it could end up having to tighten policy relatively abruptly to keep the economy from significantly overshooting both of the Committee's longer-run policy goals. Moreover, holding the federal funds rate at its current level for too long could also encourage excessive risk-taking and ultimately undermine financial stability. The FOMC continues to expect that the evolution of the economy will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate over time to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability. This assessment is based on the view that the neutral federal funds rate--meaning the rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary and keeps the economy operating on an even keel--appears to be currently quite low by historical standards. Consistent with this view, growth in aggregate spending has been moderate in recent years despite support from the low level of the federal funds rate and the Federal Reserve's large holdings of longer-term securities. With the federal funds rate currently only somewhat below estimates of the neutral rate, the stance of monetary policy is likely moderately accommodative, which is appropriate to foster further progress toward the FOMC's objectives. But because monetary policy is only moderately accommodative, the risk of falling behind the curve in the near future appears limited, and gradual increases in the federal funds rate will likely be sufficient to get to a neutral policy stance over the next few years. Of course, the economic outlook is inherently uncertain, and, as always, the appropriate path for the federal funds rate will change in response to changes to the outlook and associated risks. Thank you. I would be pleased to answer your questions.