WASHINGTON--The federal banking agencies today issued an advisory to clarify expectations for the use of property evaluations by banking institutions. The advisory responds to questions raised during outreach meetings held by the agencies last year pursuant to the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act. The advisory describes the agencies' existing supervisory expectations for the use of an evaluation instead of an appraisal to estimate a property's market value for certain real estate-related financial transactions. Unlike an appraisal, an evaluation does not have to be developed by a state-licensed or state-certified appraiser. The advisory also addresses the use of alternative valuation approaches, methods, and other information that financial institutions may use to develop an evaluation in areas with few, if any, recent comparable property sales in reasonable proximity to the subject property. Regardless of the approach or method used to estimate the market value of real property, an evaluation report should contain sufficient information and analysis to support the value conclusion and the institution's decision to engage in the transaction. Related Links
Federal financial institution regulatory agencies today issued guidance clarifying the applicability of the Customer Identification Program (CIP) rule to prepaid cards issued by banks. The guidance applies to banks, savings associations, credit unions, and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks (collectively "banks"). The guidance clarifies that a bank's CIP should apply to the holders of certain prepaid cards issued by the institution as well as holders of such prepaid cards purchased under arrangements with third-party program managers that sell, distribute, promote, or market the prepaid cards on the bank's behalf. The guidance describes when, in accordance with the CIP rule, the bank should obtain information sufficient to reasonably verify the identity of the cardholder, including at a minimum, obtaining the name, date of birth, address, and identification number, such as the Taxpayer Identification Number of the cardholder. Agencies issuing the guidance include the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve Board, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. SR 16-7: Interagency Guidance to Issuing Banks on Applying Customer Identification Program Requirements to Holders of Prepaid Access Cards
Governor Lael Brainard At the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, D.C. This is a fitting moment to take stock of economic and financial developments, following a volatile start to the year. I will begin by reviewing the outlook, then provide a brief recap of how financial market liquidity has fared, and finish by commenting on the resilience and resolvability of the large interconnected banks.1 Outlook for the United StatesI am heartened by the continued strong progress on employment and the resilience of American consumers, which stand out against a considerably more challenging global backdrop. I am pleased with the continued strength in the U.S. labor market, which is drawing people back into the labor force. In February, the unemployment rate was 4.9 percent--a level that is one-half its peak during the depths of the recession in 2009. Last Friday, we learned that employment growth has averaged 223,000 per month over the past 12 months. And there likely is some room to go: The prime-age employment-to-population ratio remains 1-3/4 percentage points below levels prevailing prior to the financial crisis, while a relatively large share of employees who are working part time would prefer to work full time. In addition, wage growth remains relatively slow. Domestic activity continues to grow at a moderate pace. The pace of consumer spending, after slowing some at the end of last year, looks to have picked up in January, and auto sales remained strong in February. Over the past two years, consumption has increased at about a 3 percent pace, on average, and I expect to see growth to continue at close to this pace based on solid job and income growth--together with elevated readings on consumer confidence and the boost to household purchasing power from persistent declines in energy prices. The housing sector has also contributed steadily to growth over the past year. With housing activity well below pre-recession norms, it appears there is still scope for continued growth in construction activity. In contrast, sectors of the economy that are sensitive to energy prices or international demand have been a drag. In response to the plunge in oil prices, investment in drilling and mining structures fell 50 percent last year, and continued reductions in the number of drilling rigs this year suggest that further declines are likely.2At the same time, firms and workers in the energy sector have experienced extreme financial difficulties and severe job losses. Although the euro area and Japan are recovering, their demand growth remains very low, despite extraordinary monetary accommodation. In emerging market economies growth last year came in at only one-half the average rate from 2009 to 2013. Because China has accounted for one-third of the growth in world Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and trade, the recent slippage in Chinese economic growth is having an important effect globally. Even if Chinese growth does not slide further, the changing composition of its growth toward consumption and services and away from resource-intensive manufacturing and investment will pose important challenges to commodity exporters and other emerging economies, especially since China had previously accounted for upwards of one-half of global imports of many base metals. Weak foreign demand relative to the United States has pushed down net exports and contributed to a nearly 20 percent strengthening of the real trade-weighted dollar since mid-2014. As a result, net exports subtracted a little more than 1/2 percentage point from GDP growth in 2014 and 2015, and econometric models suggest that past appreciation will lead to close to another 1 percentage point subtraction this year.3 These effects are especially prominent in the U.S. manufacturing sector, where output is sluggish, and the agricultural sector has also been hit hard by the rise in the value of the dollar. In addition, with profits at many firms adversely affected by the rise in the dollar and weak demand abroad, business fixed investment increased only 1-1/2 percent last year after contributing significantly to growth earlier in the recovery. On balance, in recent months, financial conditions have tightened somewhat with equity prices moving lower and corporate risk spreads widening, although conditions have improved in recent weeks. In addition, progress on inflation has been slow. Prices for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) have increased 1.3 percent over the 12 months through January, well below the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent target. Reductions in energy prices are, in part, responsible for this low rate, and if energy prices stabilize, top-line inflation should move higher. Still, a stabilization in energy prices is not assured. Market participants have been repeatedly surprised by the depth and persistence of oil price declines: Both spot and far futures oil prices, for example, have fallen in five out of the past six quarters since mid-2014. But even after discounting the influence of energy prices, core PCE inflation has been stubbornly stuck in the vicinity of 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent since 2012.4Most recently, the dollar has played an important role in holding down non-oil import prices, which fell 3-1/2 percent last year and subtracted an estimated 1/2 percentage point from core inflation.5Should the dollar stabilize, the downward influence on inflation should dissipate. But, as with oil prices, the movement in the value of the dollar has been more persistent than markets and many observers expected, with increases in every quarter since mid-2014. If the labor market continues to improve, higher resource utilization should also put some upward pressure on inflation going forward. However, the effect of resource utilization on inflation is estimated to be much lower today than in past decades.6 An important concern about persistently low inflation is that it can lead to a fall in longer-term inflation expectations, making it much more difficult to achieve our inflation target. For the most part, longer-term inflation expectations appear to have remained reasonably stable, though there are some concerning signs. Longer-term inflation expectations of professional forecasters and primary dealers have held quite steady in recent years at levels consistent with the FOMC's target. However, households' inflation expectations appear to have moved down somewhat recently. Five-to-10-year inflation expectations in the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers have edged lower over the past year or two with the level in February nearly 1/2 percentage point below the 10-year average. Three-year inflation expectations in the New York Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Expectations have also moved steadily lower over the past two years, though the recent decline in energy prices may explain much of this drift. Notably, market-based measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) and nominal Treasury yields are at historically low levels. At the five-year, five-year-ahead horizon, inflation compensation is 1 percentage point lower than mid-2014 levels. Declines in swap-based measures of inflation compensation have been similar. However, these declines appear correlated with oil prices, and it is not clear to what extent these declines reflect a change in inflation expectations, changes in investor demand for TIPS versus nominal Treasury securities, or an improvement in the risk characteristics of nominal Treasury securities versus other assets. Over the next couple of years, there are reasons to expect energy prices and the dollar to eventually stabilize, output to increase at around the moderate pace it has averaged over the recovery thus far, foreign growth to recover somewhat, the U.S. labor market to improve further, and inflation to move toward our 2 percent target. However, there are risks around this baseline forecast, the most prominent of which lie to the downside. For example, China faces risks as it navigates a sharp slowing in its goods sector, a large buildup in corporate debt, and an apparent surge in demand for foreign assets, although China possesses resources to deal with these challenges. More broadly, sources of robust demand around the globe are few, and sources of weakness relatively greater, as evidenced by persistently below target inflation in all of the major advanced economies. Monetary PolicyIn today's circumstances, policy could usefully follow two simple guidelines. First, we should not take the strength in the U.S. labor market and consumption for granted. Given weak and decelerating foreign demand, it is critical to carefully protect and preserve the progress we have made here at home through prudent adjustments to the policy path. Tighter financial conditions and softer inflation expectations may pose risks to the downside for inflation and domestic activity. From a risk-management perspective, this argues for patience as the outlook becomes clearer.7 Second, we should put a high premium on clear evidence that inflation is moving toward our 2 percent target. Inflation has persistently underperformed relative to our target. Moreover, measures of inflation compensation and some survey-based measures of inflation expectations suggest that inflation expectations may have edged lower. Given the currently weak relationship between economic slack and inflation and the persistent, depressing effects of energy price declines and exchange rate increases, we should be cautious in assessing that a tightening labor market will soon move inflation back to 2 percent. We should verify that this is, in fact, taking place. In this regard, core PCE inflation increased 1.7 percent over the 12 months ending in January, a noticeable step-up from an increase of 1.3 percent over the preceding 12 months.8 LiquidityIn addition to raising uncertainty around the outlook, the recent financial market volatility has underscored the importance of ongoing attention to the resilience of market liquidity. Although it is fair to say that the recent uptick in volatility has in part reduced earlier concerns about prolonged low volatility and associated reach-for-yield behavior, it has placed added focus on the resilience of liquidity, particularly in markets, such as the market for corporate bonds, that may be prone to gapping between liquidity demand and supply in stressed conditions. The Federal Reserve's surveillance of liquidity conditions in financial markets has broadened and deepened considerably since the "taper tantrum" in mid-2013 and the events of October 2014 in the Treasury market. The analysis so far suggests a few preliminary observations. While it does not appear that day-to-day liquidity has declined notably, some characteristics of liquidity provision are changing. Broadly, traditional price-based measures of liquidity such as bid-asked spreads and the price effect of a given trade size generally remain in line with pre-crisis norms in most markets. In contrast, both anecdotes from market participants and the declining size of trades in some markets suggest it may have become more expensive to conduct, and may take more time to implement, large trades.9 Moreover, there may be some deterioration in the resilience of liquidity at times of stress, along with a greater incidence of outsized intraday price movements. Relatedly, liquidity appears to be more segmented based on the characteristics of the securities being traded and the underlying structure of the markets in which they are traded. Based on granular disaggregation of the traded securities, liquidity appears little changed in secondary markets that have traditionally been highly liquid, such as on-the-run Treasury bonds and highly rated corporate bonds. By contrast, there has been some reduction in liquidity in the segments of these markets that have historically been less liquid.10 The move toward somewhat greater segmentation of liquidity, in conjunction with ongoing electronification and acceleration of trade execution, might be contributing to increased linkages across markets. Anecdotally, it appears market participants may be using relatively more liquid instruments to hedge exposures in other less liquid market segments, perhaps unintentionally contributing to increased correlation across markets.11 From a broader financial stability perspective, the possible deterioration in the resilience of liquidity suggests a special focus on segments where price gaps are most likely to arise at times of stress between holders of relatively illiquid or thinly traded securities that want to sell and dealers with an apparently reduced willingness to take the other side of the trade, as indicated, for example, by leaner dealer inventory holdings.12Mutual funds holding relatively less liquid assets is one area of focus. Despite having share prices that move with market prices, these funds can give rise to first-mover advantages for redeeming shareholders and create the potential for destabilizing waves of redemptions and asset fire sales if liquidity buffers and other tools to manage liquidity risk prove insufficient.13In this regard, our surveillance has been closely monitoring for any signs of liquidity strains associated with the recent increases in spreads for high-yield corporate bonds, as well as for idiosyncratic events affecting particular funds in this segment, such as the events surrounding the abrupt closing of Third Avenue Management's Focused Credit Fund last December. More broadly, the regulatory agencies in the United States and the Financial Stability Board internationally have work under way focusing on possible fire-sale risk associated with the growing share of less liquid bonds held in asset management portfolios on behalf of investors who may be counting on same-day redemption when valuations fall. The recent proposal by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to ensure mutual funds have ample liquidity buffers under stressed scenarios and undertake measures to address the risk of heavy redemptions and fire sales is notable in this regard. Our surveillance will continue to undertake more granular analysis of liquidity resilience and associated risks. Across financial markets, it is difficult to disentangle the effects on liquidity of changes in technology and market structure and changes in broker-dealer risk-management practices in the wake of the crisis on the one hand and enhanced regulation on the other. While the leverage ratio and other Dodd-Frank Act requirements likely are encouraging broker-dealers to be more rigorous about risk management in allocating balance sheet capacity to certain trading activities, the growing presence of proprietary firms using algorithmic trading in many of these markets, which predated the crisis, is also influencing trading dynamics in important ways.14The Request for Information issued by the U.S. Treasury and the recent proposals from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the SEC will be important in deepening our understanding. While acknowledging the role of regulation as a possible contributor, it is important to recognize that this regulation was designed to reduce the concentration of liquidity risk on the balance sheets of the large, interconnected banking organizations that proved to be a major amplifier of financial instability at the height of the crisis. Resilience and ResolvabilityThis brings me to the last item on my agenda: an update on efforts to strengthen the resilience and resolvability of these systemic banking organizations. With recent and upcoming proposals, much of the new regulatory architecture will be in the process of implementation or in train. Even so, I would expect the rules and their application to continue to be strengthened and modified as financial risks evolve, just as I would expect these rules to be increasingly tailored over time to better reflect risk profiles. As a result of the capital and liquidity regulations already in place as well as the associated stress tests, the eight most systemic U.S. banking organizations are now holding $800 billion more in high-quality liquid assets than they were in 2011 and $500 billion more in common equity capital than they were in 2008. These liquidity and capital buffers are designed to strengthen the going-concern resilience of systemic banking organizations during periods of market volatility and financial stress. In addition, we recently released our proposed framework for determining the application of an additional countercyclical buffer to our large banking firms and made the first determination under the rule. On top of this, the capital surcharge we have proposed, which is designed to ensure the largest, most systemic banking organizations internalize the risk they pose to the system, is estimated to range from 1.0 to 4.5 percent of risk-weighted assets, based on 2013 data, over and above the 7 percent minimum and capital conservation buffers under Basel III. Indeed, it appears that some institutions may have already reduced their systemic footprint in anticipation of these additional charges. Of course, the crisis starkly illustrated that what seem like thick capital cushions in good times can become uncomfortably thin in the face of financial stress. Our Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) stress-testing framework is arguably our most powerful tool for ensuring that these capital buffers remain robust to a variety of possible shocks to the trading and banking book exposures of the large, interconnected banking organizations. Therefore, as we work to fine-tune and strengthen this framework, I would hope to see the capital surcharge for systemic banking organizations integrated into CCAR to ensure robustness, even as adjustments might be made on other parameters of the framework. Although today's greatly enhanced common equity capital requirements should materially reduce the probability that a large bank might fail in response to a severe economic downturn or financial stress, it is not enough to reduce the risks of failure. In parallel, our supervisory and regulatory efforts are raising the bar on ensuring that the large, interconnected banking organizations have in place credible plans and preparations as well as properly calibrated and positioned liquidity and loss absorbing capacity to ensure failure can take place in an orderly manner. To that end, we have proposed a Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity rule that contains a long-term debt requirement that is critical to the feasibility of bankruptcy for the systemic banking organizations. It is a necessary counterpart to the Dodd-Frank Act requirement that large banking organizations have credible resolution plans and undertake preparations to make those plans operationally feasible. In particular it requires the top-tier holding companies of systemic banking organizations to maintain a sufficiently large buffer of long-term debt that can be converted into equity and used to fully recapitalize their important operating subsidiaries in the event of bankruptcy. The proposed levels of long-term debt are calibrated to the specific riskiness and scale of each institution's activities, taking into account the likely shrinkage of the operations of their subsidiaries in resolution. The requirement is designed to mitigate contagion, fire-sale, and run risks by providing comfort to depositors, short-term debt holders, and counterparties of the operating subsidiaries of the firm, since the long-term unsecured debt issued by the top-tier holding company would be structurally subordinated to the claims on the operating subsidiaries. The presence of long-term debt holders that will be bailed in ensures that taxpayer resources will not be used and should provide incentives to preserve the firm's value as it approaches insolvency, thus aligning the firm's interests with the public's broader interest in financial stability. The Board has received many detailed comments on the proposed long-term debt rule. Some have commented on the existing stock of outstanding long-term debt with acceleration clauses that might not qualify under the rule's criteria and have proposed grandfathering as a possible solution. Others have raised questions about whether the leverage ratio or the risk-based capital framework provides the more appropriate calibration benchmark for the minimum long-term debt requirement. Comments from foreign banks have also addressed our proposal to impose internal long-term debt requirements on the U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banks and have asked, among other things, whether the proposed requirement should vary more depending on the resolution strategy of the parent foreign bank. We are currently carefully reviewing these comments. One thing is clear: the long-term debt requirement is a critical component in ending too big to fail. The long-term debt requirement together with rigorous resolution plans and operational preparedness, the capital surcharges along with the capital stress tests, and the availability of sufficient amounts of high-quality liquidity where it is most likely to be needed will all substantially decrease the risk that a large financial institution's distress could pose to the broader financial system and help ensure that no banking institution is too large and too complex to fail. They will move us closer to our goal of a safer, more responsible, and more resilient financial system. ReferencesAdrian, Tobias, Michael Fleming, Or Shachar, and Erik Vogt (2015). "Has U.S. Corporate Bond Market Liquidity Deteriorated?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), October 5. Adrian, Tobias, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt (2015). "What's Driving Dealer Balance Sheet Stagnation?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), August 21. Adrian, Tobias, Michael Fleming, Erik Vogt, and Zachary Wojtowicz (2016a), "Corporate Bond Market Liquidity Redux: More Price-Based Evidence," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), February 9. --------- (2016b), "Further Analysis of Corporate Bond Market Liquidity," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), February 10. Bank for International Settlements, Committee on the Global Financial System (2016). "Fixed Income Market Liquidity (PDF)," CGFS Papers, no. 55. Basel, Switzerland: BIS, January. Blanchard, Olivier (2016). "The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief PB16-1. Washington: Peterson Institute of International Economics, January. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 21726. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Monetary Policy Report (PDF). Washington: Board of Governors, February. Brainard, Lael (2015). "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. Cai, Fang, Song Han, Dan Li, and Yi Li (2015). "Institutional Herding in the Corporate Bond Market," working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December, available at the Social Science Research Network. Cetorelli, Nicola, Fernando Duarte, and Thomas Eisenbach (2016). "Are Asset Managers Vulnerable to Fire Sales?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), February 18. Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, Matthew Cocci, Sara Shahanaghi, and Micah Smith (2015). "Why Are Interest Rates So Low?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), May 20. Dobrev, Dobrislav, and Ernst Schaumburg (2016). "High-Frequency Cross-Market Trading and Market Volatility," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), February 17. Fleming, Michael (2016). "Is Treasury Market Liquidity Becoming More Concentrated?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), February 11. Gruber, Joseph, Andrew McCallum, and Robert Vigfusson (2016). "The Dollar in the U.S. International Transactions (USIT) Model," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 8. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 21476. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. International Monetary Fund (2014). "Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates," chapter 3 inWorld Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven. Washington: IMF, April, pp. 81-112. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Kiley, Michael T. (2015a). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. --------- (2015b). "Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2015). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2015-16. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October. I am grateful to Andrew Figura for his assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Despite the drop-off in drilling investment, oil production has been surprisingly resilient, as producers have increased the productivity of established wells.Return to text 3. See Gruber, McCallum, and Vigfusson (2016).Return to text 4. Core consumer price index (CPI) inflation has been 1/2 percentage point higher than core PCE inflation over the 12 months through January. Over the past 15 years, core CPI inflation has averaged about 1/4 percentage point more than core PCE inflation. Much of the recent larger gap is due to differences in the coverage of health-care services and to differences in the weight accorded to housing services and health-care services. The CPI only covers out-of-pocket expenditures for health-care services, while the PCE index covers a much broader range of spending. Expenditures on housing are a larger share of the CPI than of the PCE index, and prices for housing services have increased at an above-average pace recently.Return to text 5. See pp. 8-9 of the February 2016Monetary Policy Report(Board of Governors, 2016).Return to text 6. See Blanchard (2016); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Kiley (2015b).Return to text 7. To the extent that the neutral rate of interest--the rate that keeps output at its potential level and inflation at its target--has fallen in the United States and is low around the world, this may weigh on the policy path. See Laubach and Williams (2015), Hamilton and others (2015), Kiley (2015a), Johannsen and Mertens (2016), Del Negro and others (2015), Brainard (2015), and chapter 3 ofWorld Economic Outlook(International Monetary Fund, 2014).Return to text 8. Because the most recent 12-month change in core PCE prices includes several relatively large monthly increases in core PCE prices in the first part of 2015, it is possible that 12-month core PCE inflation will move lower in coming months as these relatively large monthly increases drop out of the 12-month window.Return to text 9. See Adrian, Fleming, Shachar, and Vogt (2015); and Adrian, Fleming, Vogt, and Wojtowicz (2016b).Return to text 10. See Adrian, Fleming, Vogt, and Wojtowicz (2016a); and Fleming (2016).Return to text 11. See Dobrev and Schaumburg (2016).Return to text 12. See Bank for International Settlements (2016).Return to text 13. In particular, research has suggested that corporate bond funds exhibit herding behavior--that is, a tendency for waves of sales or purchases of common securities across funds. This herding appears more significant for less liquid bonds, which could exacerbate the concerns noted above. See Cai and others (2015). Also, see Cetorelli, Duarte, and Eisenbach (2016) for estimates of the effects of asset fire sales.Return to text 14. See Adrian, Fleming, Stackman, and Vogt (2015).Return to text
The Federal Reserve will begin its Survey of Finance Companies in March as part of the continuing effort to paint a comprehensive view of the range of companies in this sector of the U.S. financial system. "The availability of credit to consumers and businesses is important to our economy, and finance companies play a very important role in U.S. credit markets," Federal Reserve Chair Janet L. Yellen said in a letter to prospective survey participants. The survey collects balance sheet data on major categories of household and business credit receivables and liabilities from finance companies. Results of the survey will further the understanding of the finance company industry. The data provide a benchmark for the System's monthly report on the outstanding accounts receivable of finance companies (presented in the Federal Reserve'sFinance Companiesstatistical release) and provide a comprehensive update on these companies' sources of funds. This information in turn becomes an important input to the estimates of total consumer credit (presented in the Federal Reserve'sConsumer Creditstatistical release) and theFinancial Accounts of the United States. The attached letter from Chair Yellen is being sent to approximately 2,300 companies urging their participation in the survey. Individual responses will be kept confidential. In addition to the Chair's letter, more information about the survey is available atwww.federalreserve.gov/financecosurvey. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the March 15-16 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the March 15-16 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the applications under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Frost Bank, San Antonio, Texas, to establish branches at 314 South WW White Road, San Antonio, and 2421 East Seventh Street, Austin, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act by Goldman Sachs Bank USA, New York, New York, to assume certain deposits of, and acquire certain assets from, GE Capital Bank, Holladay, Utah. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Washington Bancorp, Inc., Lynnwood, WashingtonWritten Agreement issued November 19, 2009Terminated March 16, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: ColoEast Bankshares, Inc., Lamar, ColoradoWritten Agreement issued June 6, 2012Terminated February 29, 2016 Community First, Inc., Columbia, TennesseeWritten Agreement issued April 19, 2012Terminated February 29, 2016 Valley Bancorp, Inc., Brighton, ColoradoWritten Agreement issued August 27, 2009Terminated February 26, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board in April will begin a statistical study of household finances, the Survey of Consumer Finances, that will provide policymakers with important insight into the economic condition of a broad cross section of American families. The survey has been undertaken every three years since 1983. It is being conducted for the Board by NORC, a social science research organization at the University of Chicago, through December of this year. The data collected will provide a representative picture of what Americans own (from houses and cars to stocks and bonds), how and how much they borrow, and how they bank. Past study results have contributed to policy discussions regarding recovery of households from the Great Recession, changes in the use of credit, the use of tax-preferred retirement savings accounts, and a broad range of other issues. "This survey is one of the nation's primary sources of information on the financial condition of different types of households," Federal Reserve Board Chair Janet Yellen said in a letter to prospective survey participants. "Our previous surveys…have helped the Federal Reserve and other parts of the government make policy decisions and have also supported a wide variety of basic research, public discussion, and education." Participants in the study are chosen at random from 128 areas, including metropolitan areas and rural counties across the United States, using a scientific sampling procedure. A representative of NORC contacts each potential participant personally to explain the study and request time for an interview. "I assure you that we give the highest priority to guarding the privacy of all survey participants and the confidentiality of their answers," Chair Yellen said. NORC uses names and addresses only for the administration of the survey, and that identifying information will be destroyed at the close of the study. NORC is forbidden from giving the names and addresses of participants to anyone at the Federal Reserve or anywhere else. Summary results for the 2016 study will be published in late 2017 after all data from the survey have been assessed and analyzed. The attached letter from Chair Yellen will be mailed in mid-April to approximately 13,000 households urging their participation in the study. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Hazard Bancorp, Hazard, Kentucky, and Peoples Bank and Trust Company of Hazard, Hazard, KentuckyWritten Agreement dated March 3, 2016 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: American Bank of Baxter Springs, Baxter Springs, KansasWritten Agreement dated January 5, 2010Terminated March 4, 2016 CB Financial Corporation, Wilson, North CarolinaWritten Agreement dated May 25, 2010Terminated March 3, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Industrial Bank of Korea (PDF), Seoul, Korea, and Industrial Bank of Korea New York Branch, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated February 24, 2016 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: CSRA Bank Corp., Wrens, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated August 19, 2010Terminated January 20, 2016 FMB Equibanc, Inc., Statesboro, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated April 23, 2010Terminated February 25, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: National Bank of Pakistan, Karachi, Pakistan and National Bank of Pakistan (PDF), New York BranchWritten Agreement dated March 14, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday proposed a rule to address the risk associated with excessive credit exposures of large banking organizations to a single counterparty. As demonstrated during the financial crisis, large credit exposures, particularly between financial institutions, can spread financial distress and undermine financial stability. The proposal would apply single-counterparty credit limits to bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more. The proposed limits are tailored to increase in stringency as the systemic footprint of a firm increases: "We are determined to do as much as we can to reduce or eliminate the threat that trouble at one big bank will bring down other big banks," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Janet L. Yellen. Similarly tailored requirements would also be established for foreign banks operating in the United States. "This regulation would complement overall capital requirements, which are generally based on the size and nature of a bank's assets, but do not address the concentration of risk in specific borrowers or counterparties," Governor Daniel K. Tarullo said. The proposed rule implements part of the Dodd-Frank Act and builds on earlier proposals released by the Board in 2011 and 2012, and includes some modifications based on comments received. Additionally, the proposal seeks to promote global consistency by generally following the international large exposures framework released by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in 2014. The Board on Friday also released a white paper explaining the analytical and quantitative reasoning for the proposed rule's tighter 15 percent limit for credit exposures between systemically important financial institutions. Because systemically important financial institutions are generally engaged in similar activities and exposed to similar risks, the paper discusses why systemically important firms are more likely to come under stress at the same time and, as a result, generally incur more risk when exposed to other systemically important firms compared to non-systemically important counterparties. Comments on the proposed rule are invited until June 3, 2016. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal RegisterNotice:PDF|HTML Calibrating the Single-Counterparty Credit Limit between Systemically Important Financial Institutions (PDF)|HTML Opening Statement by Chair Janet L. Yellen Opening Statement by Governor Daniel K. Tarullo
The Federal Reserve on Tuesday announced the selection of McKinsey & Company to support Faster Payments Task Force efforts this year to assess faster payments solution proposals from various providers across the United States payments industry. The Federal Reserve established the 331-member Faster Payments Task Force in 2015 to support a broader effort to improve the speed, safety and efficiency of payments. The task force is specifically charged with identifying effective approaches for implementing faster payment capabilities in the United States. Next month, interested task force members will submit comprehensive faster payment solution proposals to be analyzed using 36 effectiveness criteria identified by the task force. "The task force members wanted a firm with broad payments expertise to assess proposals against the comprehensive effectiveness criteria they published in February," said Gordon Werkema, the Federal Reserve's payments strategy director. "McKinsey was chosen through a competitive bid process that considered expertise, ability to conduct an independent assessment, proposed assessment approach, and cost." The Federal Reserve will fund the engagement on behalf of the task force, and an advisory group comprised of task force steering committee members will oversee the assessment process. Both the proposals and assessments will be provided to the full task force later this year for review and comment, prior to their publication in early 2017. In addition, the task force will identify strategic issues deemed important to the successful development of faster payments in the United States and consider potential industry actions required to advance implementation and adoption. These conclusions will also be published in the task force's final report. "The process established by the task force ensures a fair, consistent, and quality assessment of solution proposals, while bringing forward task force members' comments and diverse perspectives," said Sean Rodriguez, the Federal Reserve's faster payments strategy leader and chair of the task force. "Importantly, the proposal assessments and the broader task force input are designed to enhance solution designs and help ensure that effective faster payments capabilities are implemented in the United States in a reasonable time frame."
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace despite the global economic and financial developments of recent months. Household spending has been increasing at a moderate rate, and the housing sector has improved further; however, business fixed investment and net exports have been soft. A range of recent indicators, including strong job gains, points to additional strengthening of the labor market. Inflation picked up in recent months; however, it continued to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance, in recent months. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators will continue to strengthen. However, global economic and financial developments continue to pose risks. Inflation is expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of earlier declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. The Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely. Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting further improvement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Stanley Fischer; Loretta J. Mester; Jerome H. Powell; Eric Rosengren; and Daniel K. Tarullo. Voting against the action was Esther L. George, who preferred at this meeting to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1/2 to 3/4 percent. Implementation Note issued March 16, 2016
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Mobile banking use continued to rise last year as smartphone adoption grew and consumers were increasingly drawn to the convenience of mobile financial services, according to a Federal Reserve Board report,Consumers and Mobile Financial Services 2016,released on Wednesday. The report documents consumers' use of mobile phones--Internet-enabled smartphones as well as more basic phones with limited features--as they bank and carry out financial activities. It is the Board's fifth annual look at how consumers use mobile phones to access banking services ("mobile banking"), make payments, transfer money, or pay for goods and services ("mobile payments"), and inform financial decisions, as well as their reasons for using these services. As of November 2015, 43 percent of adults with mobile phones and bank accounts reported using mobile banking--an increase of 4 percentage points from the prior year's survey. The most common way that consumers use mobile banking is checking their account balances or recent transactions, followed by transferring money between accounts. More than half of mobile banking users received an alert from their financial institution through a text message, push notification, or e-mail--making this the third most common use of mobile banking. For those who have adopted mobile banking, use of a mobile phone appears to complement their use of other banking channels. Among mobile banking users with smartphones, 54 percent cited the mobile channel as one of the three most important ways they interact with their bank. This share is below those that cited online (65 percent) and ATM (62 percent) as most important, but slightly above the share that cited a teller at a branch (51 percent). Use of mobile payments continues to be less common than use of mobile banking. Twenty-four percent of all mobile phone users, and 28 percent of smartphone users, made a mobile payment in the 12 months prior to the survey. For smartphone owners who reported making payments with their phones, the most common types of mobile payments were paying bills, purchasing a physical item or digital content remotely, and paying for something in a store. Use of mobile financial services varies across demographic groups. For particular groups of respondents to the 2015 survey--such as younger adults, Hispanics and non-Hispanic blacks--the shares who reported using mobile banking and mobile payments were higher than the overall survey averages. Smartphone ownership among those with mobile phones is higher for Hispanics than for non-Hispanic whites in this survey. Consistent with findings from prior years, a majority of consumers using mobile banking and mobile payments cite convenience or getting a smartphone as their main reason for adoption. The main impediments to the adoption of mobile financial services continue to be a stated preference for other methods of banking and making payments, as well as concerns about security. Concerns about the security and privacy of personal information continue to be expressed by mobile phone users, and the majority of smartphone users reported taking actions that can reduce harm in case of a security incident. The most common actions were installing updates, password-protecting the phone, and customizing privacy settings. The survey was conducted on behalf of the Board by GfK, an online consumer research firm. The 2015 survey was conducted from November 4-23, 2015. More than 2,500 respondents completed the survey. Previous surveys have informed the Federal Reserve and other parts of the government on consumer banking and payment behavior and have supported basic research and public discussion. The 2016 report and a video summarizing the survey's mobile financial services findings may be found at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/mobile_finance.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve System on Friday released the 2015 combined annual audited financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as statements for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks, Maiden Lane LLC (ML LLC), and the Board of Governors. An independent auditing firm engaged by the Board has issued unmodified opinions on these financial statements and unqualified opinions on the Board's and the Bank's internal controls over financial reporting. The Reserve Banks provided for remittances to the U.S. Treasury of $117.1 billion in 2015, which includes a one-time transfer of $19.3 billion made in December 2015 to reduce aggregate Reserve Bank capital surplus to $10 billion, as required by the Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act (FAST Act). The FAST Act, which amended Section 7(a) of the Federal Reserve Act (FRA), requires that any aggregate Reserve Bank capital surplus in excess of $10 billion be transferred to the U.S. Treasury. At the effective date of this FRA amendment, aggregate Reserve Bank capital surplus was $29.3 billion. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2015 earnings, inclusive of other comprehensive income, were $100.3 billion. The Reserve Banks reported a net loss of $16.8 billion as a result of the increased amount of remittances to Treasury related to the implementation of the FAST Act. Interest income on securities acquired through open market operations totaled $113.6 billion, a decrease of $2.3 billion from the previous year. Interest expense on depository institutions' reserve balances and term deposits during the year was $6.9 billion. Losses from the daily revaluation of foreign currency denominated asset holdings were $1.4 billion. Reserve Bank operating expenses were $6.4 billion, including assessments of $1.9 billion for Board expenses, currency costs, and the operations of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. The audited financial statements provide a significant amount of information about the assets, liabilities, and earnings of the Reserve Banks, Maiden Lane LLC, and the Board as of and for the year ended December 31, 2015, including information about the composition, fair value, and earnings related to the $4.4 trillion of U.S. Treasury securities, government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) debt securities, and federal agency and GSE mortgage-backed securities (MBS) acquired through open market operations. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York provides additional detailed information about open market operations and securities holdings on an ongoing basis on its website atwww.newyorkfed.org/markets/pomo_landing.html. Total Reserve Bank assets as of December 31, 2015, were $4.5 trillion, which was similar to the balance on December 31, 2014. Holdings of U.S. Treasury securities decreased by $15.6 billion, and federal agency and GSE MBS holdings increased by $11.4 billion. GSE debt securities holdings decreased by $6.2 billion. Asset holdings of Maiden Lane LLC totaled $1.8 billion on December 31, 2015. The Federal Reserve System financial statements are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Policy Challenges in an Interconnected World" 32nd Annual National Association for Business Economics Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. I am grateful to the National Association for Business Economics (NABE) for conferring the fourth annual NABE Paul A. Volcker Lifetime Achievement Award for Economic Policy on me, thereby allowing me the honor of following in the footsteps of Paul Volcker, Jean-Claude Trichet, and Alice Rivlin.1The honor of receiving the award is enhanced by its bearing the name of Paul Volcker, a model citizen and public servant, and a giant in every sense among central bankers. One thinks of many things on an occasion such as this one. My mind goes back first to growing up in a very small town in Zambia, then Northern Rhodesia, and to the surprise and delight my parents would have felt at seeing me standing where I am now. They would have been even more delighted that my girlfriend, Rhoda, whom I met when my parents moved to a bigger town in Zimbabwe, and I have been happily married for 50 years. But that is not the story I will tell today. Rather, I want to talk about our field, macroeconomics, and some of the lessons we have learned in the course of the last 55 years--and I say 55 years, because in 1961, at the end of my school years, on the advice of a friend, I read Keynes'sGeneral Theoryfor the first time. Did I understand it? Certainly not. Was I captivated by it? Certainly, though "captured" is a more appropriate word than "captivated." Does it remain relevant? Certainly. Just a week ago I took it off the bookshelf to read parts of chapter 23, "Notes on Mercantilism, the Usury Laws, Stamped Money and Theories of Under-Consumption." Today that chapter would be headed "Protectionism, the Zero Lower Bound, and Secular Stagnation," with the importance of usury laws having diminished since 1936. There is an old joke about our field--not the one about the one-handed economist, nor the one about "assume you have a can opener," nor the one that ends, "If I were you, I wouldn't start from here." Rather it's the one about the Ph.D. economist who returns to his university for his class's 50th reunion. He asks if he can see the most recent Ph.D. generals exam. After a while it is brought to him. He reads it carefully, looking perplexed, and then says, "But this is exactly the same as the exam I wrote over 50 years ago." "Ah yes," says the professor. "It is the same, but all the answers are different." Is that really the case? Not really, though it is true to some extent in the realm of policy. To discuss the question of whether the answers to the questions of how to deal with macroeconomic policy problems have changed markedly over the past half-century or so, I will start by briefly sketching the structure of a basic macro model. The building blocks of this model are similar to those used in many macro models, including FRB/US, the Fed staff's large-scale model, and a variety of DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) models used at the Fed and other central banks and by academic researchers. The structure of the model starts with the standard textbook equation for aggregate demand for domestically produced goods, namely:2 When I was an undergraduate at the London School of Economics (LSE) between 1962 and 1965, we learned the IS-LM model, which combined the aggregate demand equation (1) with the money market equilibrium condition set out in (3). That was the basic understanding of the Keynesian model as crystallized by John Hicks, Franco Modigliani, and others, in which it was easy to add detail to the demand functions for private-sector consumption, C; for investment, I; for government spending, G; and for net exports. The Keynesian emphasis on aggregate demand and its determinants is one of the basic innovations of the Keynesian revolution, and one that makes it far easier to understand and explain what factors are determining output and employment. Continuing down the list, on price and wage dynamics, the Phillips curve has flattened somewhat since the 1950s and 1960s.3Further, the role of expectations of inflation in the Phillips curve has been developed far beyond what was understood when A.W. Phillips--who was a New Zealander, an LSE faculty member, and a statistician and former engineer--discovered what later became the Phillips curve. The difference between the short- and long-run Phillips curves, which is now a staple of textbooks, was developed by Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps, and the effect of making expectations rational or model consistent was emphasized by Robert Lucas, whose islands model provided an imperfect information reason for a nonvertical short-run Phillips curve. In Okun's law, the Okun coefficient--the coefficient specifying how much a change in the unemployment rate affects output--appears to have declined over time. So has the trend rate of productivity growth, which is a critical determinant of future levels of per capita income. In (3), the monetary equilibrium condition, the monetary policy decision was typically represented by the money stock at the LSE and perhaps also at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) after the Keynesian revolution (after all, "L" represents the liquidity preference function and "M" the supply of money); now the money supply rule is replaced by an interest-rate setting rule, for instance a reaction function of some form, or by a calculated "optimal" policy based on a loss function. The development of the flexible inflation-targeting approach to monetary policy is one of the major achievements of modern macroeconomics. Flexible inflation targeting allows for flexibility in the speed with which the monetary authority plans on returning to the target inflation rate, and is thereby close to the dual mandate that the law assigns to the Fed. A great deal of progress has been made in developing the credit and financial intermediation block. As early as the 1960s, each of James Tobin, Milton Friedman, and Karl Brunner and Alan Meltzer wrote out models with more fully explicated financial sectors, based on demand functions for assets other than money. Later the demand functions were often replaced by pricing equations derived from the capital asset pricing model. Researchers at the Fed have been bold enough to add estimated term and risk premiums to the determination of the returns on some assets.4They have concluded, inter alia, that the arguments we used to make about how easy it would be to measure expected inflation if the government would introduce inflation-indexed bonds failed to take into account that returns on bonds are affected by liquidity and risk premiums. This means that one of the major benefits that were expected from the introduction of inflation-indexed bonds (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, generally called TIPS), namely that they would provide a quick and reliable measure of inflation expectations, has not been borne out, and that we still have to struggle to get reasonable estimates of expected inflation. As students, we included NX, net exports, in the aggregate demand equation, but we did not generally solve for the exchange rate, possibly because the exchange rate was typically fixed. Later, in 1976, Rudi Dornbusch inaugurated modern international macroeconomics--and here I'm quoting from a speech by Ken Rogoff--in his famous overshooting model.5As globalization of both goods and asset markets intensified over the next 40 years, the international aspects of trade in goods and assets occupied an increasingly important role in the economies of virtually all countries, not least the United States, and in macroeconomics. At the LSE, we took a course on the British economy from Frank Paish, whose lectures consisted of a series of charts, accompanied by narrative from the professor. He made a strong impression on me in a lecture in 1963, in which he said, "You see, it (the balance of payments deficit) goes up and it goes down, and it is clear that we are moving toward a balance of payments crisis in 1964." I waited and I watched, and the crisis appeared on schedule, as predicted. But Paish also warned us that forecasting was difficult, and gave us the advice "Never look back at your forecasts--you may lose your nerve." I pass that wisdom on to those of you who need it. I remember also my excitement at being told by a friend in a more senior class about the existence of econometric models of the entire economy. It was a wonderful moment. I understood that economic policy would from then on be easy: All that was necessary was to feed the data into the model and work out at what level to set the policy parameters. Unfortunately, it hasn't worked out that way. On the use of econometric models, I think often of something Paul Samuelson once said: "I'd rather have Bob Solow's views than the predictions of a model. But I'd rather have Solow with a model than without one." We learned a lot at the LSE. But wonderful as it was to be in London, and to meet people from all over the world for the first time, and to be able to travel to Europe and even to the Soviet Union with a student group, and to ski for the first time in my life in Austria, it gradually became clear to me that the center of the academic economics profession was not in London or Oxford or Cambridge, but in the United States. There was then the delicate business of applying to graduate school. There was a strong Chicago tendency among many of the lecturers at the LSE, but I wanted to go to MIT. When asked why, I gave a simple answer: "Samuelson and Solow." Fortunately, I got into MIT and had the opportunity of getting to know Samuelson and Solow and other great professors. And I also met the many outstanding students who were there at the time, among them Robert Merton. I took courses from Samuelson and Solow and other MIT stars, and I wrote my thesis under the guidance of Paul Samuelson and Frank Fisher. From there, my first job was at the University of Chicago--and I understood that I was very lucky to have been able to learn from the great economists at both MIT and Chicago. Among the many things I learned at Chicago was a Milton Friedman saying: "Man may not be rational, but he's a great rationalizer," which is a quote that often comes to mind when listening to stock market analysts. After four years at Chicago, I returned to the MIT Department of Economics, and thought that I would never leave--even more so when MIT succeeded in persuading Rudi Dornbusch, whom I had met when he was a student at Chicago, to move to MIT--thus giving him too the benefit of having learned his economics at both Chicago and MIT, and giving MIT the pleasure and benefit of having added a superb economist and human being to the collection of such people already present. MIT was still heavily involved in developing growth theory at the time I was a Ph.D. student there, from 1966 to 1969. We students were made aware ofKaldor's stylized factsabout the process of growth, presented in his 1957 article "A Model of Economic Growth." They were: Well, that was then, and many of the problems we face in our economy now relate to the changes in the stylized facts about the behavior of the economy: Every one of Kaldor's stylized facts is no longer true, and unfortunately the changes are mostly in a direction that complicates the formulation of economic policy.6 While the basic approach outlined so far remains valid, and can be used to address many macroeconomic policy issues, I would like briefly to take up several topics in more detail. Some of them are issues that have remained central to the macroeconomic agenda over the past 50 years, some have to my regret fallen off the agenda, and others are new to the agenda. The right guide to thinking in this case is given by a famous Herbert Stein line: "The difference between a growth rate of 1 percent and 2 percent is 100 percent." Why? Productivity growth is a major determinant of long-term growth. At a 1 percent growth rate, it takes income 70 years to double. At a 2 percent growth rate, it takes 35 years to double. That is to say, that with a growth rate of 1 percent per capita, it takes two generations for per capita income to double; at a 2 percent per capita growth rate, it takes one generation for per capita income to double. That is a massive difference, one that would very likely have severe consequences for the national mood, and possibly for economic policy. That is to say, there are few issues more important for the future of our economy, and those of every other country, than the rate of productivity growth. At this stage, we simply do not know what will happen to productivity growth.Robert Gordon of Northwestern University has just published an extremely interesting and pessimistic book that argues we will have to accept the fact that productivity will not grow in future at anything like the rates of the period before 1973. Others look around and see impressive changes in technology and cannot believe that productivity growth will not move back closer to the higher levels of yesteryear.7A great deal of work is taking place to evaluate the data, but so far there is little evidence that data difficulties account for a significant part of the decline in productivity growth as calculated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.8 Critics have argued that QE has gradually become less effective over the years, and should no longer be used.It is extremely difficult to appraise the effectiveness of a program all of whose parameters have been announced at the beginning of the program. But I regard it as significant with respect to the effectiveness of QE that the taper tantrum in 2013, apparently caused by a belief that the Fed was going to wind down its purchases sooner than expected, had a major effect on interest rates. More recently, critics have argued that QE, together with negative interest rates, is no longer effective in either Japan or in the euro zone.That case has not yet been empirically established, and I believe that central banks still have the capacity through QE and other measures to run expansionary monetary policies, even at the zero lower bound. Thus was born or renewed the concept of secular stagnation--the view that the economy could find itself permanently in a situation of low demand, less than full employment, and low growth.10That is not what happened after World War II, and the thought of secular stagnation was correspondingly laid aside, in part because of the growing confidence that intelligent economic policies--fiscal and monetary--could be relied on to help keep the economy at full employment with a reasonable growth rate. Recently, Larry Summers has forcefully restated the secular stagnation hypothesis, and argued that it accounts for the current slowness of economic growth in the United States and the rest of the industrialized world. The theoretical case for secular stagnation in the sense of a shortage of demand is tied to the question of the level of the interest rate that would be needed to generate a situation of full employment. If the equilibrium interest rate is negative, or very small, the economy is likely to find itself growing slowly, and frequently encountering the zero lower bound on the interest rate. Research has shown a declining trend in estimates of the equilibrium interest rate. That finding has become more firmly established since the start of the Great Recession and the global financial crisis.11Moreover, the level of the equilibrium interest rate seems likely to rise only gradually to a longer-run level that would still be quite low by historical standards. What factors determine the equilibrium interest rate? Fundamentally, the balance of saving and investment demands. Several trends have been cited as possible factors contributing to a decline in the long-run equilibrium real rate. One likely factor is persistent weakness in aggregate demand. Among the many reasons for that, as Larry Summers has noted, is that the amount of physical capital that the revolutionary information technology firms with high stock market valuations have needed is remarkably small. The slowdown of productivity growth, which as already mentioned has been a prominent and deeply concerning feature of the past six years, is another important factor.12Others have pointed to demographic trends resulting in there being a larger share of the population in age cohorts with high saving rates.13Some have also pointed to high saving rates in many emerging market countries, coupled with a lack of suitable domestic investment opportunities in those countries, as putting downward pressure on rates in advanced economies--the global savings glut hypothesis advanced by Ben Bernanke and others at the Fed about a decade ago.14 Whatever the cause, other things being equal, a lower level of the long-run equilibrium real rate suggests that the frequency and duration of future episodes in which monetary policy is constrained by the ZLB will be higher than in the past. Prior to the crisis, some research suggested that such episodes were likely to be relatively infrequent and generally short lived.15The past several years certainly require us to reconsider that basic assumption. Moreover, recent experience in the United States and other countries has taught us that conducting monetary policy at the effective lower bound is challenging.16And while unconventional policy tools such as forward guidance and asset purchases have been extremely helpful and effective, all central banks would prefer a situation with positive interest rates, restoring their ability to use the more traditional interest rate tool of monetary policy.17 The answer to the question "Will the equilibrium interest rate remain at today's low levels permanently?" is also that we do not know. Many of the factors that determine the equilibrium interest rate, particularly productivity growth, are extremely difficult to forecast. At present, it looks likely that the equilibrium interest rate will remain low for the policy-relevant future, but there have in the past been both long swings and short-term changes in what can be thought of as equilibrium real rates. Eventually, history will give us the answer. But it is critical to emphasize that history's answer will depend also on future policies, monetary and other, notably including fiscal policy. Concluding RemarksWell, are the answers all different than they were 50 years ago? No. The basic framework we learned a half-century ago remains extremely useful. But also yes: Some of the answers are different because they were not on previous exams because the problems they deal with were not evident fifty years ago. So the advice to potential policymakers is simple: Learn as much as you can, for most of it will come in useful at some stage of your career; but never forget that identifying what is happening in the economy is essential to your ability to do your job, and for that you need to keep your eyes, your ears, and your mind open, and with regard to your mouth--to use it with caution. Many thanks again for this award and this opportunity to speak with you. ReferencesBernanke, Ben S. (2005). "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, St. Louis, April 14. Blanchard, Olivier (2014). "Where Danger Lurks: The Recent Financial Crisis Has Taught Us to Pay Attention to Dark Corners, Where the Economy Can Malfunction Badly,"Finance and Development,vol. 51 (September), pp. 28-31. -------- (2016). "The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief 16-1. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, January. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Blanchard, Olivier, and John Simon (2001). "The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output Volatility (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,1, pp. 135-74. Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer (1972). "Money, Debt, and Economic Activity,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 80 (September-October), pp.951-77. Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall Reinsdorf (forthcoming). "Does the United States Have a Productivity Problem or a Measurement Problem?"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2008). "An Equilibrium Model of 'Global Imbalances' and Low Interest Rates,"American Economic Review,vol. 98 (1), pp. 358-93. Daly, Mary C., John G. Fernald, Òscar Jordà, and Fernanda Nechio (2014). "Output and Unemployment Dynamics (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2013-32. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November. -------- (2014). "Interpreting Deviations from Okun's Law," FRBSF Economic Letter 2014-12. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. D'Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei (2014). "Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation-Protected Security Prices (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-24. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976). "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 84 (December), pp. 1161-76. Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Richard Startz (2014).Macroeconomics,12th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education. Fischer, Stanley (forthcoming). "Monetary Policy, Financial Stability, and the Zero Lower Bound,"American Economic Review(Papers and Proceedings). Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 58 (March), pp. 1-17. Gordon, Robert J. (2014). "The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections," NBER Working Paper Series 19895. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. -------- (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Hall, Robert E. (2014). "Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial Crisis," in Jonathan Parker and Michael Woodford, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014,vol. 29. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future," NBER Working Paper Series 21476. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Hicks, John R. (1937). "Mr. Keynes and the 'Classics': A Suggested Interpretation,"Econometrica, vol. 5 (April), pp. 147-59. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run:Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Jones, Charles I., and Paul M. Romer (2010). "The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions, Population, and Human Capital,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 2 (January), pp. 224-45. Kaldor, Nicholas (1957). "A Model of Economic Growth," Economic Journal, vol. 67 (December), pp. 591-624. Keynes, John Maynard (1936).The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.London: Macmillan. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Usabout the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Knotek, Edward S., II (2007). "How Useful Is Okun's Law? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Economic Review,Fourth Quarter, pp. 73-103. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70. Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972). "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 4 (April), pp. 103-24. Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull (2009). "Financial Integration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 117 (3), pp. 371-416. Modigliani, Franco (1944). "Liquidity Preference and the Theory of Interest and Money,"Econometrica,vol. 12 (January), pp. 45-88. Mokyr, Joel, Chris Vickers, and Nicolas L. Ziebarth (2015). "The History of Techonological Anxiety and the Future of Economic Growth: Is This Time Different?"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 29 (Summer), pp. 31-50. Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff (1996).Foundations of International Macroeconomics.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Okun, Arthur M. (1962). "Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance,"Proceedings of the Business and Economics Statistics Section of the American Statistical Association,pp. 98-104. Phelps, Edmund S. (1967). "Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment over Time,"Economica,vol. 34 (August), pp. 254-81. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936-66. Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009).This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Rogoff, Kenneth (2001). "Dornbusch's Overshooting Model after Twenty-Five Years (PDF)," speech delivered at the Mundell-Fleming Lecture, Second Annual Research Conference, International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 30 (revised January 22, 2002). Solow, Robert M. (2004). "Introduction: The Tobin Approach to Monetary Economics,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 36 (August), pp. 657-63. Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2003). "Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?"NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002, vol. 17 (January). Tobin, James (1969). "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory (PDF),"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 1 (February), pp. 15-29. U.S. Executive Office of the President, Council of Economic Advisors (2015).Long-Term Interest Rates: A Survey(PDF). Washington: EOP. Williams, John C. (2013). "A Defense of Moderation in Monetary Policy (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2013-15. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, July. Woodford, Michael (2010). "Financial Intermediation and Macroeconomic Analysis,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 24 (Fall), pp. 21-44. 1. I am grateful to David Lopez-Salido, Andrea Ajello, Elmar Mertens, Stacey Tevlin, and Bill English of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance. Views expressed are mine, and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. A fuller description of the equations is contained in the appendix.Return to text 3. See Blanchard (2016).Return to text 4. See D'Amico, Kim, and Wei (2014).Return to text 5. See Dornbusch (1976) and Rogoff (2001).Return to text 6. See Jones and Romer (2010).Return to text 7. See, for instance, Mokyr, Vickers, and Ziebarth (2015).Return to text 8. See Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (forthcoming).Return to text 9. Inside the Fed, the range of 0 to 1/4 percent is generally called the ELB, the effective lower bound.Return to text 10. I am distinguishing in this section between secular stagnation as being caused by a deficiency of aggregate demand and another view, that output growth will be very slow in future because productivity growth will be very low. The view that future productivity growth will be very low has already been discussed, with the conclusion that we do not have a good basis for predictions of its future level, and that we simply do not know whether future productivity growth will be extremely low or higher than it has been recently. There is no shortage of views on this issue among economists, but the views to some extent appear to depend on whether the economist making the prediction is an optimist or a pessimist.Return to text 11. This research includes recent work by Johannsen and Mertens (2015) and Kiley (2015) that uses extensions of the original Laubach and Williams (2003) framework. An international perspective on medium-to-long-run real interest rates is provided by U.S. Executive Office of the President (2015). Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Hall (2014) discuss the long-lived effects of financial crises on economic performance. See also Hamilton and others (2015). I have, in addition, drawn on Fischer (forthcoming).Return to text 12. It is also a major factor explaining the phenomenon of the economy's impressive performance on the jobs front during a period of historically slow growth.Return to text 13. See, for instance, Gordon (2014, 2016).Return to text 14. See Bernanke (2005). See also the recent work by Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008); and Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2009).Return to text 15. See, for instance, Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Blanchard and Simon (2001), and Stock and Watson (2003).Return to text 16. For a discussion of various issues reviewed by the Federal Open Market Committee in late 2008 and 2009 regarding the complications of unconventional monetary policy at the ZLB, see the set of staff memos on the Board'swebsite.Return to text 17. See Williams (2013).Return to text Appendix The following model includes a number of elements that play a central role in the analysis of economic fluctuations and in larger policy models as I have encountered them at the Federal Reserve and other institutions. Anaggregate demandrelationship, in the form of the investment-saving (or IS) curve, characterizes the negative dependence of economic activity on the real borrowing rate, $$ i^{B}-\pi^{e}$$, and the positive dependence on expected output, $$ y^{e}$$; government spending, $$ G$$; and net exports, $$ NX$$, as a function of the exchange rate, $$ e$$, and foreign output, $$ y^{f}$$: ThePhillips curvedescribes a relationship between inflation and labor market slack. Inflation responds negatively to the level of the unemployment gap, $$ \hat{u}$$, and to changes in aggregate productivity, $$ z$$ (including shocks to commodity prices). Current inflation also responds positively to expected future inflation, $$ \pi^{e}$$, and to the level of the borrowing rate and of the exchange rate, $$ \phi\left(i^{B},e\right)$$ (cost - push shocks): Current issues regarding the role of expectations, the size of the slope, and the pass-through from exchange rate movements to domestic prices and wages can be addressed in this context. Recent discussions can be found in Blanchard's (2016) reference to the back-to-the-1960s thinking about the Phillips curve and in Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers's (2015) thoughts on hysteresis mechanisms underlying the inflation and unemployment dynamic. To connect cyclical fluctuations in the level of aggregate activity with changes in employment,Okun's lawhas been proved useful as an empirical description of the relationship between the output gap and the unemployment gap, $$ \hat{u} = \frac{u-u^{*}}{u^{*}}$$ (see Knotek (2007); and Daly, Fernald, Jordà, and Nechio (2013, 2014)): To characterizemonetary policy, it is nowadays useful to consider how the central bank affects the level of interest rates by setting the federal funds rate, $$ i$$, in response to deviations of expected inflation from its target, $$ \hat{\pi} = \pi^{e}-\pi^{*}$$ (inflation gap), and percent deviations of output from its potential level, $$ \hat{y} = \frac{y-y^{*}}{y^{*}}$$ (output gap): To capture the role of credit and financial intermediation in the economy, consider aloan market equation, where the demand on the left-hand side depends negatively on the borrowing rate, $$ i^{B}$$, and the level of economic activity (higher income implies lower financing needs). The supply of loans depends negatively on the level of interest rates, $$ i$$, and positively on the level of intermediation spreads, $$ \omega$$, and income, $$ y$$ (to the extent that higher aggregate income increases deposits and banks' capitalization and hence the supplies of intermediated funds). This equation pins down the equilibrium level of the intermediation spread, $$ \omega$$: The borrowing rate, $$ i^{B}$$, is then equal to the sum of the risk-free rate set by the central bank, $$ i$$, and the spread, $$ \omega$$: This analysis is in the spirit of James Tobin's approach to monetary economics as was recently described by Solow (2004) and extended by Woodford (2010) to describe the role for financial intermediation shocks. It also captures the work by B. Friedman, B. Bernanke, and A. Blinder in thinking about the role of credit and credit spreads in the transmission of monetary policy impulses. Open economy aspects are captured by the following equations: Thebalance of paymentis in equilibrium when net exports are compensated by capital flows of opposite sign. Capital flows depend on the difference between the domestic interest rate and the foreign rate adjusted for depreciation: Furthermore, theuncovered interest rate parityequates the rate of return on domestic assets, $$ i$$, to the rate of return on foreign assets, $$ i_{f}$$, plus future expected changes in the exchange rate, $$ \frac{de}{e}$$, and a residual risk premium component, $$ RP$$: For a detailed description of these relationships, see Dornbusch, Fischer, and Startz (2014); and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996).
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York For more than a century, the Economic Club of New York has served as one of the nation's leading nonpartisan forums for discussion of economic policy issues. It is an honor to appear before you today to speak about the Federal Reserve's pursuit of maximum employment and price stability. In December, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) raised the target range for the federal funds rate, the Federal Reserve's main policy rate, by 1/4 percentage point. This small step marked the end of an extraordinary seven-year period during which the federal funds rate was held near zero to support the recovery from the worst financial crisis and recession since the Great Depression. The Committee's action recognized the considerable progress that the U.S. economy had made in restoring the jobs and incomes of millions of Americans hurt by this downturn. It also reflected an expectation that the economy would continue to strengthen and that inflation, while low, would move up to the FOMC's 2 percent objective as the transitory influences of lower oil prices and a stronger dollar gradually dissipate and as the labor market improves further. In light of this expectation, the Committee stated in December, and reiterated at the two subsequent meetings, that it "expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate."1 In my remarks today, I will explain why the Committee anticipates that only gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted in coming years, emphasizing that this guidance should be understood as aforecastfor the trajectory of policy rates that the Committee anticipates will prove to be appropriate to achieve its objectives, conditional on the outlook for real economic activity and inflation. Importantly, this forecast is not aplanset in stone that will be carried out regardless of economic developments. Instead, monetary policy will, as always, respond to the economy's twists and turns so as to promote, as best as we can in an uncertain economic environment, the employment and inflation goals assigned to us by the Congress. The proviso that policy will evolve as needed is especially pertinent today in light of global economic and financial developments since December, which at times have included significant changes in oil prices, interest rates, and stock values. So far, these developments have not materially altered the Committee's baseline--or most likely--outlook for economic activity and inflation over the medium term. Specifically, we continue to expect further labor market improvement and a return of inflation to our 2 percent objective over the next two or three years, consistent with data over recent months. But this is not to say that global developments since the turn of the year have been inconsequential. In part, the baseline outlook for real activity and inflation is little changed because investors responded to those developments by marking down their expectations for the future path of the federal funds rate, thereby putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and cushioning the adverse effects on economic activity. In addition, global developments have increased the risks associated with that outlook. In light of these considerations, the Committee decided to leave the stance of policy unchanged in both January and March. I will next describe the Committee's baseline economic outlook and the risks that cloud that outlook, emphasizing the FOMC's commitment to adjust monetary policy as needed to achieve our employment and inflation objectives. Recent Developments and the Baseline OutlookReadings on the U.S. economy since the turn of the year have been somewhat mixed. On the one hand, many indicators have been quite favorable. The labor market has added an average of almost 230,000 jobs a month over the past three months. In addition, the unemployment rate has edged down further, more people are joining the workforce as the prospects for finding jobs have improved, and the employment-to-population ratio has increased by almost 1/2 percentage point. Consumer spending appears to be expanding at a moderate pace, driven by solid income gains, improved household balance sheets, and the ongoing effects of the increases in wealth and declines in oil prices over the past few years. The housing market continues its gradual recovery, and fiscal policy at all levels of government is now modestly boosting economic activity after exerting a considerable drag in recent years. On the other hand, manufacturing and net exports have continued to be hard hit by slow global growth and the significant appreciation of the dollar since 2014. These same global developments have also weighed on business investment by limiting firms' expected sales, thereby reducing their demand for capital goods; partly as a result, recent indicators of capital spending and business sentiment have been lackluster. In addition, business investment has been held down by the collapse in oil prices since late 2014, which is driving an ongoing steep decline in drilling activity. Low oil prices have also resulted in large-scale layoffs in the energy sector and adverse spillovers to output and employment in industries that support energy production. On balance, overall employment has continued to grow at a solid pace so far this year, in part because domestic household spending has been sufficiently strong to offset the drag coming from abroad. Looking forward however, we have to take into account the potential fallout from recent global economic and financial developments, which have been marked by bouts of turbulence since the turn of the year. For a time, equity prices were down sharply, oil traded at less than $30 per barrel, and many currencies were depreciating against the dollar. Although prices in these markets have since largely returned to where they stood at the start of the year, in other respects economic and financial conditions remain less favorable than they did back at the time of the December FOMC meeting. In particular, foreign economic growth now seems likely to be weaker this year than previously expected, and earnings expectations have declined. By themselves, these developments would tend to restrain U.S. economic activity. But those effects have been at least partially offset by downward revisions to market expectations for the federal funds rate that in turn have put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, including mortgage rates, thereby helping to support spending. For these reasons, I anticipate that the overall fallout for the U.S. economy from global market developments since the start of the year will most likely be limited, although this assessment is subject to considerable uncertainty. All told, the Committee continues to expect moderate economic growth over the medium term accompanied by further labor market improvement. Consistent with this assessment, the medians of the individual projections for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation made by all of the FOMC participants for our March meeting are little changed from December.2A key factor underlying such modest revisions is a judgment that monetary policy remains accommodative and will be adjusted at an appropriately gradual pace to achieve and maintain our dual objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Reflecting global economic and financial developments since December, however, the pace of rate increases is now expected to be somewhat slower. For example, the median of FOMC participants' projections for the federal funds rate is now only 0.9 percent for the end of 2016 and 1.9 percent for the end of 2017, both 1/2 percentage point below the December medians. As has been widely discussed, the level of inflation-adjusted or real interest rates needed to keep the economy near full employment appears to have fallen to a low level in recent years. Although estimates vary both quantitatively and conceptually, the evidence on balance indicates that the economy's "neutral" real rate--that is, the level of the real federal funds rate that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near its potential--is likely now close to zero.3However, the current real federal funds rate is even lower, at roughly minus 1-1/4 percentage point, when measured using the 12-month change in the core price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), which excludes food and energy. Thus, the current stance of monetary policy appears to be consistent with actual economic growth modestly outpacing potential growth and further improvements in the labor market.4 Looking beyond the near term, I anticipate that growth will also be supported by a lessening of some of the headwinds that continue to restrain the U.S. economy, which include weak foreign activity, dollar appreciation, a pace of household formation that has not kept up with population and income growth and so has depressed homebuilding, and productivity growth that has been running at a slow pace by historical standards since the end of the recession. If these headwinds gradually fade as I expect, the neutral federal funds rate will also rise, in which case it will, all else equal, be appropriate to gradually increase the federal funds rate more or less in tandem to achieve our dual objectives. Otherwise, monetary policy would eventually become overly accommodative as the economy strengthened.5 Implicitly, this expectation of fading headwinds and a rising neutral rate is a key reason for the FOMC's assessment that gradual increases in the federal funds rate over time will likely be appropriate. That said, this assessment is only a forecast. The future path of the federal funds rate is necessarily uncertain because economic activity and inflation will likely evolve in unexpected ways. For example, no one can be certain about the pace at which economic headwinds will fade. More generally, the economy will inevitably be buffeted by shocks that cannot be foreseen. What is certain, however, is that the Committee will respond to changes in the outlook as needed to achieve its dual mandate. Turning to inflation, here too the baseline outlook is little changed. In December, the FOMC anticipated that inflation would remain low in the near term due to the drag from lower prices for energy and imports. But as those transitory effects faded, the Committee expected inflation to move up to 2 percent over the medium term, provided the labor market improves further and inflation expectations are stable. This assessment still seems to me to be broadly correct. PCE prices were up only 1 percent in February relative to a year earlier, held down by earlier declines in the price of oil. In contrast, core PCE inflation, which strips out volatile food and energy components, was up 1.7 percent in February on a 12 month basis, somewhat more than my expectation in December. But it is too early to tell if this recent faster pace will prove durable. Even when measured on a 12-month basis, core inflation can vary substantially from quarter to quarter and earlier dollar appreciation is still expected to weigh on consumer prices in the coming months. For these reasons, I continue to expect that overall PCE inflation for 2016 as a whole will come in well below 2 percent but will then move back to 2 percent over the course of 2017 and 2018, assuming no further swings in energy prices or the dollar. This projection, however, depends critically on expectations for future inflation remaining reasonably well anchored. It is still my judgment that inflation expectations are well anchored, but as I will shortly discuss, continued low readings for some indicators of expected inflation do concern me. Risks to the Outlook for Real Economic ActivityAlthough the baseline outlook has changed little on balance since December, global developments pose ongoing risks. These risks appear to have contributed to the financial market volatility witnessed both last summer and in recent months. One concern pertains to the pace of global growth, which is importantly influenced by developments in China. There is a consensus that China's economy will slow in the coming years as it transitions away from investment toward consumption and from exports toward domestic sources of growth. There is much uncertainty, however, about how smoothly this transition will proceed and about the policy framework in place to manage any financial disruptions that might accompany it. These uncertainties were heightened by market confusion earlier this year over China's exchange rate policy. A second concern relates to the prospects for commodity prices, particularly oil. For the United States, low oil prices, on net, likely will boost spending and economic activity over the next few years because we are still a major oil importer. But the apparent negative reaction of financial markets to recent declines in oil prices may in part reflect market concern that the price of oil was nearing a financial tipping point for some countries and energy firms. In the case of countries reliant on oil exports, the result might be a sharp cutback in government spending; for energy-related firms, it could entail significant financial strains and increased layoffs. In the event oil prices were to fall again, either development could have adverse spillover effects to the rest of the global economy. If such downside risks to the outlook were to materialize, they would likely slow U.S. economic activity, at least to some extent, both directly and through financial market channels as investors respond by demanding higher returns to hold risky assets, causing financial conditions to tighten. But at the same time, we should not ignore the welcome possibility that economic conditions could turn out to be more favorable than we now expect. The improvement in the labor market in 2014 and 2015 was considerably faster than expected by either FOMC participants or private forecasters, and that experience could be repeated if, for example, the economic headwinds we face were to abate more quickly than anticipated. For these reasons, the FOMC must watch carefully for signs that the economy may be evolving in unexpected ways, good or bad. Risks to the Inflation OutlookThe inflation outlook has also become somewhat more uncertain since the turn of the year, in part for reasons related to risks to the outlook for economic growth. To the extent that recent financial market turbulence signals an increased chance of a further slowing of growth abroad, oil prices could resume falling, and the dollar could start rising again. And if foreign developments were to adversely affect the U.S. economy by more than I expect, then the pace of labor market improvement would probably be slower, which would also tend to restrain growth in both wages and prices. But even if such developments were to occur, they would, in my view, only delay the return of inflation to 2 percent, provided that inflation expectations remain anchored. Unfortunately, the stability of longer-run inflation expectations cannot be taken for granted. During the 1970s, inflation expectations rose markedly because the Federal Reserve allowed actual inflation to ratchet up persistently in response to economic disruptions--a development that made it more difficult to stabilize both inflation and employment. With considerable effort, however, the FOMC gradually succeeded in bringing inflation back down to a low and stable level over the course of the 1980s and early 1990s. Since this time, measures of longer-run inflation expectations derived from both surveys and financial markets have been remarkably stable, making it easier to keep actual inflation relatively close to 2 percent despite large movements in oil prices and pronounced swings in the unemployment rate. Lately, however, there have been signs that inflation expectations may have drifted down. Market-based measures of longer-run inflation compensation have fallen markedly over the past year and half, although they have recently moved up modestly from their all-time lows. Similarly, the measure of longer-run inflation expectations reported in the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers has drifted down somewhat over the past few years and now stands at the lower end of the narrow range in which it has fluctuated since the late 1990s. The shifts in these measures notwithstanding, the argument that inflation expectations have actually fallen is far from conclusive. Analysis carried out at the Fed and elsewhere suggests that the decline in market-based measures of inflation compensation has largely been driven by movements in inflation risk premiums and liquidity concerns rather than by shifts in inflation expectations.6In addition, the longer-run measure of inflation expectations from the Michigan Survey has historically exhibited some sensitivity to fluctuations in current gasoline prices, which suggests that this measure may be an unreliable guide to movements in trend inflation under current circumstances.7Moreover, measures of longer-run expected inflation gleaned from surveys of business and financial economists, such as those reported in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, the Blue Chip survey, and the Survey of Primary Dealers, have largely moved sideways in the past year or two. Taken together, these results suggest that my baseline assumption of stable expectations is still justified. Nevertheless, the decline in some indicators has heightened the risk that this judgment could be wrong. If so, the return to 2 percent inflation could take longer than expected and might require a more accommodative stance of monetary policy than would otherwise be appropriate.8 Despite the declines in some indicators of expected inflation, we also need to consider the opposite risk that we are underestimating the speed at which inflation will return to our 2 percent objective. Economic growth here and abroad could turn out to be stronger than expected, and, as the past few weeks have demonstrated, oil prices can rise as well as fall. More generally, economists' understanding of inflation is far from perfect, and it would not be all that surprising if inflation was to rise more quickly than expected over the next several years. For these reasons, we must continue to monitor incoming wage and price data carefully. Monetary Policy ImplicationsLet me now turn to the implications for monetary policy of this assessment of the baseline outlook and associated risks. The FOMC left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged in January and March, in large part reflecting the changes in baseline conditions that I noted earlier. In particular, developments abroad imply that meeting our objectives for employment and inflation will likely require a somewhat lower path for the federal funds rate than was anticipated in December. Given the risks to the outlook, I consider it appropriate for the Committee to proceed cautiously in adjusting policy. This caution is especially warranted because, with the federal funds rate so low, the FOMC's ability to use conventional monetary policy to respond to economic disturbances is asymmetric. If economic conditions were to strengthen considerably more than currently expected, the FOMC could readily raise its target range for the federal funds rate to stabilize the economy. By contrast, if the expansion was to falter or if inflation was to remain stubbornly low, the FOMC would be able to provide only a modest degree of additional stimulus by cutting the federal funds rate back to near zero.9 One must be careful, however, not to overstate the asymmetries affecting monetary policy at the moment. Even if the federal funds rate were to return to near zero, the FOMC would still have considerable scope to provide additional accommodation. In particular, we could use the approaches that we and other central banks successfully employed in the wake of the financial crisis to put additional downward pressure on long-term interest rates and so support the economy--specifically, forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate and increases in the size or duration of our holdings of long-term securities.10While these tools may entail some risks and costs that do not apply to the federal funds rate, we used them effectively to strengthen the recovery from the Great Recession, and we would do so again if needed.11 Of course, economic conditions may evolve quite differently than anticipated in the baseline outlook, both in the near term and over the longer run. If so, as I emphasized earlier, the FOMC will adjust monetary policy as warranted. As our March decision and the latest revisions to the Summary of Economic Projections demonstrate, the Committee has not embarked on a preset course of tightening. Rather, our actions are data dependent, and the FOMC will adjust policy as needed to achieve its dual objectives. Financial market participants appear to recognize the FOMC's data-dependent approach because incoming data surprises typically induce changes in market expectations about the likely future path of policy, resulting in movements in bond yields that act to buffer the economy from shocks. This mechanism serves as an important "automatic stabilizer" for the economy. As I have already noted, the decline in market expectations since December for the future path of the federal funds rate and accompanying downward pressure on long-term interest rates have helped to offset the contractionary effects of somewhat less favorable financial conditions and slower foreign growth. In addition, the public's expectation that the Fed will respond to economic disturbances in a predictable manner to reduce or offset their potential harmful effects means that the public is apt to react less adversely to such shocks--a response which serves to stabilize the expectations underpinning hiring and spending decisions.12 Such a stabilizing effect is one consequence of effective communication by the FOMC about its outlook for the economy and how, based on that outlook, policy is expected to evolve to achieve our economic objectives. I continue to strongly believe that monetary policy is most effective when the FOMC is forthcoming in addressing economic and financial developments such as those I have discussed in these remarks, and when we speak clearly about how such developments may affect the outlook and the expected path of policy. I have done my best to do so today, in the time you have kindly granted me. ReferencesAbrahams, Michael, Tobias Adrian, Richard K. Crump, and Emanuel Moench (2012). "Decomposing Real and Nominal Yield Curves (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Reports No. 570. New York: FRBNY, September; revised February 2015. Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates (PDF),"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol.54 (April), pp.728-52. An earlier version of this article is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's website athttp://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/reswkpap/pdf/rwp05-08.pdf. Bauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2015). "Optimal Policy and Market-Based Expectations," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-12, San Francisco: FRBSF, April 13. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 16. Brayton, Flint, Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2014). "The FRB/US Model: A Tool for Macroeconomic Policy Analysis," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. D'Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei (2014). "Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation-Protected Security Prices (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-24. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Engen, Eric M., Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. English, William B., J. David Lopez-Salido, and Robert J. Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions (PDF),"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (April), pp. 22-70. An earlier version of this article is available on the Federal Reserve Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2013/201376/201376pap.pdf. Evans, Charles, Jonas Fisher, François Gourio, and Spencer Krane (2015). "Risk Management for Monetary Policy Near the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, BPEA Conference Draft. Washington: Brookings Institution, March. Gust, Christopher J., Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2015). "Monetary Policy, Incomplete Information, and the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-099. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2016). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-011. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Lubik, Thomas A., and Christian Matthes (2015). "Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches (PDF)," Economic Brief 15-10. Richmond: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, October. Nakata, Taisuke (2012). "Uncertainty at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-09. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2. 1. Board of Governors (2015), paragraph 4.Return to text 2. Specifically, the median projections of real GDP growth in 2016 and 2017 revised down 0.2 percentage point and 0.1 percentage point, respectively; the median projections of real GDP growth in 2018 and the longer run were unrevised. The median projection for the unemployment rate in late 2016 was unrevised, while the projections for late 2017, late 2018, and the longer run were revised down slightly. Finally, although the median projection for overall inflation in 2016 was revised down 0.4 percentage point, median projections for subsequent years were unrevised; in addition, median projections for core inflation were almost unrevised for all years. For additional information on the Summary of Economic Projections to be released with the March 2016 FOMC minutes, seewww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20160316.htm.Return to text 3. The neutral rate is not directly observable. However, we intuitively know that it must have run well below its historical norm in recent years because otherwise the economy would have expanded at a much more rapid pace with the nominal federal funds rate near zero. As discussed in my December 2, 2015, speech to the Economic Club of Washington (Yellen, 2015), empirical evidence supports this intuition. I showed that model-based estimates of the "natural rate," when the natural rate is defined as the real short-term interest rate that would prevail in the absence of frictions that slow the adjustment of wages and prices to changes in the economy, are currently close to zero in four macroeconomic models used by Federal Reserve staff. Time series estimates of a different concept of the natural rate that is more similar to the neutral rate definition used in this speech, such as Laubach and Williams (2016) and Lubik and Matthes (2015), are near historical lows. See also Johannsen and Mertens (2016) for empirical evidence of a decline in the longer-run level of the natural rate, along with measures of the uncertainty attached to estimates of its current value.Return to text 4. Assuming that the current gap between the actual federal funds rate and its neutral value is about 125basis points, simulations of the FRB/US model under vector-autoregression-based expectations suggest that maintaining this interest rate gap for the next couple of years would lower the unemployment rate 1/2percentage point or so below what it otherwise would be if the gap were instead immediately closed. Under rational expectations, the predicted effect would be smaller. For further information, see Brayton, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2014).Return to text 5. Of course, any gap between the real federal funds rate and the neutral rate will eventually need to be closed in order to stabilize inflation at 2 percent, keep employment at its maximum level, and the economy growing in line with its potential rate.Return to text 6. For related background discussions, see Bauer and Rudebusch (2015), Abrahams and others (2012 [rev. 2015), and D'Amico, Kim, and Wei (2014).Return to text 7. Similarly, a monthly survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shows a noticeable decline over the past two years in household expectations for inflation three years ahead. However, these readings on shorter-term expectations may also be influenced by current gasoline prices. Moreover, readings from this survey are only available since 2013, making it difficult to determine the significance of these results.Return to text 8. Another risk to the inflation forecast, although one that has not changed appreciably since the turn of the year, is that the Committee may have overestimated the longer-run rate of unemployment consistent with inflation stabilizing at 2 percent. Currently, the median of FOMC participants' estimates of this rate is 4.8 percent. However, this longer-run rate cannot be estimated precisely, and so it could be appreciably higher or lower--although given low readings on wages in recent years, I think the latter possibility is more likely than the former. If so, a lower level of unemployment might be needed to fully eliminate slack in the labor market, drive faster wage growth, and return inflation to our 2 percent objective.Return to text 9. Research suggests that, all else being equal, increased uncertainty and greater downside risk in the vicinity of the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates call for greater gradualism under optimal policy than would be the case if short-term nominal interest rates were appreciably above zero. This phenomenon is known as "policy attenuation" in the economic literature. For a discussion, see, for example, Adam and Billi (2007), Nakata (2012), Evans and others (2015), and Gust, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2015).Return to text 10. With regard to the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, the FOMC could increase its size by resuming large-scale purchases of longer-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities. Alternatively, the FOMC could increase the duration of the Federal Reserve's holdings without expanding the size of its portfolio by selling assets with relatively short residual maturities and buying equal amounts of assets with relatively long residual maturities. Studies suggest that either action would reduce the term premiums embedded in longer-term interest rates considerably.Return to text 11. For an overview of the macroeconomic effects of the Federal Reserve's unconventional policies after the financial crisis, see Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015) and the references therein. For a discussion of the costs and benefits of these tools, see English, Lopez-Salido, and Tetlow (2015).Return to text 12. That said, market expectations are not always well aligned with the Committee's baseline outlook for the federal funds rate. Market participants may hold different views about the economic outlook and the associated risks and at times may be confused about the FOMC's strategy. In such situations, the Committee must do what it believes is appropriate while clearly explaining the rationale for its actions.Return to text