The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today released a report to the Congress and the Financial Stability Oversight Council on the activities and investments that banking entities may engage in under applicable law. Section 620 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) required the federal banking agencies to conduct the study and report to Congress on the types of activities and investments permissible for banking entities, the associated risks, and how banking entities mitigate those risks. For the purpose of this study, banking entities include insured depository institutions and any company that controls an insured depository institution or is treated as a bank holding company under the International Banking Act of 1978. The study also covers any affiliate or subsidiary of such companies. Each agency prepared the section of the report relative to the banking entities that it supervises. Each of the three sections includes a discussion of permissible activities, risk mitigation, legal limitations, and specific recommendations as required by the Dodd-Frank Act.
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the "Banking and the Economy: A Forum for Minority Bankers," sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri (via videoconference) Watch live Thank you, and I also would like to thank the organizers of this forum for arranging for me to be part of your conversation, on a day when other business unfortunately prevents me from travelling to Kansas City. And I am really looking forward to hearing from all of you on what I expect will be a range of topics, but I thought I might start with a few remarks about something of considerable interest to me, which is diversity and inclusion. I think the Kansas City Fed is an excellent place to discuss this issue because of the recognition it has received for promoting diversity and inclusion, both among businesses and other organizations in the 10th District and in its own ranks. I know that the Bank is continuing to hold Diversity Summits with firms and community groups, the most recent of which was last month. In various ways, it is also promoting diversity among its own staff and senior leaders through recruiting, hiring and promotions, and is closely tracking progress. The Greater Kansas City Chamber of Commerce singled out the Bank this year for its diversity efforts from among 20 organizations and businesses. I believe these efforts reflect a commitment to diversity that is found throughout the Federal Reserve System, and I would like to talk a bit about the basis for that commitment, starting with why it is that diversity, in its different forms, is so important. One reason that the Fed organizes conferences such as this one is to facilitate communication. In this case, we want to communicate with you, as leaders of institutions we oversee and are otherwise affected by our decisions. We want to understand your views and try to explain what we are trying to accomplish. Such communication would not be effective if only one or just a few banks in the 10th District were part of the conversation. Today's forum includes bankers from smaller community banks, regional banks, and large banks because the roles of your institutions in your communities differ, and hearing your different views provides a fuller picture of the industry's views. Similarly, it is important to include in the conversation bankers of diverse backgrounds, which is why it is important that we hear from minority bankers. In these examples, diversity in its various forms is a source of strength, which is something that we as financial regulators understand very well. The Federal Reserve supports an ongoing role for community banks in part because diversity among financial institutions promotes a stable and healthy financial system, spurring competition and ensuring that customers of all types have access to a wide variety of services. The Federal Reserve supports the Partnership for Progress, which assists and advises minority-owned financial institutions, because we believe that those institutions are likewise a source of diversity that contributes to a healthy financial system. I expect it is not news, either, to bankers, that diversity is a source of strength. Every day, in serving customers, bankers can see the strength that comes from diversity--the wisdom of diversification in investment decisions, in diverse product lines for the businesses you lend to, and especially in the strength of diverse communities. Diversity also strengthens organizations by making it possible to have a wide variety of views available. It helps ensure that individuals within those organizations have the opportunity to shine and employ their talents to the fullest and that their best ideas are heard and acted on. The banks you serve are better able to reach new customers, especially groups of customers who have historically been underbanked, when they show that serving those customers is a top priority. And one of the most effective ways of showing a commitment to a diverse customer base is showing a commitment to a diverse workforce. Demographic trends indicate that minorities will be an increasing share of the population in the years and decades ahead, and thus an increasing share of new customers for your institutions. My organization, the Federal Reserve, is also committed to a diverse workforce and to diversity in our senior leadership. The Federal Reserve is pursuing this goal not only for all of the practical reasons I have cited to seek diversity, but also because it is the right thing to do. I want to be clear to all of you that I am committed to improving diversity throughout our organization, including at the upper ranks. Diversity is also important on the boards of directors and advisory councils of Reserve Banks. I hope, in fact, that in this room today there are individuals who one day may serve as an advisor, director or even a Reserve Bank President or member of the Board of Governors. Improving diversity requires effort and constant focus. We will continue working hard to achieve this goal. I believe it is as vital to the Federal Reserve as it is to your employers, and to every employer, to improve diversity and extend opportunity to everyone.
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the September 20-21 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the September 20-21 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Nellie Liang, director of the Division of Financial Stability, will retire later this year after 30 years of service to the Federal Reserve Board, including six years as director. The Board will begin a search for her successor. Ms. Liang began her career at the Board in 1986 when she joined the Division of Research and Statistics as an economist. In 2010, she was appointed director of the newly-created Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, which became the Division of Financial Stability in 2016. During her tenure as director, Ms. Liang led the division's efforts to systematically assess risks to financial stability and to develop policy responses to mitigate those risks. "Nellie's perceptive leadership and thoughtful analyses have contributed tremendously to the advancement of the Federal Reserve's efforts to rigorously assess financial stability risks and incorporate them into the development of both monetary and supervisory policy," said Chair Janet L. Yellen. "I have deeply appreciated her service and wise counsel, especially during the financial crisis and, in the years afterward, as the founding director of the Board's Division of Financial Stability." Ms. Liang was a key participant in crafting the Federal Reserve's response to the financial crisis and, in 2009, helped lead the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, or bank stress tests, which helped increase public confidence in the banking system. She has a Ph.D. in economics from the University of Maryland and an undergraduate degree in economics from the University of Notre Dame. The Division of Financial Stability identifies and monitors significant vulnerabilities in the financial system, including from financial markets and both bank and nonbank financial institutions. It supports an active research program to evaluate the effects of monetary and regulatory policies on systemic risks and develops regulations and policies to reduce the systemic risk of banking institutions, including through the annual stress tests and countercyclical capital buffers. It coordinates the Board's responsibilities as a member of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, and works with international agencies on financial stability policies. It reports regularly on its findings to the Board, the Federal Open Market Committee, and the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: FirstFed Bancorp, Inc. Employee Stock Ownership Plan and FirstFed Bancorp, Inc., both of Bessemer, AlabamaWritten Agreement dated June 27, 2011Terminated September 1, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: North State Bancshares, Inc., Shakopee, MinnesotaWritten Agreement date July 26, 2010Terminated August 29, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Anchor Commercial Bank, Juno Beach, FloridaWritten Agreement dated March 16, 2010Terminated September 8, 2016 Bridgeview Bancorp, Inc., Bridgeview, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated February 18, 2011Terminated September 7, 2016 Calvert Financial Corporation and Mainstreet Bank, both of Ashland, MissouriWritten Agreement dated June 5, 2012Terminated September 7, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released a policy statement detailing the framework the Board will follow in setting the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) for private-sector credit exposures located in the United States. The CCyB is a macroprudential tool that can be used to increase the resilience of the financial system by raising capital requirements on internationally active banking organizations when the risk of above-normal losses is elevated. The CCyB would then be available to help banking organizations absorb shocks associated with declining credit conditions. Implementation of the buffer could also help moderate fluctuations in the supply of credit. The policy statement provides background on the range of financial-system vulnerabilities and other factors the Board may take into account as it evaluates settings for the buffer, including but not limited to, leverage in the nonfinancial sector, leverage in the financial sector, maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector, and asset valuation pressures. Because economic and financial risks are constantly evolving, the range of indicators and models that the Board may consider is likely to change over time. In response to comments, the final policy statement clarifies that the Board expects that the CCyB will be activated when systemic vulnerabilities are meaningfully above normal and that the Board generally intends to increase the CCyB gradually. The final policy statement also emphasizes that the Board expects to remove or reduce the CCyB when the conditions that led to its activation abate or lessen and when the release of CCyB capital would promote financial stability. The Board generally would expect to provide notice to the public and seek comment on the proposed level of the CCyB as part of making any final determination to change the CCyB. The CCyB applies to banking organizations that are subject to the advanced approaches capital rules, generally those with more than $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign exposures, and to any depository institution subsidiary of such banking organizations. TheBoard Voteto approve the policy statement was unanimous. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday invited public comment on a proposed rule that would strengthen existing requirements and limitations on the physical commodity activities of financial holding companies. The proposal would help reduce the catastrophic, legal, reputational, and financial risks that physical commodity activities pose to financial holding companies. A limited number of firms supervised by the Board engage in physical commodity activities and investments. Some firms are permitted by law to engage in a broad range of physical commodity activities, including the extraction, storage, and transportation of commodities. Others may engage in more limited activities, such as commodities trading. The possibility of an environmental accident due to these activities presents significant risks to the firms. Based on a broad review of firms' physical commodity activities as well as comments received on the Board's 2014 advance notice of proposed rulemaking on this matter, the proposed rule would: Comments on the proposed rule will be accepted for 90 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes Board Memo (PDF) Federal RegisterNotice:HTML|PDF Comments on proposal:Submit|View
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday invited public comment on a proposed rule to modify its capital plan and stress testing rules for the 2017 cycle. Among other changes, the proposal would tailor the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) to remove certain large and noncomplex firms from the qualitative assessment of CCAR. CCAR evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of bank holding companies with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets. In the current CCAR process, the Federal Reserve conducts a qualitative assessment of the strength of each firm's capital planning process in addition to a quantitative assessment of each firm's capital adequacy based on hypothetical scenarios of severe economic and financial market stress. The proposal would remove the qualitative assessment of CCAR for large and noncomplex firms, or bank holding companies and intermediate holding companies of foreign banking organizations with total consolidated assets between $50 billion and $250 billion, on-balance sheet foreign exposure of less than $10 billion, and total consolidated nonbank assets of less than $75 billion. While the Federal Reserve has already published capital planning supervisory expectations that are tailored to the size and complexity of these firms, the proposal would reinforce the Federal Reserve's less stringent expectations for these less systemic firms, which are generally engaged in traditional banking activities. The proposed rule would also reduce certain reporting requirements for these firms. The firms would continue to be subject to the quantitative requirements of CCAR, as well as normal supervision by the Federal Reserve regarding their capital planning. The proposed rule would also decrease the amount of capital any firm subject to the quantitative requirements of CCAR can distribute to shareholders outside of an approved capital plan without seeking prior approval from the Board. Currently, if a firm does not receive an objection to its capital plan, it may distribute up to 1 percent of its tier 1 capital above the distributions in its capital plan. The proposal would reduce that amount to 0.25 percent of tier 1 capital. The proposed rule would take effect for the 2017 CCAR. Comments on the proposal are due by November 25, 2016. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes Federal RegisterNotice:HTML|PDF Comment on proposal:Submit|View
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Agricultural Bank of China, Beijing, Peoples Republic of China and Agricultural Bank of China New York Branch, New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated September 28, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in July indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and growth of economic activity has picked up from the modest pace seen in the first half of this year. Although the unemployment rate is little changed in recent months, job gains have been solid, on average. Household spending has been growing strongly but business fixed investment has remained soft. Inflation has continued to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; most survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance, in recent months. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further. Inflation is expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of earlier declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory effects of past declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. The Committee continues to closely monitor inflation indicators and global economic and financial developments. Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent. The Committee judges that the case for an increase in the federal funds rate has strengthened but decided, for the time being, to wait for further evidence of continued progress toward its objectives. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting further improvement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Stanley Fischer; Jerome H. Powell; and Daniel K. Tarullo. Voting against the action were: Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric Rosengren, each of whom preferred at this meeting to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1/2 to 3/4 percent. Implementation Note issued September 21, 2016
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Yale University School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, Connecticut Watch Live Supervisory stress testing has become a cornerstone of post-crisis prudential regulation. Stress testing, unlike traditional capital requirements, provides a forward-looking assessment of losses that would be suffered under adverse economic scenarios. The simultaneous testing of the largest firms lends a perspective on a large part of the banking system and facilitates identification of common exposures and risks. During the financial crisis, the success of an ad hoc stress test in assessing the capital needs of, and restoring confidence in, the nation's largest financial institutions encouraged Congress to make stress testing a required and regular feature of large firm prudential regulation.1The Federal Reserve has, in the succeeding years, substantially refined its supervisory stress test. Moreover, the stress test has been integrated into our Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which both ties the results of the test into the banks' capital distribution practices and evaluates their risk management and capital planning capacities. Today I want to share with you the results of an extensive review of the statutory stress test and CCAR programs, which we began following the end of the 2015 cycle. Before turning to the reasons for that review and some ideas for changing these programs that have arisen from it, I will take a few moments to summarize the characteristics and purposes of the programs as they have evolved to this point. Stress Testing and CCAR TodayAs we have implemented the requirement mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) for stress testing--which the Federal Reserve denominates as the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test (DFAST)--that exercise includes four main steps.2(1) The firms subject to DFAST provide the Federal Reserve with detailed, significantly standardized data on their loans, securities holdings, trading positions, counterparty exposures, revenue, expenses, and balance sheets. (2) The Federal Reserve specifies hypothetical macroeconomic and financial market scenarios--including an "adverse" and a "severely adverse" scenario. (3) The Federal Reserve inputs the data from the firms into its own supervisory models to project each firm's losses, revenues, and capital over a nine-quarter planning horizon under the specified scenarios. (4) The results of the exercise, including the capital positions of the firms following the hypothesized stress scenarios, are disclosed to the public. As DFAST has evolved, it has become an increasingly valuable tool for evaluating whether the largest financial firms are holding sufficient capital to continue providing credit in the event of significant macroeconomic and financial stress. However, in itself DFAST does not set any capital ratios or limit any capital actions by the firms. Those functions are implemented through the CCAR program, which was created through the regulatory process by the Federal Reserve.3In CCAR, the Federal Reserve assesses the overall capital adequacy of the firms--including evaluations of whether each firm's capital provides an adequate buffer for the losses that would be incurred during the stress scenarios, whether its risk management and capital planning processes are appropriately well-developed and governed, and how its plans to distribute capital through dividends or share repurchases could affect its ability to remain a viable financial intermediary in the hypothesized scenarios. Given how central these considerations are to effective risk management and the soundness of these firms, we are progressively integrating the qualitative elements of CCAR into our year-round supervisory program for the largest banking organizations. Under CCAR, the Federal Reserve may object to a firm's capital plan on either quantitative or qualitative grounds. A quantitative objection is made when the stress test reveals that a firm would not be able to maintain its post-stress capital ratios above the regulatory minimum levels over the planning horizon, taking into account its planned capital distributions. We have taken planned distributions into account because, as the run-up to the financial crisis revealed, firms may be reluctant to cut their distributions--particularly dividends--even in a period of growing stress. Thus, CCAR included what has been called a "pre-funding" requirement. The Federal Reserve may object on qualitative grounds if it finds that the firm's capital planning processes are not sufficiently reliable. The qualitative assessment includes the assumptions and analyses underlying each firm's capital plan, its controls and governance processes, and whether previously identified weaknesses in management and operations have been corrected. If the Federal Reserve objects on quantitative or qualitative grounds, the firm may not make any capital distributions without our permission. In practice, in the case of a qualitative objection, we have generally permitted distributions at the previous year's level but no increases. This practice, however, has been in the context of distributions rising from generally low levels coming out of the crisis; there has been no guarantee that a similar practice would prevail as distributions continue rising. The quantitative component of CCAR, based as it is on the DFAST stress tests, has contributed to the continued strengthening of the capital levels of the largest financial institutions that began after the original stress test in the winter of 2009.4While, understandably, many focus on the quantitative side and its implications for capital distributions, the importance of the qualitative component has been perhaps underappreciated. We saw during the 2009 stress test that many large financial institutions were unable to marshal the data necessary to gauge their own exposures accurately or to project the adverse effects they would suffer in a tail event, as opposed to a more ordinary cyclical downturn. CCAR has required the firms to steadily improve their risk management and capital planning processes. Indeed, some of the firms--particularly the less complex banks within the CCAR cohort--are now meeting, or are close to meeting, our supervisory expectations across a range of risk management and capital planning processes. The CCAR ReviewClearly, then, we regard the stress testing and CCAR programs to have made substantial contributions to protecting the safety and soundness of the nation's largest financial firms and to promoting the stability of the financial system as a whole. But, equally clearly, if a stress testing regime is to continue to play this role, it must be dynamic. The hypothesized scenarios must change to take account of new economic and financial risks. The supervisory model may, in some circumstances, need to be changed to take account of evolving economic conditions and bank portfolio characteristics. Additionally, we have been refining the stress testing and CCAR processes in what is, of course, still a relatively new regulatory and supervisory tool. Changes of all these kinds have been, and will continue to be, made from year to year. After five years of post-crisis stress testing, however, we believed it was important for us to conduct a more thorough assessment of the program. Taking advantage of the shift in timing of the annual stress tests following the 2015 cycle, we undertook an overall review.5We knew there were several areas to which attention was needed. These included the imperfect alignment of CCAR with the regulatory capital requirements as they had evolved since we began stress testing, the desire for additional macroprudential elements in the stress test, and the qualitative component of CCAR as it applied to less complex firms. But we also wanted to hear what others thought. Accordingly, we met with bank officials, debt and equity-side market analysts, public interest groups, and academics--both to solicit their views on the topics I noted a moment ago and to hear their overall evaluation of, and recommendations for, our stress testing and CCAR exercises. As you can imagine, we received a wide range of suggestions, at least some of which were inconsistent with one another. In the main, though, these discussions reflected strong support for stress testing, reinforced our going-in view of the key issues for consideration, and presented us with some other areas for possible change. Before describing the package of potential changes that is emerging from our review, let me explain a bit more about each of the key topics. First is the fact that CCAR has been adjusted to align with some, but not all, of the important changes made in our regulatory capital rules over the past six years.6One might decide that the regulatory capital rules and CCAR should be different, complementary capital measures, roughly the way that a leverage ratio requirement and risk-weighted capital requirements are complementary. In some particulars, though, CCAR sits a bit uneasily alongside the ongoing capital requirements. The most notable example is that CCAR assumes that a firm will continue to make its planned capital distributions during a stress period even though the regulatory capital rules now include a capital conservation buffer to limit such distributions. Another is that, to this point, CCAR has not reflected the firm-specific capital surcharge we have adopted for global systemically important banks (GSIBs). Our second key topic was the macroprudential dimension of the stress testing and CCAR regimes. One of the most important lessons of the financial crisis was that prudential regulation, including capital regulation, had been dominantly microprudential in nature, even for the largest firms. That is, the regulation was designed and applied with a view mostly to the idiosyncratic risks faced by a bank in isolation, without regard to the interaction of the bank and the financial system as a whole. Thus, for example, capital regulation did not take account of fire sale effects--the reduction in portfolio values for one bank by other banks selling certain types of assets in order to enhance their own solvency or to counter a reduction in funding availability. Similarly, microprudential capital regulation allows a bank to meet its capital ratios by reducing lending--that is, by reducing the denominator of its ratio--as well as by increasing capital. If many banks were to follow this strategy, even creditworthy borrowers would be adversely affected, thereby exacerbating an economic downturn. Our stress testing and CCAR regimes do have some macroprudential elements, which have been modestly enhanced over the past few years. By conducting the stress tests for all large banks at the same time under common scenarios, we can evaluate the collective losses that may be borne by a major part of the industry in the stress scenario. We vary scenario design to take account of a variety of risks to the financial system and in a way that reduces procyclical effects.7We vary the market shock over time to reduce the incentive for firms to correlate their asset holdings or adopt correlated hedging strategies that are treated relatively favorably under one particular market shock scenario. And we do not allow firms to plan on a reduction in their balance sheets as a way to meet capital ratio requirements under stress. Still, as currently conceived and implemented, our stress testing regime emphasizes thedirectrisks to bank capital from a severe recession and associated market dislocation via the usual channels of reduced operating revenues combined with credit, market, counterparty, and operational losses. However, as noted by some academics and policy analysts, a fully developed macroprudential dimension to stress testing would incorporateindirectrisks to bank capital through channels such as market-wide funding and liquidity disruptions, fire sales, and so on.8These amplification effects are obviously particularly important for firms that have relatively larger trading books or that rely relatively more on short-term funding, or both. Indeed, many of the academics with whom we discussed stress testing during our review emphasized the importance of building out the macroprudential elements of our stress testing program. The third topic we had identified for review was the nature of the qualitative assessment as it applied to the relatively smaller, less complex firms within the CCAR exercise. While we had always explicitly differentiated our risk management and capital planning expectations for these firms, our supervisors had observed that many such firms seemed uncertain of whether they would nonetheless be held to the more stringent standards intended for the largest, most complex firms. In the course of our review, comments from these smaller, less complex firms confirmed this observation. Officials from these banks expressed the view that the CCAR qualitative assessment was unduly burdensome because it created pressure to develop complex processes, extensive documentation, and sophisticated stress test models that mirrored those in use at the largest, most complex firms, in order to avoid the possibility of a public objection to their capital plan. Since our intention had never been to create an incentive for firms with a relatively small systemic footprint to invest in stress testing processes appropriate only for larger or more complex firms, we knew we needed to address this problem. Results of the ReviewAfter more than a year of discussions and analysis, we have developed ideas for changes to the stress testing and CCAR regimes that would address these three key issues, along with some related matters that arose during the course of our review. Some of these changes would need to be pursued through rulemakings, including the usual notice-and-comment process. Others can be implemented through nonregulatory changes, though some will need further elaboration in moving from idea to concrete practice. Thus, there is a necessarily provisional character to the package set forth here. Except for the relief from the qualitative requirements for smaller, less complex CCAR firms--which I will describe a bit later--we do not contemplate proposing regulations to implement these ideas until early next year. Thus, any such changes would not apply to the coming 2017 DFAST/CCAR cycle. Better Alignment of CCAR with the new regulatory capital rulesAs I noted earlier, there have been significant additions to regulatory capital requirements since the first CCAR exercise began in late 2010. While some--such as revised risk-weighted asset calculation methodologies and definitions of capital--have been integrated into the stress testing program, other important additions have not. Most significant are the various capital buffer requirements that sit atop the regulatory minimum levels. These include a uniform 2.5-percent capital conservation buffer (CCB), the GSIB surcharge, and a countercyclical buffer that can expand the CCB for a broad range of firms in times of increasing financial vulnerabilities.9Firms that do not hold capital sufficient to meet or exceed this combined buffer level are subject to restrictions on their capital distributions and bonus payments to executives, which become progressively stricter as their capital level falls deeper into the buffer. To better align CCAR with the regulatory capital rules as they now stand, we will be considering adoption of a "stress capital buffer" (SCB) approach to setting post-stress capital requirements that would further integrate our capital rules with our stress test and CCAR frameworks. The simplest way to describe it is that the SCB would replace the existing 2.5 percent CCB as a component in each CCAR firm's point-in-time capital requirements. The SCB would be risk-sensitive and vary across firms, based on the results of the annual stress test. Specifically, it would be set equal to the maximum decline in a firm's common equity tier 1 capital ratio under the severely adverse scenario of the supervisory stress test before the inclusion of the firm's planned capital distributions, a simplification from the current practice of calculating the capital positions of the firm separately for each quarter in the scenario horizon. As is now the case with the CCB and other applicable capital buffers, a firm would be subject to restrictions on its capital distributions whenever its capital levels fall below the combined regulatory minima and buffers. Although it is likely that the stress test losses will continue to exceed 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets for most GSIBs, the SCB would have a specified floor at this current CCB level to avoid any reduction in the stringency of the regulatory capital rules. A firm's buffer requirement would be recalculated after each year's stress test, and its capital plan would not be approved in CCAR if the plan indicated that the firm would fall into the buffer under the stress test's baseline projections. Let me use a hypothetical example to illustrate how the SCB would work. Assuming that a firm's common equity tier 1 capital ratio declines in CCAR's severely adverse scenario from 13 percent to 8 percent, that firm's SCB would be the greater of 2.5 percent or the 5 percent decline--thus, 5 percent. Assuming further that this firm is a GSIB with a surcharge of 3 percent and that the countercyclical buffer is not in effect, the firm would be constrained in making capital distributions that would bring its common equity tier 1 capital ratio under 12.5 percent. The 12.5 percent figure is the sum of the 4.5 percent minimum common equity tier 1 risk-weighted capital requirement, the 3 percent surcharge, and the 5 percent stress loss as calculated in annual stress test.10 Because the GSIB capital surcharge already exists as an additional buffer requirement in the regulatory capital rules, the stress capital buffer approach would effectively add the GSIB capital surcharge to our estimates of the amount of capital needed under stress. This would generally result in a significant increase in capital requirements applicable to the GSIBs, for most of which CCAR has been their binding capital constraint. But having both the stress loss buffer and the capital surcharge included in our capital requirements is wholly consistent with the reasons for having a capital surcharge in the first place. Indeed,nothaving the two together has actually been an anomaly that arose from the sequencing of the various capital strengthening measures we have undertaken. The Board adopted the GSIB surcharge requirement as part of its implementation of section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which established the important macroprudential principle that financial firms should be subject to increasingly stringent regulation as their systemic importance increases. As explained in more detail in the white paper that accompanied the Board's final GSIB risk-based capital surcharge rule,11the material distress or failure of a GSIB would have an adverse impact on the financial system as a whole that is far greater than the impact on the financial system of the distress or failure of a non-GSIB banking firm. Accordingly, GSIBs should face capital surcharges to compel internalization of those external costs. This should reduce the probability of a GSIB's failure enough below that of a non-GSIB that the expected impact on the system of a GSIB and a non-GSIB failure are more comparable. Because the difference in the external costs of the distress or failure of a GSIB as compared to a non-GSIB is likely to be at least as high during times of macroeconomic and financial market stress as during ordinary times, there is no reason why the GSIB surcharge should not be a part of the post-stress capital regime. A complementary point is that the extra buffer required by the GSIB surcharge also reflects the fact that even the best-conceived annual stress scenarios cannot capture all tail risks in the financial system. The integration of capital rules and the stress test thus advances our second aim in initiating our CCAR review--the incorporation of more macroprudential elements. As some of you may know, Chair Yellen and I have, on a number of occasions over the past year or so, indicated publicly that we would be considering the effective incorporation of the surcharge into post-stress capital expectations. Some industry representatives have subsequently argued that this step is not warranted. While we will of course address these and other comments as our rulemaking process moves forward, I want to comment now on a couple of arguments, since they seem to reflect a misunderstanding of our stress testing program or of the regulatory structure established by the Dodd-Frank Act. One such argument is that it is duplicative to include both the anticipated losses under stress and the GSIB surcharge in a firm's capital requirement because two elements of our current stress test, the global market shock and the counterparty default shock, only apply to GSIB firms. However, these additional scenario components capture direct losses to whichanyfirm engaged in material trading activity is exposed. The market shock measures the trading mark-to-market losses associated with sudden changes in asset prices. The large counterparty default measures the losses associated with repricing counterparty exposures based on the market shock, and then assuming the default of the counterparty that represents the largest net exposure. These components of the stress test do not capture the adverse impact of a GSIB failure on the financial system as a whole--the risks that are the basis for the GSIB surcharge. These components of our stress test currently apply only to GSIBs because GSIBs are the only firms currently in CCAR for which these exposures are material. Non-GSIBs currently do not have material trading activities and so would suffer only small direct trading losses as a result of severely stressed market conditions or the failure of a major derivatives or repurchase agreement (repo) counterparty. As the U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banks with more material trading businesses in their U.S. operations are added to CCAR, we intend to revisit whether the global market shock and counterparty default component should be applied to firms beyond the U.S. GSIBs. Another argument offered against inclusion of the surcharge as an element of post-stress capital expectations is that the material distress or failure of a GSIB no longer poses a significant threat to financial stability due to the regulations and supervisory programs that are designed to improve GSIB resolvability. These measures include, among others, the proposed total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) rule, the proposed qualifying financial contracts early termination rule and related International Swap and Derivatives Association (ISDA) protocols, and efforts to ensure firms engage in strong recovery and resolution planning. It is true that these efforts have improved GSIB resolvability in recent years. But these efforts are ongoing, rather than complete. More importantly, while there is certainly a relationship between the goals of strengthening the resiliency of the most systemically important firms and making them more readily resolvable should they nonetheless fail, those are still separate regulatory aims. The demise of a very large financial institution would cause substantial damage to the economy and the financial system even if it was not so disorderly as to threaten the system entirely. Note, in this regard, that the Dodd-Frank Act requires both more stringent prudential standards for systemically important firms and a process for promoting the orderly resolution of these same firms. While the complementarity of these and other elements of a regulatory program always warrant consideration, and while adjustments in all aspects of the program should be made as conditions and practices evolve, current work on orderly resolution is surely no argument against the promotion of systemic stability and macroprudential aims by integrating the surcharge requirement with CCAR. Changes to the treatment of planned dividends and share repurchasesThe shift to a stress capital buffer approach would provide a mechanism for addressing two issues related to capital distribution limitations under CCAR. The first is the arguable inconsistency between, on the one hand, the existing CCAR assumption that all planned dividends and share repurchases would proceed during the two-year planning horizon, regardless of how much stress the bank was under and, on the other, the concept of a capital conservation buffer above minimum capital requirements as it has been added to the capital rules. The second is a soft limitation on dividends put in place by the Board at the inception of CCAR. Both of these features of CCAR reflected supervisory concerns with the fact that, even as the financial crisis was clearly unfolding, some of the largest banks continued to repurchase shares and pay dividends to shareholders and, thereby, depleted capital that proved to be needed later.12 The SCB approach addresses the first of these issues by providing a continuous constraint on any planned distributions that would bring capital levels below the sum of the minimum 4.5 percent of risk-weighted assets plus the firm-specific SCB, plus any applicable GSIB surcharge.13However, because declines in observed and reported capital levels usually occur with a lag, and the historical evidence that dividends are less likely to be curtailed than share repurchases,14we would assume a firm will maintain its dividends for one year while reducing its repurchases. This would have the effect of requiring a firm to hold capital to meet its stress lossesandfund its planned dividends over the next year. The switch to an SCB approach would also give us an opportunity to address a second issue, the soft limit on dividends in CCAR. Since its inception, our policy statements on CCAR have indicated that a capital plan with a planned dividend payout ratio above 30 percent would be subjected to particularly close scrutiny. When this policy was adopted in late 2010, we expected that it would be a useful guideline during a period when most of the CCAR banks would need to continue increasing capital levels for some time but also recognized that at some point we would need to revisit it. Since the new approach of adding one year's planned dividends to a firm's capital buffer should act as a disincentive for imprudent or unsustainable levels of dividends, the notion of extra scrutiny on planned dividends may no longer be useful. And we would, in any case, be reluctant to substitute a higher payout ratio for the original 30 percent ratio because it may end up being an implicit target for banks to try to reach. However, firms planning higher dividends should be aware that the operation of the SCB is such that, if a firm planned to pay out all of its earnings in the form of dividends and things did not go as well as expected for the firm, it could end up having to cut its dividend. Balance sheet and risk-weighted asset assumptionsBeyond requiring that large banks have the resiliency to weather a period of serious financial stress, an important macroprudential aim of stress testing is to ensure that they can provide credit to households and businesses that remain creditworthy even in such a period. If banks maintain their capital ratios under stress by reducing their balance sheets through asset sales, or reductions in new lending, this crucial intermediation function will be compromised across the economy. The result could be a credit crunch, likely resulting in a more severe or longer-lasting recession. In the first few years of CCAR, we used the banks' own projections where many banks planned on balance sheet declines as part of their strategy for remaining sufficiently capitalized.15In the 2014 CCAR cycle, we replaced banks' projections with our own model, adding a requirement that banks would not restrict the supply of loans during the severely adverse scenario. To date, the model has actually operated to project an increase in the balance sheets of the CCAR banks during the severely adverse scenario, with varying impacts on different portfolios. This assumption, and its somewhat complicated implementation, was designed to be fairly conservative, in a manner not dissimilar to the assumptions about capital distributions. Numerous banks have attempted to show why some of these portfolios or business lines would not be increasing under any reasonable assumptions, and thus that even macroprudential goals do not justify ignoring the likelihood thatthoseportfolios would decline. During our review of CCAR, some banks proposed ways to distinguish among business lines so as to relax what they argued to be an unrealistic assumption, even one with a macroprudential purpose. The complexities of trying to differentiate across idiosyncratic business lines seem to us considerable. We are instead considering replacing this feature of our model with a simple assumption that balance sheets and risk-weighted assets remain constant over the severely adverse scenario horizon. Given that some decline in demand by creditworthy borrowers for loans is inevitable in a serious recession, this simpler assumption would still achieve the macroprudential policy objective that any such decline in lending during a recession is attributable to the impact of the recession, rather than to capital constraints at the large banks. This change would also make the treatment of balance sheets and risk-weighted assets simpler and more transparent. Toward a more macroprudential stress testing regimeThe second major objective in our stress testing review was to integrate more macroprudential elements into the program. Of course, combining the GSIB surcharge with the SCB approach promotes an important macroprudential aim, since the surcharges are calibrated to force large, interconnected banks to internalize the additional costs their distress would impose on the financial system. The surcharges are thus at least a partial surrogate for inclusion of various macroprudential features in the stress test. We are also considering a couple of relatively modest revisions we are considering to the Board's "Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing"16that are motivated by the macroprudential consideration of reducing procyclicality. The first would be to make the severity of the change in the unemployment rate less severe during downturns. The second would be to replace the current judgmental approach to setting the hypothesized path of house prices by tying this variable to disposable personal income. The result would be a more countercyclical path of house prices and increased transparency into how we determine the severity of this very important element of the scenario. Beyond these steps, we heard many ideas during our review on how we might pursue our macroprudential objective by adding new features to the stress test, especially from official sector representatives and academics. We also reviewed the growing academic literature on this topic. We concluded that, to this point, even the most conceptually promising of the ideas are a good ways from being realized in specific and well-supported elements of our economic models. Many macroprudential risks involve the spread of stress from one firm or market to others. As such, macroprudential elements of stress tests often must estimate not just first-round losses, but also the knock-on effects, which depend significantly on the vulnerabilities and responses of all other major actors in the financial system, including many that we do not regulate. Modelling these effects requires information about the behavior of those actors that may not be observable either to a firm or to us. Notwithstanding these and other practical challenges, many of the suggestions we received have focused on important potential risks that bear further inquiry by regulators. Hence we will be undertaking a research program to pursue these ideas in order to better understand the quantitative consequences of new risks and business activities, potential amplification channels such as fire sales by which stress could migrate from the large banks to the rest of the financial system, and important dynamics between capital and liquidity positions. At a minimum, this research should inform scenario design and the overall regulatory and financial stability functions of the Board. And at least some of the ideas might eventually be translated into features of the stress testing regime. Over the medium term we view three related areas as the highest priorities: funding shocks, liquidity shocks, and spillovers from the default of common counterparties. Funding shocksFunding stresses are a natural starting point. As banks incur losses and their capital base erodes, some of their creditors will demand additional compensation and bank funding costs will increase. This kind of "direct" funding shock is really microprudential because the resulting losses depend largely on the bank's own decisions about its capital base, asset risk, and reliance on short-term wholesale funding. As such, it should be more straightforward to integrate direct funding shocks into our main stress testing framework than to integrate systemwide effects, and we will consider whether, and how, to do so in the relatively near term. In a "systemic" funding shock, by contrast, each bank's cost of funds depends on the capital position of the system as a whole. By taking the overall solvency of the system into account, this element captures a key amplification channel evident during the last financial crisis. As the banking system experienced capital losses, the cost of funding increased and some wholesale funding markets shut down even for relatively healthy banks. The potential for this kind of funding shock means that the presence of a poorly capitalized bank might increase funding costs for all banks--a classic kind of macroprudential concern. Liquidity shocks and fire sale dynamicsAs we saw during the last financial crisis, repo and other funding markets can simply close to distressed institutions, which are then unable to access certain kinds of funds at any price. Such a firm may then be forced to make up the funding shortfall by turning to market sources of liquidity by selling assets--both high-quality liquid assets like Treasury securities and less liquid assets. During the financial crisis, distressed firms sold large amounts of securities as quickly as possible. The fire sale price discounts required for such rapid execution in turn imposed mark-to-market losses on other firms with similar holdings. To understand better this channel of financial contagion, we intend to continue our work on the ability of markets to handle large quantities of asset sales under stress, the capacity and willingness of firms to tap their buffers of high-quality assets, and the susceptibility of bank capital to mark-to-market losses from fire sales. Many commentators have drawn attention to these concerns, and some have advocated an integrated approach to capital and liquidity stress testing. We may or may not be able to achieve this end point. At a minimum, though, research in this area will allow us to move in this direction, perhaps by using the conclusions reached in the annual stress test as a starting point for our annual Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review (CLAR), or vice versa. The results could also shed light on the current calibration of our liquidity rules. Default of a common counterparty and the reaction of central counterpartiesCurrently, the annual stress test incorporates a counterparty default scenario component for the eight G-SIBs that measures direct credit loss. However, this component does not consider the potentially large second-round effects of the default of a major financial institution, including an increase in the probability of default of other counterparties as a result of the initial default and requirements for larger margins from derivatives counterparties. Of particular interest is the role of central counterparties (CCPs) in alleviating or transmitting stress from the default of one of their members. By regulatory design, CCPs have increased in prominence in the post-crisis environment because they can lead to greater efficiency and transparency in trading. But this increased role makes it important to understand the impact they may have in stressed conditions. For example, CCPs collect prefunded resources that can mitigate the impact of a default, but also can call on surviving clearing members for additional financial resources if those pre-funded resources are exhausted. Promoting transparencyTransparency has played an important role in making stress testing such a key part of post-crisis prudential regulation. Transparency of the scenarios and results gives investors and analysts valuable information about the condition of the tested banks, thereby contributing to market discipline. It also allows the public to evaluate the job that the Federal Reserve is doing. For example, analysts can compare our loss estimates for specified portfolios under specified stress conditions with their own evaluations--an exercise that can inform both the analysts and us. There are three areas in which transparency considerations need to be applied. First is the set of scenarios applied in the annual exercise. We release essentially all details of the scenarios and, further, have published a policy statement exploring the aims and factors relevant to development of the scenarios.18 Second is the set of results of the DFAST and CCAR exercises themselves. Right from the start--during the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) in 2009--we adopted what was then the controversial practice of publishing post-stress capital ratio results for each participating firm, along with a breakdown of the projected losses by loan type. Since then, we have substantially increased the breadth of the disclosed results, including a summary of the reasons for any qualitative objection or conditional non-objection to firms' capital plans. During the course of our review, suggestions were made for more granular disclosures, such as providing more details on different components of projected net revenues. We will make this change, and possibly a few others, over the course of the next cycle or two of stress testing.19 The third area for transparency involves the supervisory models used in the stress tests. Banks involved in DFAST/CCAR have regularly requested more disclosures so that they can better understand the likely impact on their firms. One argument has been that banks will have a difficult time in their capital planning if they cannot predict how loss functions and other model features will affect their stress losses. In part to remove the possibility that a bank would receive a quantitative objection to its capital plan because of a large gap between their loss estimates and those produced by the supervisory model, a few years ago we began allowing banks to revise their capital distribution requests following receipt of their DFAST results. Under the SCB approach, a bank could also adjust its planned capital distributions after receiving the stress test results to avoid having its baseline capital distribution projections fall into the buffer. We have already taken a number of steps to respond to these requests. We currently publish descriptions of all models used in the stress test, including the key risk drivers and scenario variables for each key modeling area. We host an annual conference about modelling practices. We disclose a description of the most material changes to stress test models before each stress test. We are considering further steps, such as disclosing descriptions of changes well in advance of the stress test, and phasing in the most material model changes over two years, so as to smooth somewhat the effects of the changes on projected losses or revenues. Finally, and a bit more tentatively, we are assessing the feasibility of publishing data that represent typical bank portfolios of loans and securities with the losses we would project for those portfolios under various stress scenarios. This kind of information could also help the public trace how changes in risk drivers alter loss projections. Having said all this, let me now say that we do not intend to publish the full computer code in the supervisory model that is used to project revenues and losses. Full disclosure would permit firms to game the system--that is, to optimize portfolio characteristics based on the parameters of the model and take risks in areas not well-captured by the stress test just to minimize the estimated stress losses. In part for this reason, full disclosure could promote a "model monoculture" in which both supervisors and firms use the same models to evaluate risks. A critical part of the DFAST/CCAR process is that firms use their own models to assess their risks. We do not want them simply to copy the supervisory model and thereby increase the vulnerability of the financial system to the inevitable blind spots in even the best models. In short, this is not like using a model to develop a regulation that, for example, limits emissions of polluting substances. In such a case, adherence to the precise model output would itself achieve the regulatory purpose. Here, by contrast, the very purpose of the regulatory regime would be undermined. Remember, this is a stresstest. The shifts in activities of banks and in the economy create a dynamic set of risks. Effective prudential regulation must be equally dynamic and should try to avoid pushing major financial firms toward measuring all of their risk positions in exactly the same way. There is, however, one additional consideration. Because the stress tests would be undermined by giving the models to the banks, there are of course limited opportunities for external parties to assess the models. To promote the integrity of the models in these circumstances, we established a Model Validation Group, which is composed of modelling experts who are not involved in the design and application of the stress test models. They make regular assessments and offer suggestions for improvement. We expect to be providing the public greater information on our internal validation processes. Eliminating the qualitative CCAR exercise for smaller firmsAs you can already tell, our responses to the need for better alignment of the stress test with our capital rules and to the desirability of more macroprudential emphasis each required a good bit of explanation. In contrast, our response to the issue of the unnecessary burden on smaller, less complex CCAR firms is both simply stated and simply achieved. In a notice of proposed rulemaking that the Board is releasing today we are proposing that banks with less than $250 billion in assets that do not have significant international or nonbank activity would no longer be included in the annual CCAR qualitative review. As noted earlier, many of these firms have already met supervisory expectations. We do not intend for less complex firms to invest in stress testing capabilities on par with the most complex firms and, given their profile, we feel these firms can maintain the progress they have made through the normal supervisory process, supplemented with targeted horizontal reviews of discrete aspects of capital planning. This shift will reduce the intensity of supervision of their capital planning processes, remove any uncertainty as to supervisory expectations for their firms relative to the largest firms, and eliminate the possibility of a public objection to their capital plans on qualitative grounds. They would still be included in the quantitative side of the stress test and the proposed stress capital buffer. But we are also proposing to reduce the amount of data these firms are required to submit for the purpose of running the stress test, on what we call the Y-14 regulatory reports. Unlike the other substantial changes we are contemplating to CCAR and our stress test, we are proposing that these changes would be effective next year, for CCAR 2017. ConclusionThis set of changes we are considering for our stress testing regime has been motivated by somewhat different considerations, against the backdrop of what we intend to remain a dynamic regulatory instrument whose procedures will be regularly refined and whose substance will be regularly adapted to changing economic conditions and industry practices. Still, in pulling this package of modifications together, we have consciously shaped them in accordance with the principle that financial regulation should be progressively more stringent for firms of greater importance, and thus potential risk, to the financial system. Two features of the package reflect this principle. First, of course, is the elimination of the qualitative portion of CCAR for nearly all the firms with less than $250 billion in assets, along with some record keeping and reporting requirements. The second key feature is the differential impact the better alignment of CCAR with our capital regulations will have on the roughly 30 firms that are covered. Let me note at the outset that the precise effects on the capital requirements of individual firms cannot be determined because of the very nature of the stress test regime. The scenarios vary from year to year, and the resulting projected effects on losses and revenues may also vary materially depending on the composition of a firm's balance sheet and activities. However, to provide some idea of what the impact may be, we assessed how the various changes I have mentioned would have affected capital requirements in the two most recent CCAR cycles. On average for the eight GSIBs, integration of the surcharge with the post-stress requirements would have been somewhat less than half offset by the simplifying changes in the prefunding of capital distributions and balance sheet assumptions. The impact on capital requirements will likely be greater for firms with larger GSIB surcharges. For the other CCAR firms, for which there are no capital surcharges, these simplifying assumptions will result in some reduction of post-stress capital requirements. We estimate that the aggregate impact of these changes for the CCAR firms as a whole should be a modest increase in the total amount of required capital. But this increase will be totally due to the impact on the eight GSIB firms, whose increased capital requirements will more than offset the reductions for the other firms. In short, the GSIBs will see their capital requirements rise. All other CCAR firms will see some reduction in their capital requirements. And firms that have less than $250 billion in assets and do not have extensive international or nontraditional banking activities will also transition to a more tailored set of capital planning expectations outside the CCAR process. 1. Dodd-Frank Act 165(i), 12 U.S.C. 5365(i).Return to text 2. For a more complete description of the Federal Reserve's DFAST and CCAR programs, seewww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/stress-tests-capital-planning.htm. As a formal matter, DFAST was implemented beginning in 2013. However, in 2011 and 2012, the Federal Reserve conducted supervisory stress tests as part of its CCAR program, as explained later in the text.Return to text 3. 12 CFR 225.8.Return to text 4. The common equity capital ratio--which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets--of the 33 bank holding companies in the 2016 CCAR has more than doubled from 5.5 percent in the first quarter of 2009 to 12.2 percent in the first quarter of 2016. This reflects an increase of more than $700 billion in common equity capital to a total of $1.2 trillion during the same period.www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20160629a.htm.Return to text 5. The 2016 CCAR cycle started one quarter later than past years' CCAR cycles.Return to text 6. For example, our regulatory capital rules now include a minimum requirement based on common equity, reflecting the fact that common equity provides the best buffer against losses. As a result, the similar common equity requirement that had been included in the early years of CCAR, to meet an additional post-stress target ratio of tier 1 common equity, was removed after CCAR 2015. Other changes that have been integrated into the stress test include modification of the risk-weighted asset calculation methodologies and revised definitions of capital.Return to text 7. Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), "Macroprudential Regulation," speech delivered at the Yale Law School Conference on Challenges in Global Financial Services, New Haven, CT, September 20.Return to text 8. See, for example, David Greenlaw, Anil Kashyap, Kermit Schoenholtz, and Hyun Song Shin (2012), "Stressed Out: Macroprudential Principles for Stress Testing." Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 12-08, Fama-Miller Working Paper (Chicago: University of Chicago Booth School of Business, February 13).Return to text 9. The countercyclical buffer applies to banking organizations with more than $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign exposures and to any depository institution subsidiary of such organizations. See 12 CFR Part 217, Appendix A.Return to text 10.Figure 1further illustrates the stress capital buffer.Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Calibrating the G-SIB Surcharge," white paper (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 20).Return to text 12. See Beverly Hirtle (2014), "Bank Holding Company Dividends and Repurchases during the Financial Crisis (PDF)," Staff Report No. 666 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March).Return to text 13. Were a countercyclical capital buffer to be imposed, it would be added to the buffers above the 4.5 percent minimum capital requirement.Return to text 14. During the financial crisis, firms began to curtail share repurchases beginning in 2007 but generally did not cut dividends until late 2008. See Hirtle (2014).Return to text 15. The original stress test undertaken during the crisis did not allow this assumption, precisely because of our aim that the large banks as a group be well-positioned to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers at that time of great stress.Return to text 16. See 12 CFR part 252, appendix A.Return to text 17. See 12 CFR Part 252, Appendix A.Return to text 18. See 12 CFR 252, appendix A; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing (PDF)," Final Rule; Policy Statement, November 29.Return to text 19. Quite recently some banks have also suggested disclosing some version of the supervisory letters we send following the annual CCAR to each participating firm detailing our assessment of their capital planning processes. These banks believe that analysts and investors could benefit from knowing more detail on the concerns of the supervisors. We had already been considering how to increase the information provided around qualitative objections or conditional non-objections and will factor these latest observations into this decision.Return to text
Thomas Sullivan, Associate Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Subcommittee on Housing and Insurance, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. IntroductionChairman Luetkemeyer, Vice Chairman Westmoreland, Ranking Member Cleaver, and other members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify on behalf of the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve welcomes the opportunity to participate in today's hearing, and I am pleased to be joined by my colleagues from the Federal Insurance Office (FIO) of the U.S. Treasury Department, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), and the United States Trade Representative (USTR). While we each have our own unique authority and mission, the Federal Reserve remains committed to working collaboratively on a wide range of issues, including insurance prudential matters both domestically and internationally. I will briefly address both of these areas: the Federal Reserve's work to develop domestic and international supervisory and regulatory standards that are appropriate for the U.S. insurance market and U.S. insurance consumers. The Federal Reserve's Role in Supervising Insurance InstitutionsLet me first touch on the statutory role of the Federal Reserve in supervising and regulating insurance firms. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) gave the Federal Reserve regulatory responsibilities for insurance firms that own a federally insured bank or thrift and for insurance companies designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). These firms are highly diverse: they range in size from firms with total assets of approximately $3 billion to firms with total assets of over $700 billion. They engage in a wide variety of insurance and non-insurance activities. Some are fully domestic and others have material international operations. Some are organized as mutual companies, while others are owned by public shareholders. Some produce only statutory accounting statements, while others also produce statements under U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. The approach of the Federal Reserve in regulating insurance firms, complementary to and in coordination with the states, is derived from its overall statutory responsibilities for financial regulation as those have evolved over the years, most recently through the changes arising from the Dodd-Frank Act. First, as was the case before enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act, we are responsible for supervision of depository holding companies to ensure that they operate in a safe and sound manner and do not pose risks to their subsidiary depository institutions. This includes insurance companies that have subsidiary banks or thrifts. Second, the Dodd-Frank Act enhanced our statutory mandate for regulating and supervising holding companies with a view to the safety and soundness of the holding company and its functionally regulated subsidiaries. Third, the Dodd-Frank Act changed our statutory mandate to require that we consider the stability of the U.S. financial system in supervising large holding companies. At the same time, the Dodd-Frank Act maintained the Federal Reserve Board's (Board) ability to tailor its supervision of firms based on the kind of financial intermediation in which they are engaged. For example, with respect to capital, the Board is now permitted to tailor its minimum capital requirements for firms that may also be regulated by state or foreign insurance regulators. In pursuing what might be termed its dual regulatory mandate of protecting the safety and soundness of depository institution holding companies and promoting U.S. financial stability, the Federal Reserve continues to develop regulatory and supervisory measures that are appropriate for its supervised insurance firms. In addition, we continue to be cognizant that states and state insurance supervisors regulate the types of insurance products offered by insurance companies that are part of holding companies we supervise and the manner in which the insurance is provided. Because of the overall structure of insurance regulation as specified by Congress in the McCarran-Ferguson Act and elsewhere, the line here is rather bright. The Federal Reserve's Regulatory Framework for Supervised Insurance InstitutionsIn this regard, the Federal Reserve's approach to insurance supervision distinguishes between insurance companies that we oversee solely because they control an insured depository institution and those that have been designated as systemically important by the FSOC. In its Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR), the Board has set out two conceptual frameworks--one of which may be more appropriate for large, complex, systemically important institutions, while the other may be more appropriate for firms such as the current population of insurance savings and loan holding companies. We have used the flexibility given us by the December 2014 changes to the Collins Amendment to fashion an approach that reflects the ways in which insurance activities differ from those of banks and other forms of financial intermediaries. The bifurcated approach set out in the ANPR would efficiently advance the Board's differing supervisory objectives for the two populations of supervised insurance firms. For the insurance companies that the FSOC has determined should be supervised by the Board, the ANPR sets out a capital framework termed theconsolidated approach. The financial crisis demonstrated the need for stronger regulatory and supervisory assessments of the consolidated resiliency of large financial firms. Among other things, it revealed that too narrow a focus on the safety and soundness of individual legal entities in a corporate group could result in a failure to detect threats to the group and to financial stability that emerge from unregulated or less-regulated subsidiaries of the group. Hence the crisis reaffirmed the importance of consolidated supervision, encompassing the parent company and all its subsidiaries, which allows the Board to understand a supervised institution's activities, resources, and risks across the entire enterprise. The ANPR's proposal of the consolidated approach reflects the importance of maintaining an enterprise-wide perspective and minimizing regulatory arbitrage at systemically important insurance companies. Because these firms are large, active domestically and internationally, internally and externally complex, and systemically important, the consolidated approach appears more suitable than the approach set out for the insurance savings and loan holding companies. For the insurance savings and loan holding companies, the Board's ANPR sets out a capital framework termed thebuilding block approach. The building block approach uses existing capital requirements for the various legal entities in an insurance group to construct an enterprise-wide capital requirement. The building block approach relies significantly on the state-based capital requirements for state-regulated insurance companies, in conjunction with the Board's existing bank capital requirements for other subsidiaries, to achieve an aggregated capital requirement for an insurance savings and loan holding company. Generally, the building block approach would aggregate capital resources and capital requirements across the firm's subsidiaries, with some adjustments, to calculate combined capital resources and requirements for the firm. For the insurance savings and loan holding companies, the building block approach would streamline implementation costs and other burdens while achieving the Board's supervisory objectives of ensuring the holding company's overall safety and soundness and protecting the subsidiary depository institution. In addition to setting conceptual frameworks for capital standards, the Board has issued proposals on reporting requirements and enhanced prudential standards for the FSOC-designated systemically important insurance companies. The proposed reporting requirements differ substantially from reporting requirements for bank holding companies that are predominantly engaged in banking and other non-insurance activities and are tailored to the assets, liabilities, and risks of insurance companies. They are designed, among other things, to keep the Board informed as to the financial condition and risk profile of these firms, including risks posed to the financial stability of the United States. The enhanced prudential standards would require firms to implement enterprise-wide risk management, establish a risk committee of the company's board of directors, and appoint both a chief risk officer and a chief actuary as well as meets institute liquidity risk-management requirements. The firm would also be required to have short- and long-term cash-flow projections, a contingency funding plan, liquidity risk limits, and monthly liquidity stress tests with a liquidity buffer covering net stressed cash flows over a 90-day period. We believe these proposed requirements are well-tailored to the business and risks of FSOC-designated insurance companies, and we look forward to reviewing the comments received. The Importance of Stakeholder Engagement and TransparencyWe have taken a good bit of time in arriving at some potential insurance regulatory capital frameworks precisely because we wanted to consider these issues thoroughly, and get them right. As we continue exploring the regulatory frameworks we have set out, and other areas of our supervision, we appreciate the comments we have received on the outstanding proposals, including 28 on the capital ANPR, 13 on the notice of proposed rulemaking on enhanced prudential standards for the systemically important insurance companies, and 4 on the proposed reporting requirements for these companies. Indeed, to allow interested parties additional time, we extended the comment period for our ANPR on domestic capital. We have found that the comments we have received offer many constructive observations. We also continue to meet with industry and other interested parties. In the last year and a half alone, we have held over 60 meetings with stakeholders. Among other things, this reaffirms our commitment to increasing transparency in our insurance rulemaking development. We value the input of stakeholders and, together with the Board's supervisory objectives, it enhances the quality of our regulation. Improving Regulatory and Supervisory Treatment for U.S. Insurers Operating in the European UnionThe Federal Reserve has acted and will continue to act in international insurance standard setting in an engaged partnership with our colleagues from the NAIC, the state insurance commissioners, and the FIO. The Board is committed to continuing our multiparty collaboration with the state insurance regulators and the FIO on advocating standards internationally that are appropriate for the U.S. market. Last year, the Board was invited to join the NAIC and the FIO in their work on the EU-U.S. Dialogue Project to engage in healthy exchange among supervisors and determine the way forward as to supervision of insurers whose operations span across these jurisdictions. Alongside this dialogue project has been the negotiation of a possible covered agreement, under the leadership of the FIO and the USTR. We respect the work of the FIO and the USTR toward an agreement that would enhance regulatory certainty for U.S. insurers and reinsurers operating in the European Union. The Federal Reserve's Participation in Developing Appropriate International Insurance StandardsAs the consolidated supervisor of large, complex, and internationally active insurance firms, the Federal Reserve participates in the development of international supervisory standards and guidance to ensure that they best meet the needs of the U.S. insurance market. Our participation focuses on those aspects most relevant to the supervision of FSOC-designated insurance firms. The Federal Reserve is participating alongside the FIO, the NAIC, and state insurance regulators in the development of a global group capital standard for internationally active insurance firms, in development of other policy measures for internationally active and systemically important insurers, and in research and analysis related to financial stability topics. We appreciate our current ability to advocate for international standards that work for U.S. insurance firms, U.S. insurance consumers, and the U.S. financial markets more broadly. Indeed, the Federal Reserve continues to participate actively in standard setting at the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) in consultation and collaboration with state insurance regulators, the NAIC, and the FIO to present a coordinated U.S. voice in these processes. In addition, since the financial crisis, U.S. authorities and foreign regulators have been working to identify financial institutions whose failure or distress may pose a threat to financial stability, including nonbank financial companies like insurance firms. The leaders of the Group of 20 nations, including the United States, charged the Financial Stability Board (FSB) with identifying firms whose distress would threaten the global economy. The FSB has coordinated its work in this area with global standard-setting bodies like the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the IAIS. The identification of a global systemically important insurer (G-SII) by the FSB and the IAIS requires a careful evaluation of the firm and its global systemic footprint in accordance with the methodology developed by the IAIS. The IAIS has developed its G-SII identification methodology through a public notice-and-comment process and updated its methodology for identifying G-SIIs this year. Crucially, FSB designation of an entity as a G-SII does not result in the Federal Reserve becoming the entity's prudential regulator. Moreover, it is important to remain mindful of the fact that IAIS standards and FSB determinations have no binding force in the United States unless the policies are adopted by a U.S. agency in compliance with applicable administrative rulemaking process. Neither the FSB, nor the IAIS, has the ability to implement requirements in any jurisdiction, and implementation in the United States would have to be consistent with U.S. law. Additionally, none of the global standards being developed by the IAIS are intended to replace the existing legal-entity requirements that are already in place for U.S. insurance firms. We remain committed to a supervisory framework that best meets the needs of U.S. insurers as they compete internationally and that is appropriate for the U.S. insurance market and consumers. Mr. Chairman, members of the subcommittee, I thank you for inviting me here today. I look forward to an active dialogue on these issues with you all, and continued collaboration with this subcommittee.
Governor Lael Brainard At the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois Watch live:https://www.thechicagocouncil.org/event/economic-outlook-and-monetary-policy-implications In the months ahead, my colleagues and I will continue to assess what policy path will best promote the sustained attainment of our goals. With that in mind, I would like to start by describing the contours of today's economy that will be particularly important in shaping the appropriate path of policy before reviewing recent developments. These contours represent noteworthy departures from the "old normal" that prevailed in the decades prior to the financial crisis. I would argue that policy today must rely less on the old normal as a guidepost and instead be sensitive to the contours that shape today's "new normal."1 Key Features of the "New Normal"Because monetary policy is forward looking, policymakers must assess how key features of the economic environment are most likely to influence the future path of the economy and shape policy accordingly. At a time when our assessment of the economy is evolving, several features of the "new normal"--some of which are interrelated--appear particularly noteworthy for our policy deliberations: 1. Inflation Has Been Undershooting, and the Phillips Curve Has FlattenedFirst, for the past several decades, policymakers relied on the empirical relationship between unemployment and inflation embodied in the Phillips curve as a key guidepost for monetary policy. The Phillips curve implied that as labor market slack diminished and the economy approached full employment, upward pressure on inflation would result. However, since 2012, inflation has tended to change relatively little--both absolutely and relative to earlier decades--as the unemployment rate has fallen considerably.2At a time when the unemployment rate has fallen from 8.2 percent to 4.9 percent, inflation has undershot our 2 percent target now for 51 straight months.3In other words, the Phillips curve appears to be flatter today than it was previously. With the Phillips curve appearing to be a less reliable guidepost than it has been in the past, the anchoring role of inflation expectations remains critically important. On expected, similar to realized, inflation, recent developments suggest some reasons to be concerned more about undershooting than overshooting. Although some survey measures have remained well anchored at 2 percent, consumer surveys have moved to the lower end of their historical ranges and have not risen sustainably.4Meanwhile, marketbased measures of inflation compensation have declined noticeably over the past two years at longer-term horizons, and have shown little improvement despite the recent stabilization in the price of oil and the exchange rate. Thus, we cannot rule out that the sustained period of undershooting the inflation target along with global disinflationary pressures are weighing on inflation expectations. Recognition of these developments is reflected in the evolution of the forecasts of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from June 2012 to June 2016. The SEP forecasts have shown repeated mark downs of the central tendency of the projection for core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation, and the attainment of 2 percent at the upper end of the range has been pushed out repeatedly from 2012 initially to 2017 most recently. The apparent flatness of the Phillips curve together with evidence that inflation expectations may have softened on the downside and the persistent undershooting of inflation relative to our target should be important considerations in our policy deliberations. In particular, to the extent that the effect on inflation of further gradual tightening in labor market conditions is likely to be moderate and gradual, the case to tighten policy preemptively is less compelling. 2. Labor Market Slack Has Been Greater than AnticipatedSecond, and related, although we have seen important progress on employment, this improvement has been accompanied by evidence of greater slack than previously anticipated. This uncertainty about the true state of the economy suggests we should be open to the possibility of material further progress in the labor market. Indeed, with payroll employment growth averaging 180,000 per month this year, many observers would have expected the unemployment rate to drop noticeably rather than moving sideways, as it has done. It is true that today's unemployment rate of 4.9 percent is only 0.1 percentage point from the median SEP participant's estimate of the longer-run level of unemployment. However, the natural rate of unemployment is uncertain and can vary over time. Indeed, in the SEP, the central tendency of the projection for the longer-run natural rate of unemployment has come down significantly, from a range of 5.2 to 6.0 percent in June 2012 to 4.7 to 5.0 percent in June 2016--a reduction of 1/2 to 1 percentage point.5We cannot rule out that estimates of the natural unemployment rate may move even lower. In addition, the unemployment rate is not the only gauge of labor market slack, and other measures have been suggesting there is some room to go. The share of employees working part time for economic reasons, for example, has remained noticeably above its pre-crisis level. Of particular significance, the prime-age labor force participation rate, despite improvement this year, remains about 11/2 percentage points below its pre-crisis level, suggesting room for further gains. While it is possible that the current low level of prime-age participation reflects ongoing pre-crisis trends, we cannot rule out that it reflects a lagged and still incomplete response to a very slow recovery in job opportunities and wages.6 This possibility is reinforced by the continued muted recovery in wage growth. Although wage growth has picked up to about a 2-1/2 percent pace in recent quarters, this pace is only modestly above that which prevailed over much of the recovery and well below growth rates seen prior to the financial crisis.7 My main point here is that in the presence of uncertainty and the absence of accelerating inflationary pressures, it would be unwise for policy to foreclose on the possibility of making further gains in the labor market. 3. Foreign Markets Matter, Especially because Financial Transmission is StrongThird, disinflation pressure and weak demand from abroad will likely weigh on the U.S. outlook for some time, and fragility in global markets could again pose risks here at home.8In Europe, recovery continues, but growth is slow and inflation is very low. Low growth and a flat yield curve are contributing to reduced profitability and a higher cost of equity financing for banks, which in turn could impair bank lending, one of the main transmission channels of monetary policy in the euro area's bank-centric financial system. A low growth, low inflation environment also makes progress on fiscal sustainability difficult and leaves countries with high debt-to-gross domestic product (GDP) ratios vulnerable to adverse demand shocks. Against this backdrop, uncertainty about Britain's future relationship with the European Union could damp business sentiment and investment in Europe. Japan remains greatly challenged by weak growth and low inflation. Indeed, it is striking that despite active and creative monetary policies in both the euro area and Japan, inflation remains below target levels. The experiences of these economies highlight the risk of becoming trapped in a low-growth, low-inflation, low-inflation-expectations environment and suggest that policy should be oriented toward minimizing the risk of the U.S. economy slipping into such a situation. Downside risks are also present in emerging market economies, where growth has slowed rapidly in recent years.9Most importantly, China is undergoing a challenging transition from a growth model based on investment, exports, and debt-fueled state-owned enterprises to one driven by consumption, services, and dynamic private businesses. Because of the adjustment costs along this transition path and demographic trends, Chinese growth will likely continue to slow. Given that China has experienced very high growth in corporate debt, this downshift could pose risks. Importantly, Chinese authorities have made some progress on clarifying their policy stance, and capital outflows have slowed in recent months. Nonetheless, considerable uncertainty remains, and further volatility cannot be ruled out. The importance of Chinese growth and stability to many emerging market economies and to global markets more broadly implies that these risks have global implications. Headwinds from abroad should matter to U.S. policymakers because recent experience suggests global financial markets are tightly integrated, such that disturbances emanating from Chinese or euro-area financial markets quickly spill over to U.S. financial markets. The fallout from adverse foreign shocks appears to be more powerfully transmitted to the U.S. than previously. Indeed, recent research suggests that changes in expectations regarding the path of policy in the United States relative to other major economies lead to exchange rate movements that appear to be several times bigger than they were several years ago.10The fact that many advanced economies are suffering from deficient demand and have policy rates at or near the zero bound and that the U.S. dollar is a favored safe-haven asset may imply that adverse foreign demand shocks have a particularly strong effect on the value of the dollar, effectively transmitting the weakness to the U.S. economy.11 In turn, U.S. activity and inflation appear to be importantly influenced by these exchange rate movements. In particular, estimates from the FRB/US model suggest that the nearly 20 percent appreciation of the dollar from June 2014 to January of this year could be having an effect on U.S. economic activity roughly equivalent to a 200 basis point increase in the federal funds rate. Interestingly, it appears that this effect showed through in decreased business investment activity and stagnant manufacturing output, while the anticipated effect on net exports may have been somewhat dampened by depressed demand for imports of capital goods, among other factors. 4. The Neutral Rate Is Likely to Remain Very Low for Some TimeFourth, perhaps most salient for monetary policy, it appears increasingly clear that the neutral rate of interest remains considerably and persistently lower than it was before the crisis. Over the current expansion, with a federal funds rate at, or near, zero and the additional support provided by asset purchases and reinvestment, GDP growth has averaged a very modest rate upward of 2 percent, and inflation has averaged only 11/2 percent. Ten years ago, based on the underlying economic relationships that prevailed at the time, it would have seemed inconceivable that real activity and inflation would be so subdued given the stance of monetary policy. To reconcile these developments, it is difficult not to conclude that the current level of the federal funds rate is less accommodative today than it would have been 10 years ago. Put differently, the amount of aggregate demand associated with a given level of the interest rate is now much lower than before the crisis. In the early stages of the recovery, most observers thought that the cyclical headwinds restraining demand and lowering the neutral rate would dissipate, and that the neutral rate would move gradually back to the pre-crisis norm of 2 percent. But seven years into the expansion and with little sign of a significant acceleration in activity, the low neutral rate looks likely to persist. Indeed, developments over the past year confirm that the underlying causes will be with us for some time.12Foreign consumption and investment are weak, while foreign demand for savings is high, along with an elevated demand for safe assets. Productivity growth, which increased at an average annual rate of nearly 2-1/2 percent from 1950 to 2000, has increased only 1/2 percent on average over the past five years, and demographics also suggest a persistent slowing of the labor force. Recognition of the reduction in the long-run neutral federal funds rate is perhaps the most consequential change in the SEP forecasts. In the four years between June 2012 and June 2016, the estimate of the long-run federal funds rate has declined from 4.25 percent to 3.0 percent--nearly one-third. Over one-third of that adjustment has occurred between December 2015 and June 2016. It is notable that this recent step-down in the SEP estimate has coincided with a period of easing in financial conditions and a stabilization in the exchange rate as market participants have taken into account changes in the perceived FOMC policy reaction function. Several econometric models and estimates from market participants suggest the current real neutral rate is at or close to zero, and any increase is likely to be shallow and slow.13These estimates imply that it may require a relatively more modest adjustment in the policy rate to return to neutral over time than previously anticipated. 5. Policy Options Are AsymmetricThe four features just discussed that define the new normal make it likely that we will continue to grapple with a fifth new reality for some time: the ability of monetary policy to respond to shocks is asymmetric. With policy rates near the zero lower bound and likely to return there more frequently even if the economy only experiences shocks similar in magnitude to those experienced pre-crisis, due to the low level of the neutral rate, there is an asymmetry in the policy tools available to respond to adverse developments. Conventional changes in the federal funds rate, our most tested and best understood tool, cannot be used as readily to respond to downside shocks to aggregate demand as it can to upside shocks. While there are, of course, other policy options, these alternatives have constraints and uncertainties that are not present with conventional policy.14From a risk-management perspective, therefore, the asymmetry in the conventional policy toolkit would lead me to expect policy to be tilted somewhat in favor of guarding against downside risks relative to preemptively raising rates to guard against upside risks. Because a persistently low neutral rate implies less room for conventional monetary policy to adjust to adverse developments, it will be important to assess whether our current policy tools are adequate to respond to negative shocks and, if not, what adjustments would be most appropriate. There is a growing literature on such policy alternatives, such as raising the inflation target, moving to a nominal income target, or deploying negative interest rates.15These options merit further assessment. However, they are largely untested and would take some time to assess and prepare. For the time being, the most effective way to address these concerns is to ensure that our policy actions align with our commitment to achieving the existing inflation target, which the Committee has recently clarified is symmetric around 2 percent--and not a ceiling--along with maximum employment. Recent Developments Suggest Gradual ProgressAgainst the backdrop of these five features of the new normal that are most salient for conditioning policy, I will briefly summarize my take on recent economic developments and their implications for policy. The economy has seen welcome progress on some fronts in recent months, supported by the cautious approach taken by the Committee and a corresponding easing in financial conditions: The labor market has continued to improve, consumer confidence has remained high, and we have navigated past near-term risks from abroad. Overall, the recent data on the labor market and aggregate spending suggest that we are continuing to move toward full employment, but that progress has been, and likely will be, somewhat gradual. This year, monthly job gains have averaged 180,000, below last year's pace but still sufficient to reduce labor market slack. The slowing pace of job gains has been associated with a flattening out in the unemployment rate over the past year, along with a heartening 1/2 percentage point increase in the prime-age labor force participation rate. These developments suggest that an improving job market has made joining, or remaining in, the labor force increasingly attractive, and may imply that the labor market has room for further improvement. Recent spending data suggest a pickup in third-quarter growth. In particular, real consumer spending increased at nearly a 4 percent annual pace over the three months ending in July, driven by continued job growth, buoyant consumer sentiment, and rising household wealth. Nonetheless, spending in other sectors has been disappointing. Weak foreign growth and the net appreciation of the dollar over the past two years have weighed heavily on net exports, corporate profitability, business investment, and manufacturing production. Business investment has declined in each of the past three quarters, and the latest data on housing permits suggest that residential investment slowed noticeably in the middle of this year. As a result, economic activity over the past three quarters has been disappointing, with growth in GDP and gross domestic income each averaging less than 1 percent, a significant step-down from the same period in 2015. Looking ahead, the stabilization of the dollar and oil prices suggests that growth in these components should move higher over the second half of the year. Indeed, exports, which have declined since the end of 2014, moved slightly higher last quarter, and the number of oil drilling rigs in operation has begun to edge up after sharp declines over the past two years, a positive sign for business investment. In addition, inventory investment, which edged lower last quarter, should step up over the second half of the year to a level more in line with continued moderate increases in final sales. We have also seen signs of progress on our inflation mandate. In July, the 12month change in core PCE prices was 1.6 percent, higher than a year ago, but still noticeably below our 2 percent target. The stabilization of the dollar and oil prices should lead inflation to move back toward our target in coming quarters. Non-oil import prices, which fell steadily from the end of 2014 through the first quarter of this year, edged up in the second quarter and, if the dollar remains steady, should continue to rise going forward. Continued progress in inflation will also depend on inflation expectations remaining well anchored and not drifting lower. The evidence here is mixed, as I noted earlier. Policy ImplicationsThe five features of the current economic landscape that I have highlighted lean roughly in the same direction: In today's new normal, the costs to the economy of greater-than-expected strength in demand are likely to be lower than the costs of significant unexpected weakness. In the case of unexpected strength, we have well-tried and tested tools and ample policy space in which to react. Moreover, because of Phillips curve flattening, the possibility of remaining labor market slack, the likely substantial response of the exchange rate and its depressing effect on inflation, the low neutral rate, and the fact that inflation expectations are well anchored to the upside, the response of inflation to unexpected strength in demand will likely be modest and gradual, requiring a correspondingly moderate policy response and implying relatively slight costs to the economy. In the face of an adverse shock, however, our conventional policy toolkit is more limited, and thus the risk of being unable to adequately respond to unexpected weakness is greater. The experience of the Japanese and euro-area economies suggest that prolonged weakness in demand is very difficult to correct, leading to economic costs that can be considerable. This asymmetry in risk management in today's new normal counsels prudence in the removal of policy accommodation. I believe this approach has served us well in recent months, helping to support continued gains in employment and progress on inflation. I look forward to assessing the evolution of the data in the months ahead for signs of further progress toward our goals, bearing in mind these considerations. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 197-275. Ball, Laurence (2014). "The Case for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/14/92. Washington: International Monetary Fund, June. Bernanke, Ben S. (2015). "Monetary Policy in the Future," speech delivered at the "Rethinking Macro Policy III" conference sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, April 15. Blanchard, Olivier (2016). "The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief 161. Washington: Peterson Institute of International Economics, January. Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro (2010). "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy (PDF)," IMF Staff Position Note 10/03. Washington: International Monetary Fund, February 12. Brainard, Lael (2015a). "Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "North America's Place in a Changing World Economy," 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, October 12. --------- (2015b). "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2015). "Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB," NBER Working Paper Series 21670. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Council of Economic Advisers (2016).The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation(PDF).Washington: Executive Office of the President of the United States, June. Curcuru, Stephanie (forthcoming). "The Sensitivity of the USD Exchange Rate to Changes in Monetary Policy Expectations," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Crdia, Vasco (2015). "Why So Slow? A Gradual Return for Interest Rates," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-32. San Francisco: FRBSF, October 12. Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, and Micah Smith (2016). "The Macro Effects of the Recent Swing in Financial Conditions," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), May 25. Erceg, Christopher J., and Andrew T. Levin (2014). "Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 46 (S2, October), pp. 3-49. Goodfriend, Marvin (2016). "The Case for Unencumbering Interest Rate Policy at the Zero Bound (PDF)," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., Aug. 26-27. Haldane, Andrew (2015). "How Low Can You Go?" speech delivered at the Portadown Chamber of Commerce, Northern Ireland, September 18. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Kiley, Michael T. (2015a). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. --------- (2015b). "Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2015). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2015-16. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October. Lubik, Thomas A., and Christian Matthes (2015). "Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches (PDF)," Economic Brief 15-10. Richmond, Va.: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, October. Reifschneider, David (2016). "Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-068. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Romer, Christina D. (2011). "Dear Ben: It's Time for Your Volcker Moment,"New York Times,October 29, www.nytimes.com/2011/10/30/business/economy/ben-bernanke-needs-a-volcker-moment.html?_r=0. I am grateful to Andrew Figura for his assistance in preparing this text. 1.These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.See Blanchard (2016), Kiley (2015b), and Brainard (2015a),Return to text 3.The inflation information refers to core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation measured on a 12-month average basis.Return to text 4.For example, over the past 12 months, median 5-to-10 year-ahead inflation expectations from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers were 1/4 percentage point below the average over the prior 10 years.Return to text 5.For information from current and previous SEPs, seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 6.For analyses of the determinants of labor force participation, see Aaronson and others (2014), Erceg and Levin (2014), and Council of Economic Advisers (2016).Return to text 7.Over the 12 months ending in August 2016, average hourly earnings increased 2.4 percent. Over the 12 months ending in June, the employment cost index for private-sector workers also increased 2.4 percent. The more volatile compensation per hour measure for the business sector has increased at an annual rate of 2.6 percent over the past eight quarters. From the fourth quarter of 2009 to the fourth quarter of 2014, these measures all increased at an average annual rate of around 2 percent. From the fourth quarter of 2003 to the fourth quarter of 2007, the compensation per hour and employment cost index measures increased at an average annual rate of around 3-1/2 percent. Average hourly earnings for all workers were not available for this period.Return to text 8.The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has repeatedly marked down its forecast of world economic growth in recent years. From April 2014 to July of this year, for example, the IMF revised down 2015 growth from 3.9 percent to 3.1 percent. And from April 2015 to July of this year, the IMF revised down 2016 growth from 3.8 percent to 3.1 percent. See the IMF's World Economic Outlook athttp://www.imf.org/external/ns/cs.aspx?id=29.Return to text 9.Emerging market growth, as weighted by a country's share of U.S. exports, has decreased from an average pace of 5-1/4 percent from the fourth quarter of 2009 to the fourth quarter of 2012 to a little over 2 percent last year.Return to text 10.See Curcuru (forthcoming). The confidence intervals around the estimated effects are quite large.Return to text 11.See Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2015).Return to text 12.For a fuller description of the likely contributors to a persistent low neutral rate, see Brainard (2015b) and Goodfriend (2016).Return to text 13.See, for example, Laubach and Williams (2015); Del Negro, Giannoni, and Smith (2016); Crdia (2015); Lubik and Matthes (2015); Kiley (2015a); and Johannsen and Mertens (2016) for econometric estimates of the neutral rate, or the closely related concept of the natural rate of interest. See the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's most recentSurvey of Market ParticipantsandSurvey of Primary Dealersfor forecasters' estimates of the current neutral rate.Return to text 14.See Reifschneider (2016).Return to text 15.See Romer (2011), Blanchard, Dell'Ariccia and Mauro (2010), Ball (2014), Haldane (2015), Bernanke (2015), and Goodfriend (2016).Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the "Community Banking in the 21st Century" Fourth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, St. Louis, Missouri Watch live Welcome to Day 2 of the conference. I am grateful to the organizing committee for inviting me to be part of this important event once again. This is the third time that I have had the privilege of addressing this unique audience, which brings together bankers, bank supervisors, and banking researchers to share their thoughts regarding the current and future state of community banking. The interactions that occur at these annual gatherings are incredibly valuable and stimulate innovative thinking on the part of all three groups of participants. As usual, the organizers have put together a highly relevant agenda. I was particularly struck by the way in which this year's program spans generations, from last night's keynote speaker, Gene Rainbolt, who began his career in banking more than 50 years ago, to the winners of the case study competition, who are just preparing to embark on their careers. I hope that these impressive and accomplished young men and women will enjoy long and successful careers in banking that they will be able to reflect back on during the 54th annual community banking conference in 2066. I have already penciled in the date on my calendar, and I look forward to hearing what they will have to say. While the keynote addresses, case study competition, and networking opportunities all contribute to the appeal of this event, it is the research sessions that form the core of the conference. In the first research session yesterday, we heard about the importance of community banks to the Missouri economy, the viability of the traditional banking model, what is special about community banks, and the changing characteristics of the communities served by minority depository institutions. In the second session, we heard about the relationship between bank size and performance from three quite different perspectives. Both of these sessions provided cause for optimism about the future relevance and importance of community banks while simultaneously raising concerns about the viability of the very smallest banking organizations. In my remarks today, I would like to explore this mixed message a bit further and ask what the observed trends in the data imply for today's community bankers and the communities they serve. In doing so, I will look at changes in the community banking sector at a national level and will also look at geographic patterns of community bank growth and decline. For purposes of these remarks, I will define community banks as those with less than $10 billion in assets, although my conclusions would be the same if I used a lower cutoff, such as $1 billion in assets, or a more detailed definition of community banks, such as that developed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) a few years ago.1As always, the views I express here today are my own. I will start by discussing figures showing the number of community banks operating in the United States over the past 20 years.Figure 1shows the number of community banks for each year from 1995 to 2015. It shows a steady decline in the number of such banks over time. The rate of decline is considerably steeper in the late 1990s than in the period from 2000 to 2010. In the past five years, the rate of decrease has accelerated somewhat but remains slower than that experienced in the late 1990s. Breaking the universe of community banks down into subgroups based on size, we can see that the decline in community bank numbers is far from uniform.2The number of banks with between $1 billion and $10 billion in assets has doubled since 1995 (figure 2), although such banks still make up a small percentage of all community banks. I should note that the growth in this "large community bank" category is greater than that among banks with more than $10 billion in assets, in terms of both the number of banks added to the category and the percentage growth rate. Banks ranging in size from $300 million to $1 billion have also roughly doubled in number over these past 20 years (figure 3). And the number of banks in the size range from $100 million to $300 million in assets has declined by only a very modest percentage since 1995 (figure 4). However, the picture for banks with less than $100 million in assets is very different from the picture for larger banks. As can be seen infigure 5, the number of such banking organizations has declined by more than two-thirds since 1995. As with the pattern for all community banks, the decline in the number of these small community banks was steeper in the late 1990s than in later years. We can identify four factors that help to account for the decrease in the number of banks with under $100 million in assets. Some of this decline reflects the growth of small banks (often de novo banks) out of the smallest size range into larger size categories due to either organic growth or acquisition of another bank. Indeed, 90 percent of the large drop-off in the number of banks in this size range in 2014 and 2015 is due to banks moving up into a larger size category. A number of the smallest banking organizations also disappeared as a result of being merged with or acquired by other banking organizations. Some of the decline reflects the failures experienced in the Great Recession. And, finally, there have been few new bank formations in recent years. As noted in a 2014 article by McCord and Prescott, a key difference between the past few years and the late 1990s is that the recent acceleration in the rate of decrease in the number of community banks is due in large part to a decline in new bank charters rather than an increase in the annual number of exits.3This fact can be seen infigure 6, which shows the number of new charters each year (in blue, with squares to mark yearly values), the actual annual change in the number of community banks (in green, with triangles), and what the annual change in the number of banks would have been in the absence of new entry (in red, with circles), over the past 20 years. It is clear from this figure that in the absence of new entry, the annual decline in the number of community banks between 2000 and 2010 would have been quite similar to what it has been since 2010. Or, viewed from a different perspective, if entry had remained at more "normal" levels during the past 5 years, the rate of decline in the number of community banks would not have accelerated. And, since almost all new entrants have less than $100 million in assets, the decline in the number of banks in this smallest size category would have been much less steep during the past 5 years. Research by Adams and Gramlich that was presented at the 2014 community banking conference and subsequently published in theReview of Industrial Organizationconsiders the underlying causes of the virtual absence of new bank formation since 2009.4This research suggests that slow economic growth and low interest rates in the post-crisis environment can explain about 75 percent of the decline in new bank charters. The authors were not able to isolate the effect of regulatory changes on the rate of new bank formation, but note that regulation may also play a role. The sharp difference in trends for the number of banks with less than $100 million in assets compared with larger community banks naturally leads to the question of whether this difference is reflected in basic bank performance measures. I will begin with return on assets (ROA). Breaking down all community banks into the same size categories I used earlier, with the addition of a category for all banks larger than $10 billion in assets, we find striking differences in the patterns of bank profitability over time (figure 7). The largest community banks--those with $1 billion to $10 billion in assets (in green, with diamonds to mark yearly values)--followed a pattern similar to that of our largest banks (in black, with crosses), but with slightly worse results throughout the past 20 years. These large community banks had lower average levels of profitability than our largest banks prior to the recent recession, suffered worse losses in 2009, and have enjoyed lower levels of earnings since the crisis. Banks in the size range from $300 million to $1 billion in assets (in blue, with triangles) have been the most consistently profitable group among community banks, although their profit levels still lag those for the largest banks. These midsize community banks performed as well as banks with $1 billion to $10 billion in assets before the recent recession and remained profitable, on average, even in 2009. The story is much the same for banks in the size class from $100 million to $300 million in assets (in red, with squares). Their profit levels were slightly lower than those for larger community banks prior to the crisis, but they performed similarly until 2015, when banks of this size showed a decline in profits not experienced by any other size grouping of community banks. Time will tell whether this is an anomaly or the beginning of a pattern. Looking at the smallest community banks, those with less than $100 million in assets, gives some hints for why their numbers have declined. The average ROA for the smallest banks (in purple, with circles) has been consistently lower than that for the next-smallest class of banks since 1995. The already lower level of profits for the smallest banks began to decline further in 2006. Since 2009, profits for the smallest banks have increased slightly but remain below their levels of profitability prior to the recession and below the ROA levels for larger banks.5 Data on nonperforming loans (NPLs) show a mixed picture.6A breakdown of community banks by size indicates that the ratio of NPLs to total loans peaked for every size category in 2010 (figure 8). Prior to 2007, the smallest community banks consistently had a higher ratio of NPLs than did larger community banks; but from 2007 until 2013, their NPL rate was below that of larger community banks. In the past two years, NPLs on the balance sheets of the smallest banks have declined more slowly than for larger banks so that banks with less than $100 million in assets once again have the highest NPL ratio. Let me turn now to consider changes in the number of community banks over the past 20 years at a more local level. For purposes of this discussion, I define local banking markets as counties in rural areas and as Metropolitan Statistical Areas in urban areas.Figure 9shows those local banking markets in which the number of community banks decreased over the 20 years from 1995 to 2015 (in white) and those markets in which the number of community banks increased or stayed constant (in blue). As you can see, there are markets in every state where the number of community banks has declined. However, there also are markets in every state where community banks have maintained or increased their presence. In fact, the number of local markets that saw their population of community banks hold constant or increase between 1995 and 2015 was more than double the number of local markets that experienced a decline in the number of community banks over this period. And, perhaps surprisingly, the share of rural markets experiencing a decrease in the number of community banks (about 32 percent) was slightly lower than the share of urban markets facing such a decline (about 35 percent). As we saw, the vast majority of the decline in the number of community banks involved banks with less than $100 million in assets. This next figure (figure 10) shows changes in the number of banks in this smallest size category together with changes in the number of all community banks. The local markets that are shaded in dark blue are those where both the number of banks with less than $100 million in assets and the number of all community banks declined between 1995 and 2015. The light-blue markets are those where the total number of community banks remained constant or increased despite a decline in the number of banks in the smallest size category. There are just over twice as many markets shaded in light blue as there are shaded in dark blue, indicating that in two-thirds of the markets where the number of very small community banks declined, the number of community banks overall did not decline. Markets in white are those where the number of banks in the smallest category increased or remained unchanged over the past 20 years. This examination of the geographic patterns of changes in the population of community banks has shown that most markets in the United States have maintained or increased their numbers of community banks over the past 20 years. Those local markets that have lost community banks have not been concentrated in any particular section of the country, and urban markets have been slightly more likely to lose community banks over the past 20 years than rural areas. One might ask, what factors have led some markets to lose community banks while others gained community banks or saw no change? Because of the importance of community banks as a source of small business lending and other retail services, we have explored this question but do not yet have any definitive answers. We considered the possibility that underlying demographic characteristics were driving the observed changes in the number of banks in a local market area. Perhaps the size of the labor force or the population density, the racial and ethnic mix of the population, or changes in any of these factors might explain the outcome. We also considered whether economic conditions such as the unemployment rate, the median household income, the number of business establishments, or changes in any of these measures might be useful in predicting which markets would lose community banks over time. Taking into account all of these variables in a regression framework did not yield much explanatory power. This analysis has not led us to a clear story regarding the determinants of changes in the number of community banks serving a local market area, but we intend to continue our research efforts and hope that they will ultimately yield some valuable insights. We can take some comfort from the fact that the number of local markets that either maintained or increased the number of community banks serving their residents and small businesses is much larger than the number of markets that saw a decline in the number of community banks. That said, we recognize that the loss of community banks may have caused some communities to suffer adverse economic consequences. So, what do we take away from this review of bank numbers and performance? First, the decline in the number of community banks is not a recent phenomenon--it has been a constant theme over at least the past 20 years. Second, it has occurred almost exclusively among the smallest community banks--those with less than $100 million in assets. However, I want to emphasize that the long-trending decline in the number of very small community banks does not mean that these banks do not play an important role in our financial system. Almost all newly chartered banks fall into this category, and many of these banks thrive and, ultimately, outgrow the smallest size category. Thus, banks with less than $100 million in assets should be viewed as a key source of dynamism and competition within the banking sector. Third, although the rate of decline has accelerated a bit during the past 5 years, that acceleration is largely due to a lack of entry rather than an increased rate of exit. Fourth, although the lack of entry may be due in part to increased regulatory burden, much of it can be explained by very low interest rates and a post-crisis expansion that has been slower than usual. Fifth, at a local level, about one-third of markets have seen a decline in the number of community banks over the past 20 years, but about two-thirds have seen no change or an increase in the number of community banks. It is unclear what factors explain observed changes in the number of community banks at a local market level. More research is needed on this question. I think the key question for policymakers is whether the recent acceleration in the rate of decline in the number of small banks is primarily a structural change attributable to increasing economies of scale--or, perhaps more accurately, diseconomies of very small scale--or whether recent efforts by the FDIC and others to encourage more chartering of new banks, combined with a return to higher interest rates and stronger economic growth, will mitigate the decline in numbers. At this point, I think it is too soon to say. The Federal Reserve and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors began this conference three years ago in order to stimulate research on community banks, with the goal of improving our understanding of their condition and their important contributions to economic growth and prosperity. We plan to continue our own research efforts across the Federal Reserve System, as well as our efforts, through initiatives such as this conference, to encourage academics to focus their attention on community banks. Of course, the Federal Reserve's support for community banks goes well beyond research. One of the clearest lessons from our most recent recession is that, when it comes to bank regulation and supervision, one size does not fit all. As we seek to promote safety and soundness and ensure consumer compliance, we increasingly tailor rules and supervisory approaches to the differing risks posed by institutions of different size and complexity. This way, we can achieve our aims without creating undue regulatory burden. The Federal Reserve is committed to this approach to community bank oversight and to ensuring that new and existing regulations are not unduly burdensome for community banks. In addition to fulfilling this commitment, the Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies have launched a review to identify banking regulations that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome, as required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act. The Federal Reserve has taken some concrete steps to provide burden relief by publishing a streamlined Call Report for non-complex community banks, extending the examination cycle for banks with $1 billion or less in total assets, increasing the threshold for the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement to $1 billion and expanding the scope to include savings and loan holding companies. In addition, we have efforts underway to reduce burden associated with our real estate appraisal requirements, to simplify the regulatory capital requirement for community banks, to encourage resource sharing among community banks to help manage their BSA and AML obligations, and to use Call Report data and forward-looking risk analytics to identify high-risk community banks, which would allow us to focus our supervisory response on the areas of highest risk and reduce the regulatory burden on low-risk community banks. We will continue to work with bankers and the other banking regulators to ensure that we reduce burden and complexity in our regulations and guidance. Another way that we further our understanding is by talking to the bankers themselves. The entire Board of Governors meets twice a year with the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, which includes representatives of community banks, thrifts, and credit unions in each of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. Individual Governors also take advantage of opportunities to meet with community bankers from time to time. I speak regularly to bank executives, including those who run smaller institutions. I find these types of conversations--with people who live and work in the world outside the Capital Beltway and far from Wall Street--to be particularly enlightening. In addition, I hope that some of the conversations here today among researchers, bankers, and bank regulators will continue, leading to benefits to all in the form of more informative research, better design and implementation of regulatory policy, and enhanced community bank performance. 1. The FDIC definition of community banks can be found athttps://www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/cbi/report/CBSI-1.pdf.Return to text 2. All asset sizes are converted to 2005 dollars, so the changes in size distribution cannot be attributed to inflation.Return to text 3. See Roisin McCord and Edward Simpson Prescott (2014), "The Financial Crisis, the Collapse of Bank Entry, and Changes in the Size Distribution of Banks," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,Economic Quarterly,vol. 100 (First Quarter), pp. 23-50.Return to text 4. Robert M. Adams and Jacob Gramlich (2016), "Where Are All the New Banks? The Role of Regulatory Burden in New Bank Formation,"Review of Industrial Organization,vol. 48 (March), pp. 181-208.Return to text 5. The patterns for return on equity (ROE) are similar to those for ROA, although community banks as a whole had negative ROE in both 2009 and 2010. The largest community banks, with $1 billion to $10 billion in assets, suffered much greater negative returns on equity in these years than did smaller community banks. Midsize community banks, with $300 million to $1 billion in assets, fared better than their larger and smaller counterparts. The smallest community banks showed an unusual pattern in their ROEs. (It should be noted that, for banks of this size, ROE can be a questionable measure of profitability because such banks tend to be either privately held or very thinly traded.) These banks were in the only size category that did not show a negative ROE in 2009, but it was also the only class to show a negative ROE in 2013, and the ROE for these banks has been consistently below that for larger banks since the recession.Return to text 6. NPLs are defined as nonaccrual loans plus loans that are 90-plus days past due and still accruing.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Convocation for the Department of Economics, Howard University, Washington, D.C. I am very pleased to visit today with the students and faculty of the Howard University Economics Department. First, a fact that you know but others may not: The Howard University Economics Department is the only producer of economics Ph.D.'s among the nation's historically black colleges and universities, and it has been teaching economics to undergraduates for nearly a century.1 Speaking as one economist to a group among whom I hope will be many future economists, let me start by saying that pursuing a degree in economics can bring many rewards. First, an economics degree provides many possible career paths. The discipline's logical, structured approach to problem solving is valued in many settings, including academia, banking, business, consulting, government, and law. Economics majors typically receive salaries that represent a good return on their educational investment. Second, in addition to career prospects and financial rewards, economics offers a means of engaging in many of society's most pressing issues. The study of economics provides a rigorous, analytic perspective on human behavior. It commands respect and has the ability to influence policies that address important issues. A degree in economics will help you understand and participate in these policy debates, putting you in a good position to change the world for the better. Next, I would like to discuss two current questions that economists are actively debating: First, why is participation in our nation's labor force declining? And, second, what can be done to improve economic mobility (the ability to climb the economic ladder) for children from all groups and from all areas of the country? By doing so, I hope to illustrate the relevance of economics to important, real-life issues. The proportion of adults participating in the labor force--that is, either holding jobs or actively searching for employment--has declined substantially over the past decade. The decline has reflected, in part, the severe economic recession. Millions of people lost their jobs, and many of them experienced great difficulty finding new employment. Some of these people became discouraged and stopped looking for work. In other words, they dropped out of the labor force. However, much of the decline in labor force participation reflects factors that precede the recession.2Most significantly, our population is aging, and older people participate in the labor market at lower rates than younger adults. In addition, the labor force participation of prime-age males--that is, individuals aged 25 through 54--has been declining since the mid-1960s, particularly among those with only a high school degree or less education, and has continued to decline in the years since the last recession. Economists are examining a number of reasons why prime-age males are falling out of the labor force. Here there are differences among economists. Some economists have emphasized the role of public assistance programs, such as disability insurance. Some evidence suggests that public assistance income has likely played a role. Other economists have put more emphasis on the effects of the reduction over time in the demand for lower-skilled labor.3Indeed, the wages of high school graduates have fallen sharply in comparison with the wages of college graduates over the past 40 years. Many economists believe that the decline in demand for lower-skilled workers reflects technological changes.4For instance, the introduction of information technology such as desktop computers may have boosted the wages of highly skilled workers by more than the wages of workers with fewer skills. The slump in demand for lower-skilled labor likely also reflects the effects of globalization, including competition from goods produced and imported from abroad.5 My second current question concerns economic mobility: How likely is a child from a low-income family to move up to a higher income level as an adult? Over the past few years, economists have made important findings using newly available data. First, economic mobility varies substantially across the United States. For example, the odds of a child from the bottom quintile of the income distribution reaching the top quintile of income as an adult are 11 percent here in the Washington, D.C., area but only 4 percent in the Charlotte, North Carolina, region. Second, mobility is significantly lower in areas with greater residential segregation in terms of both race and income. Mobility is also lower in areas with greater income inequality, less family stability, and lower-quality schools.6However, we need further study and analysis to understand whether these factorscauselower mobility or are merely correlated with it. Thus, despite the gains in our knowledge in recent years, significant gaps remain in our understanding of what factors help and hinder economic mobility. I will conclude by discussing diversity in the economics profession. Our profession currently is not very diverse, but it needs to be. Only about one-fourth of tenured and tenure-track faculty members in U.S. academic economics departments are women, and only around 5 percent are African American or Hispanic. Yet research conducted by economists as well as other social scientists suggests that a diversity of perspectives and ideas lead to better decisions and increased productivity.7In my own experience, economic policy decisions are better when informed by a wide range of views and experiences. You all here today are crucial to the future of our profession. Indeed, I hope that by obtaining your degrees and working on economic problems, you will help change the field of economics itself. As in many other fields, economics undergoes continual redesign by its practitioners. We need--and by that I mean society as a whole needs--a more diverse set of practitioners in economics, practitioners who may perceive different questions to be important and different answers to be more persuasive. And so, by joining the profession you can acquire the power to change not only the field, but also the broad set of societal institutions that are influenced by the work of economists. Economists tend to respond to the results of research. And the research shows the importance of diversity in decisionmaking. As a result, many organizations are working very seriously to become more diverse. At the Federal Reserve Board, these efforts include developing connections with the Economics Department here at Howard. Our economists have recently served as visiting faculty at Howard or have given guest lectures here. During the past spring semester, Board economists served as mentors to Howard master's degree and Ph.D. students. This fall, we are offering a class on statistical programming methods through the university. On October 25th, we will host an open house with the undergraduate economics association here at Howard for students who are interested in learning more about the Federal Reserve. I encourage you to attend. I would also like to make you aware that the Board offers internships to qualified students, including Howard students studying economics. Moreover, the Federal Reserve Board's Office of Diversity and Inclusion is coordinating an effort to increase the diversity of our staff.8Everyone at the Board with responsibility for recruiting, hiring, management, and promotion is involved. But I want to emphasize that these are steps on what will be a long road. Finally, Board economists are also working to increase our understanding of the diverse economic experiences of different groups in the economy. For example, staff economists have recently been examining the disparities in wealth across families using our Survey of Consumer Finances. Wealth is an important measure of household well-being; it can be used to start a new business, cover expenses when household income unexpectedly falls, and provide an inheritance to children--all factors that influence opportunities for economic advancement. One study finds that factors such as educational attainment and inheritances almost entirely explain the gap between the wealth of white families and that of Hispanic families. Although these factors also explain most of the gap in wealth between white families and black families, a substantial portion of this gap cannot be explained by such factors.9Additional research is required to fully explain the difference in wealth across white and African American households. Thank you for inviting me to speak to you. It would be great to see some of you who are here today going on to influence the direction of the country on any number of issues. To put it in a nutshell, I firmly believe that a degree in economics will equip you for a personally productive and rewarding career, will position you to help make progress on some of society's toughest issues, and will change the field of economics itself. Thank you for listening--and may you all both enjoy and succeed in your future careers, especially in economics. 1. I am grateful to Andrew Cohen and Byron Lutz of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. See Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Fall), pp. 197-255.Return to text3. See John Bound, Stephan Lindner, and Timothy Waidmann (2014), "Reconciling Findings on the Employment Effect of Disability Insurance,"IZA Journal of Labor Policy,vol. 3 (11), pp. 1-23. For an opposing view that concludes that disability insurance has significantly suppressed the labor force participation of the less skilled, see David H. Autor and Mark G. Duggan (2003), "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in Unemployment,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 118 (February), pp. 157-205.Return to text4. See Daron Acemoglu (2002), "Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 40 (March), pp. 7-72.Return to text5. See David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013), "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,"American Economic Review, vol.103 (October), pp. 2121-68.Return to text6. See Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014), "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 129 (November), pp. 1553-1623.Return to text7. See, for example, Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse (forthcoming), "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,"Journal of Economic Perspectives.Return to text8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015),Report to the Congress on the Office of Minority and Women Inclusion(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, March).Return to text9. See Jeffrey P. Thompson and Gustavo A. Suarez (2015), "Exploring the Racial Wealth Gap Using the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-076 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text 1. I am grateful to Andrew Cohen and Byron Lutz of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. See Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Fall), pp. 197-255.Return to text3. See John Bound, Stephan Lindner, and Timothy Waidmann (2014), "Reconciling Findings on the Employment Effect of Disability Insurance,"IZA Journal of Labor Policy,vol. 3 (11), pp. 1-23. For an opposing view that concludes that disability insurance has significantly suppressed the labor force participation of the less skilled, see David H. Autor and Mark G. Duggan (2003), "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in Unemployment,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 118 (February), pp. 157-205.Return to text4. See Daron Acemoglu (2002), "Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 40 (March), pp. 7-72.Return to text5. See David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013), "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,"American Economic Review, vol.103 (October), pp. 2121-68.Return to text6. See Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014), "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 129 (November), pp. 1553-1623.Return to text7. See, for example, Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse (forthcoming), "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,"Journal of Economic Perspectives.Return to text8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015),Report to the Congress on the Office of Minority and Women Inclusion(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, March).Return to text9. See Jeffrey P. Thompson and Gustavo A. Suarez (2015), "Exploring the Racial Wealth Gap Using the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-076 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text 1. I am grateful to Andrew Cohen and Byron Lutz of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. See Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Fall), pp. 197-255.Return to text3. See John Bound, Stephan Lindner, and Timothy Waidmann (2014), "Reconciling Findings on the Employment Effect of Disability Insurance,"IZA Journal of Labor Policy,vol. 3 (11), pp. 1-23. For an opposing view that concludes that disability insurance has significantly suppressed the labor force participation of the less skilled, see David H. Autor and Mark G. Duggan (2003), "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in Unemployment,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 118 (February), pp. 157-205.Return to text4. See Daron Acemoglu (2002), "Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 40 (March), pp. 7-72.Return to text5. See David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013), "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,"American Economic Review, vol.103 (October), pp. 2121-68.Return to text6. See Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014), "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 129 (November), pp. 1553-1623.Return to text7. See, for example, Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse (forthcoming), "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,"Journal of Economic Perspectives.Return to text8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015),Report to the Congress on the Office of Minority and Women Inclusion(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, March).Return to text9. See Jeffrey P. Thompson and Gustavo A. Suarez (2015), "Exploring the Racial Wealth Gap Using the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-076 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text 1. I am grateful to Andrew Cohen and Byron Lutz of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Fall), pp. 197-255.Return to text 3. See John Bound, Stephan Lindner, and Timothy Waidmann (2014), "Reconciling Findings on the Employment Effect of Disability Insurance,"IZA Journal of Labor Policy,vol. 3 (11), pp. 1-23. For an opposing view that concludes that disability insurance has significantly suppressed the labor force participation of the less skilled, see David H. Autor and Mark G. Duggan (2003), "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in Unemployment,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 118 (February), pp. 157-205.Return to text 4. See Daron Acemoglu (2002), "Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 40 (March), pp. 7-72.Return to text 5. See David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013), "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,"American Economic Review, vol.103 (October), pp. 2121-68.Return to text 6. See Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014), "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 129 (November), pp. 1553-1623.Return to text 7. See, for example, Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse (forthcoming), "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,"Journal of Economic Perspectives.Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015),Report to the Congress on the Office of Minority and Women Inclusion(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, March).Return to text 9. See Jeffrey P. Thompson and Gustavo A. Suarez (2015), "Exploring the Racial Wealth Gap Using the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-076 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's regulation and supervision of financial institutions. One of the Federal Reserve's fundamental goals is to make sure that our regulatory and supervisory program is tailored to the risk that different financial institutions pose to the system as a whole. As we saw in 2007-08, the failure of systemically important financial institutions can destabilize the financial system and undermine the real economy. The largest, most complicated firms must therefore be subject to prudential standards that are more stringent than the standards that apply to other firms. Small and medium-sized banking organizations--whose failure would generally pose much less risk to the system--should be subject to standards that are materially less stringent. The Federal Reserve has made substantial progress in building a regulatory and supervisory program that is consistent with these principles. We have implemented key standards designed to limit the financial stability risks posed by the largest, most complex banking firms. We continue to work on some remaining standards and to assess the adequacy of this package of measures. With respect to small and medium-sized banks, we must build on the steps we have already taken to ensure that they do not face undue regulatory burdens. Looking forward, we must continue to monitor for the emergence of new risks, since another key lesson from the crisis is that financial stability threats change over time. Strengthening the Regulation and Supervision of the Largest Financial InstitutionsThe Federal Reserve's post-crisis efforts to strengthen its regulation and supervision of large banks have focused on promoting the safety and soundness of these firms and on limiting the adverse effects that their distress or failure could have on the financial system and the broader economy. This orientation is consistent with section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), which directs the Board to impose enhanced prudential standards on large banking organizations "in order to prevent or mitigate risks to financial stability." Our efforts to mitigate financial stability risks posed by large financial institutions generally fall into one of two categories. First, we aim to make large financial institutions more resilient in order to reduce the likelihood of their failure or distress. And second, we aim to make large financial institutions more resolvable to limit the damage that their failure would have on the rest of the financial system and on the broader economy. ResiliencyTo increase the resiliency of the largest banking organizations, the Federal Reserve has established a broad set of enhanced prudential standards for large domestic and foreign banking organizations. Together with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, we have implemented capital rules that require large banking organizations to hold substantially larger amounts of high-quality capital than they were required to hold before the 2007-08 crisis, and we have adopted a liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) that requires these organizations to hold a buffer of high-quality, liquid assets sufficient to meet liquidity outflows during a 30-day period of severe funding stress. We have also proposed single-counterparty credit limits that are designed to guard against the build-up of excessive concentrations of credit risk and, along with the other federal banking agencies, proposed a Net Stable Funding Ratio that would require banks to maintain a minimum level of stable funding relative to the liquidity of their assets over a one-year horizon. In addition to strengthening the regulation of the largest, most complex financial institutions, we have also transformed our supervision of firms that pose elevated risk to U.S. financial stability through the creation of the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC).1The LISCC is distinguished by several characteristics. First, the LISCC has implemented a centralized, multidisciplinary approach to supervision by bringing together experts from around the Federal Reserve System in the areas of supervision, research, legal counsel, financial markets, and payments systems. Second, major areas of focus for the supervision of firms in the LISCC portfolio are capital and liquidity resiliency under normal and potentially adverse conditions in the future, as well as recovery and resolution preparedness. And third, the LISCC complements traditional, firm-specific supervisory work with annual "horizontal" programs that examine these firms at the same time and on the same set of issues in order to promote better monitoring of trends and consistency of assessments across all of the LISCC firms. With regard to capital adequacy, the introduction of capital stress testing for large banking organizations has been one of our signature innovations since the financial crisis. As events during the financial crisis demonstrated, capital buffers that seem adequate in a benign environment may turn out to be far less than adequate during periods of stress. For this reason, consistent with the stress-testing mandate in the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve conducts supervisory stress tests each year on banking organizations with $50 billion or more in total assets to determine whether they have sufficient capital to continue operations through periods of economic stress and market turbulence, and whether their capital planning frameworks are adequate to their risk profiles. The expectation embodied in our stress testing program that large banking organizations should maintain sufficient capital buffers to withstand a period of significant stress promotes the resilience of those firms and of the financial system more generally. While our stress testing program has been successful since it was first introduced in 2009, the crisis reinforced the need for regulators and supervisors to continually revisit the effectiveness of their tools and adjust as needed over time. We therefore launched a review of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) program last year with the aim of re-assessing our stress testing practices on a comprehensive basis. As part of this process, we met with a wide range of stakeholders, including academics, analysts, bankers, public interest groups, and others. We are now considering making several changes to our stress testing methodology and process. The leading idea that has emerged from our comprehensive CCAR review is to integrate CCAR with our regulatory capital framework. More specifically, the regulatory capital rules now include a firm-specific, risk-based capital surcharge for each global systemically important bank (G-SIB) and a uniform capital conservation buffer requirement above the regulatory capital minimum for all firms. Under the approach we are considering, the existing capital conservation buffer would be replaced with a risk-sensitive, firm-specific buffer that is sized based on stress test results. Each firm's buffer requirement would be set equal to the decline in its common equity tier 1 capital ratio in the supervisory stress test. The buffer requirement would be floored at 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets, the current level of the capital conservation buffer, to avoid any reduction in the stringency of the regulatory capital rules. We call this idea the "stress capital buffer," and it would effectively move the stress test to the center of our regulatory capital framework. For the eight U.S. G-SIBs, the move to the stress loss buffer--which would be similar in effect to including the G-SIB capital surcharge in the CCAR post-stress minimum--would result in a significant aggregate increase in capital requirements. Thus, in addition to simplifying the capital framework by integrating CCAR with our regulatory capital rules, the stress loss buffer would advance our macroprudential goal of making G-SIBs more resilient. In contrast, the move to the stress loss buffer approach generally would not entail a toughening of our requirements for the 25 large banking firms that are subject to CCAR but are not G-SIBs. Nor would the move have any impact on community banks or other firms with less than $50 billion in assets. We are also considering making certain changes to the stress test assumptions used in CCAR. For example, under the current CCAR program, a firm's capital adequacy is assessed by assuming that the firm continues to make its baseline capital distributions over the stress test's two-year planning horizon. We are considering changing this conservative assumption, in significant part because of the advent of the capital conservation buffer in the regulatory capital rules, which limits the ability of a firm to make capital distributions when its capital ratios are lower than the buffer requirement. Instead, we are proposing that firms simply add one year of planned dividends to their stress capital buffer requirement in recognition of the fact that firms generally are more reluctant to reduce dividends than share buybacks. On this and other changes to CCAR that we are considering, we will of course seek public input before moving to adopt them. ResolvabilityDuring the crisis, fears about the systemic consequences that would result from the bankruptcies of systemically important firms motivated extraordinary government actions. The fears proved well-founded: The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers significantly exacerbated the crisis. To reduce the potential that resolution of a large financial firm in bankruptcy will be disorderly, section 165(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires large banking organizations to produce living wills that help these firms prepare to be resolved in an orderly way under the Bankruptcy Code. Although the Bankruptcy Code provides the default legal framework for resolving a failed bank holding company, the Dodd-Frank Act also creates a backup resolution authority that can be used if the resolution of a failed financial company under the Bankruptcy Code would have serious adverse effects on U.S. financial stability. The orderly liquidation authority in Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act has several features that could reduce the systemic impact of a firm's resolution, including an orderly liquidation fund and provisions to prevent the chaotic unwinding of a firm's derivatives, securities financing transactions, and other qualified financial contracts. In the unlikely event that the orderly liquidation fund does incur losses, these losses would be covered by assessments on major financial firms and would not be passed on to taxpayers. The Federal Reserve has recently proposed important new rules to increase the prospects for the orderly resolution of a G-SIB. Last October, the Board proposed to require the eight U.S. G-SIBs to meet total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) and long-term debt requirements. The proposal would require these systemically important firms to maintain outstanding a large quantity of long-term debt that could be used to absorb losses and recapitalize the firm in resolution. Because, by definition, the actual equity of a bank will have been substantially depleted--if not totally eliminated--by the time it fails, a separate long-term debt requirement is essential to ensure that the resolution authority has the raw material from which to manufacture new equity in resolution to recapitalize and stabilize the failed firm. For this reason, the proposed long-term debt requirement would more assuredly enhance the prospects for successful resolution--and thereby contribute to solving the too-big-to-fail problem--than would a TLAC requirement on its own. The proposal would also restrict the operations of G-SIB holding companies, so that those legal entities could go through resolution without setting off short-term wholesale funding runs or otherwise jeopardizing financial stability. In May this year, the Board issued another proposal to make G-SIBs more resolvable. This second proposed rule would impose restrictions on G-SIBs' qualified financial contracts--including derivatives and repurchase agreements (repos)--to guard against the rapid, mass unwinding of those contracts during the resolution of a G-SIB. The proposed restrictions are a key step toward G-SIB resolvability because rapidly unwinding these contracts could destabilize the financial system by causing asset fire sales and toppling other firms. Acting in conjunction with the FDIC, the Board has also sought to increase G-SIB resolvability through the living wills process. In April this year, the Board and the FDIC announced the results of their review of the eight U.S. G-SIBs' 2015 resolution plans. During this review, the agencies evaluated the plans based on the firms' capital, liquidity, governance mechanisms, operational capabilities, legal entity rationalization, derivatives and trading activities, and responsiveness to prior agency feedback. The agencies found that five of the G-SIBs' plans fell short of the resolvability standard set by the Dodd-Frank Act and required those firms to fix deficiencies in their plans by October of this year or potentially face more stringent prudential requirements. If the agencies jointly determine that a firm has failed to adequately remedy the noted deficiencies, the agencies may jointly determine that the company or its subsidiaries will be subject to more stringent capital, leverage, or liquidity requirements or to restrictions on the growth, activities, or operations of the firm. The agencies also identified less-severe shortcomings in the plans of all eight U.S. G-SIBs, which are expected to be addressed in the next round of resolution plan submissions, due in July 2017. The resolution planning process requires firms to demonstrate that they have adequately assessed the challenges that their structure and business activities would pose during resolution and that they have taken action to address those issues. Firms must also confront the resolution consequences of their day-to-day management decisions on a continual basis, particularly those related to structure, business activities, capital and liquidity allocation, and governance. Firms are also expected to create a meaningful set of options for selling operations and business lines to generate resources and to allow for restructuring under stress, including through the sale or wind-down of discrete businesses that could further minimize the direct impact of the firm's distress or failure on the broader financial system. The deficiencies and shortcomings issued in the most recent plan review focus on steps necessary to ensure these objectives are met at each G-SIB on an ongoing basis. In addition to providing the firms with our feedback on their resolution plans, the agencies took several steps in April to improve the transparency of the resolution planning exercise. These steps included publicly releasing the firm feedback letters, a paper outlining the resolution plan assessment framework and firm determinations, and a document detailing the expectations of the agencies regarding the firms' 2017 resolution plan submissions. The expectations articulated for the 2017 plan contents build on detailed guidance previously provided to the G-SIBs in 2014 and 2015. While the five firms that received joint deficiencies are required to fix those deficiencies by October 2016, all of the firms that received agency feedback in April are required to submit a full resolution plan by July 1, 2017. In these plans, firms will be required to address all identified shortcomings, follow all guidance provided by the agencies, and meet all statutory and regulatory requirements for their resolution plans. In meeting these expectations, the actions that firms need to take should be substantially complete by July 2017, as previously communicated by the agencies. Regulation and Supervision of Large and Regional Banking OrganizationsIn supervising banking organizations with more than $50 billion in assets but outside the LISCC program, the Board focuses on ensuring that companies are well managed, appropriately capitalized, and prepared to withstand potential adverse developments in the business environment. However, because the distress or failure of a non-LISCC firm is unlikely to have the same effect on the financial system and broader economy as that of a LISCC firm, we do not apply the full range of rules that we apply to those in the LISCC portfolio. For example, the Board's risk-based and leverage capital surcharges, as well as the recently proposed long-term debt and TLAC requirements, only apply to G-SIBs. Similarly, the advanced approaches capital rules, countercyclical capital buffer, supplementary leverage ratio, and full LCR only apply to the largest and most internationally active banking organizations. We also scale our examination procedures to reflect the lower level of systemic risk presented by banks with more than $50 billion in assets that are not LISCC companies. As a result of the comprehensive CCAR review I described earlier, we are also considering exempting from the qualitative portions of CCAR any bank that has less than $250 billion in total assets and that does not have significant international or nonbank activity. While we strongly believe the CCAR qualitative review produces significant safety and soundness benefits for the largest firms, we can achieve our supervisory goals at most medium-sized banking firms using our normal supervisory program combined with targeted horizontal assessments of particular aspects of capital planning, as many of these firms are now meeting or close to meeting our supervisory expectations for capital planning processes. As required by statute, these firms would still be subject to the quantitative portion of our stress testing program. But even with respect to the quantitative portions of CCAR, we are considering reducing the amount of data that these firms are required to submit for stress testing purposes. Regulatory and supervisory requirements are further tailored for regional banking organizations, defined as those with total assets between $10 billion and $50 billion. For example, while regional banking organizations must comply with capital rules, they are not subject to a supervisory stress test or CCAR. Rather, as required by the Dodd-Frank Act, regional banking organizations perform their own stress tests. Similarly, these companies are not subject to enhanced prudential standards established under section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, the LCR, or other related requirements. Instead, we conduct regular inspections of regional banking organizations and evaluate their safety and soundness based on each company's individual circumstances, in addition to horizontal exams we conduct of regional banking organizations. Because many regional banking organizations concentrate their assets and activities in banking subsidiaries that are supervised by other federal banking agencies, we coordinate supervisory activities closely with the other U.S. banking agencies and rely significantly on the results of their examinations, focusing our own inspections on the parent company and its ability to serve as a source of strength to the subsidiary banks. Community Bank SupervisionI know that community banks play a vital role in many of your districts. Let me say that the experiences and challenges of community banking are not new to me. Before I became Chair of the Board of Governors and Vice Chair before that, I spent six years as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. In that role, I was involved in the supervision of a substantial number of community banking organizations in the nine states of the San Francisco District. Among the lessons that experience reinforced is that when it comes to bank regulation and supervision, one size does not fit all. To effectively promote safety and soundness and to ensure that institutions comply with applicable consumer protection laws without creating undue regulatory burden, rules and supervisory approaches should be tailored to different types of institutions such as community banks. The Federal Reserve supervises more than 800 community banks and more than 4,000 holding companies that control small depository institutions. These are banking organizations with total assets of $10 billion or less. In supervising community banks, we follow a risk-focused approach that aims to target examination resources to higher-risk areas of each bank's operations and to ensure that banks maintain risk-management capabilities appropriate to their size and complexity. In the wake of the crisis, we have taken steps to refine this process by using the financial data we collect from banks to calibrate our examination procedures based on risk. We believe this will help us to identify and address emerging risks and to ensure that community bank examiners with specialized expertise are allocated to the institutions exhibiting the highest risks. We also implemented a risk-focused consumer compliance examination framework for community banks in 2014 that is intended to allow examiners to spend less time on low-risk compliance issues so that issues more likely to result in harm to consumers get more attention. The Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies are currently in the process of completing the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) review. Under EGRPRA, the federal banking agencies are required to conduct a joint review of their regulations every 10 years to identify provisions that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome. The Federal Reserve views this review as a timely opportunity to step back and identify ways to reduce regulatory burden, particularly for smaller or less complex banks that pose less risk to the U.S. financial system. In carrying out this review, the agencies sought public comment on their regulations and held several roundtable discussions with bankers and interested parties to gather additional feedback on sources of burden. Themes emerging from these comments include streamlining the Call Report, reducing examination frequency, raising long-standing dollar-based thresholds for appraisals, and reducing the complexity of capital requirements for smaller banks. In response to public comments on examination frequency, the agencies have already approved interim rules to implement a provision of the Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act (FAST Act), which raises the asset threshold for insured depository institutions that are eligible for an 18-month examination cycle from $500 million to $1 billion. As a result of raising the threshold, eligible institutions will be subject to fewer safety and soundness and Bank Secrecy Act exams. The agencies are also exploring potential options for alleviating some burdens of appraisal requirements and are actively considering proposals to simplify regulatory capital requirements for community banks. In addition, the banking agencies, under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, recently issued a proposal for a new and streamlined Call Report for community banks. The proposal would eliminate certain data items and reduce the reporting frequency of many other data items. As a result, banks with less than $1 billion in total assets would submit a Call Report with about 40 percent fewer data items than the existing Call Report. The proposal incorporates comments the banking agencies received from community banks during several outreach events used to gather information on the challenges faced by community banks in preparing Call Reports. Congress may also wish to consider carving out community banks from two sets of Dodd-Frank Act requirements: the Volcker rule and the incentive compensation limits in section 956. The risks addressed by these statutory provisions are far more significant at larger institutions than they are at community banks. In the event that a community bank engages in practices in either of these areas that raise heightened concerns, we would be able to address these concerns as part of the normal safety-and-soundness supervisory process. While the banking agencies have tailored the Volcker rule and have proposed significant tailoring of incentive compensation rules, community banks and supervisors would benefit from not having to focus on regulatory compliance for matters that are unlikely to pose problems at smaller banks. Current ConditionsHaving reviewed some of the major elements of our regulatory and supervisory programs, let me offer a few brief remarks about the current state of the firms we regulate. In response to regulatory and supervisory pressures, the financial condition of the U.S. G-SIBs has strengthened considerably since the crisis. Common equity capital at the eight U.S. G-SIBs alone has more than doubled since 2008, representing an increase to almost $800 billion. Moreover, these firms generally have developed much more stable funding positions. The largest banking organizations have increased their holdings of high-quality liquid assets by over $1 trillion over the past five years, at the same time as they have substantially reduced their reliance on run-prone sources of funding. Reducing run-risk is a central goal of post-crisis regulation and supervision. Our examinations have found large and regional banks to be well capitalized. Both large and regional banking organizations have shown improved profitability since the depths of the financial crisis, although these banks have also faced challenges in recent years because of weak growth in interest and noninterest income. Both large and regional institutions have seen robust growth in commercial and industrial lending, which supports sustainable job creation. Finally, community banks are significantly healthier. More than 95 percent are now profitable, and capital lost during the crisis has been largely replenished. Loan growth is picking up, and problem loans are now at levels last seen early in the financial crisis. ConclusionIn conclusion, our post-crisis approach to regulation and supervision is both forward-looking and tailored to the level of risk that firms pose to financial stability and the broader economy. Standards for the largest, most complex banking organizations are now significantly more stringent than standards for small and medium-sized banks, which is appropriate given the impact that the failure or distress of those firms could have on the economy. As I have discussed, we anticipate taking additional actions in the near term to further tailor our regulatory and supervisory framework. Yet even as we finalize the major elements of post-crisis reform, our work is not complete. We must carefully monitor the impact of the regulatory changes we have made and remain vigilant regarding the potential emergence of new risks to financial stability. We must stand ready to adjust our regulatory approach where changes are warranted. The work we do to ensure the financial system remains strong and stable is designed to protect and support the real economy that sustains the businesses and jobs on which American households rely. 1. The firms currently in the LISCC portfolio are American International Group, Inc.; Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; Barclays PLC; Citigroup Inc.; Credit Suisse Group AG; Deutsche Bank AG; The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; Morgan Stanley; Prudential Financial, Inc.; State Street Corporation; UBS AG; and Wells Fargo & Company. Further information on the LISCC is available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm.Return to text