Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencyFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The three federal banking regulatory agencies today approved an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) inviting comment on a set of potential enhanced cybersecurity risk-management and resilience standards that would apply to large and interconnected entities under their supervision. The standards would apply as well to services provided by third parties to these firms. The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency are considering applying the enhanced standards to depository institutions and depository institution holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more, the U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations with total U.S. assets of $50 billion or more, and financial market infrastructure companies and nonbank financial companies supervised by the Board. The proposed enhanced standards would not apply to community banks. The standards would be tiered, with an additional set of higher standards for systems that provide key functionality to the financial sector. For these sector-critical systems, the agencies are considering requiring firms to substantially mitigate the risk of a disruption or failure due to a cyber event. To benefit from comments on all aspects of the potential enhanced standards, the agencies are issuing an ANPR before developing a more detailed proposal for consideration. The agencies are also asking for comments on potential methodologies that could be used to quantify cyber risk and to compare cyber risk at entities across the financial sector. Comments on the ANPR are due January 17, 2017. Board Votes
Federal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Reserve Board of GovernorsNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Four federal financial institution regulatory agencies issued an exception from the appraisal requirements for real estate-related financial transactions in the parishes declared to be in a major disaster area due to the severe storms and flooding in Louisiana. The agencies will not require financial institutions to obtain appraisals for affected transactions for the time period specified if certain conditions are met. The exception is being made under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act and its implementing regulations. The value of the property is required to support the institution's decision to enter into the transaction, and financial institutions that rely on the appraisal exception should maintain sufficient valuation information estimating the collateral's value that supports their credit decision in the loan file. The agencies will monitor institutions' use of the appraisal exception to ensure real estate-related transactions are being originated in a manner consistent with safe and sound banking practices. The exception expires on December 31, 2017.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) on Tuesday posted the public portions of the required "targeted submissions" for the eight systemically important, domestic banking institutions. To foster transparency, the agencies required all of the firms to file a public portion of their targeted submissions. In April of this year, the agencies jointly determined that each of the 2015 resolution plans of Bank of America, Bank of New York Mellon, JPMorgan Chase, State Street, and Wells Fargo was not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, the standard established in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. As such, the agencies issued joint letters to these firms detailing the deficiencies in their plans and the actions the firms must take to address them. The agencies required these five firms to remediate their deficiencies by October 1, 2016, and file a targeted submission to the agencies detailing the remediation. If a firm has not remediated the identified deficiencies, it may be subject to more stringent prudential requirements. The agencies jointly identified weaknesses in the 2015 resolution plans of Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and Citigroup that the firms must address in their 2017 plans. These firms were also required to file a targeted submission by October 1, 2016, detailing the efforts taken to improve their weaknesses. The Dodd-Frank Act requires bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) for supervision by the Federal Reserve to periodically submit resolution plans to the Federal Reserve and FDIC. Each plan must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. Under the authority granted to the agencies in Section 165(d), if any of the five firms that received a joint notice of deficiencies did not adequately remediate those deficiencies, the agencies, acting jointly, may impose more stringent prudential requirements on the firm until it remediates them. The prudential requirements may include more stringent capital, leverage, or liquidity requirements, as well as restrictions on growth, activities, or operations of the firm, or its subsidiaries. If, following a two-year period beginning on the date of the imposition of such requirements, a firm still has failed to adequately remediate any deficiencies, the agencies, in consultation with the FSOC, may jointly require the firm to divest certain assets or operations to facilitate an orderly resolution of the firm in bankruptcy. The agencies are posting the public portions of the targeted submissions, as provided by the firms, on the FDIC and Board websites. Neither the confidential nor the public portions of the resolution plans have yet been reviewed by the agencies, which will now be initiating their process for review. Resolution Plans Search
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Five federal regulatory agencies are requesting comment on a joint notice of proposed rulemaking to implement provisions of the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act (Biggert-Waters Act) that require regulated lending institutions to accept certain private flood insurance policies in addition to policies made available by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The federal flood insurance statutes require regulated lending institutions to ensure that flood insurance is purchased in connection with loans secured by improved real property located in areas having special flood hazards. Under the Biggert-Waters Act, regulated lenders must accept, in satisfaction of this mandatory purchase requirement, policies issued by private insurers that satisfy the criteria specified in the Biggert-Waters Act. The proposed rule includes provisions to assist lending institutions in identifying private flood insurance policies they would be required to accept. The proposal also would clarify that lenders retain their discretion to accept private flood insurance policies that do not meet the criteria for mandatory acceptance, provided certain conditions are met. Furthermore, the proposed rule would establish criteria to apply in determining that coverage offered by a mutual aid society provides the type of policy or coverage that qualifies as "flood insurance" for purposes of the federal flood insurance laws. The agencies previously issued a proposal addressing private flood insurance (78 FR 65107). Based on comments received in response to that proposal, the agencies have decided to issue this second proposal for additional public comment. The proposal is being issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Farm Credit Administration, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Comments are due 60 days from date of publication in theFederal Register.
Federal Reserve Board Chair Janet Yellen will host a town hall meeting with educators from across the country on January 12, 2017. The educators will join the Chair at 7 p.m. EST in the Board Room of the Board's main building in Washington, D.C. and participate via webcast from Federal Reserve Bank offices throughout the country. The Chair will speak briefly about the mission and responsibilities of the Federal Reserve System and then respond to questions from both in-person and webcast participants. The event will be webcast live atwww.federalreserve.govandYouTube. Twitter and Facebook users can follow the Federal Reserve Board's feed,@FederalReserve, and athttps://www.facebook.com/federalreserveand may join the discussion about the event by using the hashtag: #FedTownHall. After the event, the Board will post a transcript and video recording at www.federalreserve.gov. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Conversation with the Chair: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting
Governor Lael Brainard At the Institute of International Finance Annual Meeting Panel on Blockchain, Washington, D.C. We recognize the potential of distributed ledger technology, or blockchain, to transform the way financial market participants transfer, store, and maintain ownership records of digitized assets. The genuinely innovative aspect of distributed ledger technology combines a number of core elements that can be used to support the transfer process and distributed recordkeeping for digital assets and digital representations of assets. These elements include peer-to-peer networking and distributed data records, which provide broadly shared access to a single ledger across participants in the system, so that all participants maintain a shared, accurate history of all transactions in the system. In addition, cryptography provides a secure way to initiate a valid transaction as well as to securely transmit and store data. And consensus algorithms provide a process for transactions to be confirmed and added to the single ledger, which is an important feature when more than one participant has permission to propose updates to the ledger. We are paying close attention to distributed ledger technology, or blockchain, recognizing this may represent the most significant development in many years in payments, clearing, and settlement.1 The Federal Reserve Board has established a working group that is engaged in a 360-degree analysis of financial innovation across the broad range of our responsibilities, drawing on engagement with industry stakeholders and on expertise from across the Federal Reserve System, including in supervision, consumer protection, financial stability and information technology. One important area of oversight is the payments system, where technology changes are viewed through the prism of our responsibilities for promoting the safety and efficiency of the payments and settlements systems; supervising financial institutions engaged in payments, clearing and settlement; and safeguarding financial stability. We want to maintain public confidence in the payments system, while supporting innovation that provides broadly shared benefits to the public over time, including through the reduction of unnecessary frictions, costs, and delays. Illustrative Use CasesLet me briefly mention a few of the use cases that we have explored in our discussions with industry stakeholders in order to illustrate the potential of distributed ledger technologies to improve payments, clearing, and settlement, as well as the considerations that are important to us in our assessment of benefits and risks. In cross-border payments and trade finance, significantly faster processing and reduced costs relative to the long and opaque intermediation chains associated with current methods of correspondent banking are promising potential benefits of the technology. Reducing intermediation steps in cross-border payments may help decrease time, costs, and counterparty risks and may materially diminish opacity, for instance by enabling small businesses or households remitting payments across borders to see the associated transfer costs and processing times up front. In trade finance, where document-intensive processes are not fully automated, distributed ledger technology may be able to reduce significant costs and speed up processing associated with issuing and tracking letters of credit and associated documents. To see the full potential of this technology realized for cross-border payments, it will be important to identify and track identities associated with the transactions, which in itself may be facilitated by the use of distributed ledgers, depending on their design. In securities markets, the industry is exploring activities ranging from the issuance of securities on a distributed ledger, to the clearing and settlement of trades, to tracking and administering corporate actions. For securities clearing and settlement in particular, the potential shift to one master record shared "simultaneously" among users of a distributed ledger-based system could be compelling. Sharing one immutable record may have the potential to reduce or even eliminate the need for the reconciliation of multiple records linked to a single trade among and between dealers and other organizations. In concept, such technology could lead to greater transparency, reduced costs, and faster settlement. Likewise, distributed ledgers may improve collateral management by improving the tracking of ownership and transactions. Nonetheless, as is frequently true in the complex arena of payments, clearing, and settlement, we can also expect that practical details covering a host of technical, business, and market issues will have an important role in determining how new technologies ultimately perform. For commodities and derivatives, there are projects to streamline some of the more antiquated corners of the markets. In markets that are heavily paper-based and lack any central means for coordination, distributed ledger technology could potentially be leveraged to provide coordination that facilitates exchange, clearing, and settlement of obligations. A related development is the potential coupling of distributed ledger protocols with self-execution and possibly self-enforcement of contractual clauses, using so-called "smart contracts." To take a familiar example, for a corporate bond with a specified par value, tenor, and coupon payment stream, a smart contract would automatically execute payments on the specified schedule to the assigned owner over the life of the bond. Although the idea of automating certain aspects of contracts is not new, and banks do some of this today, the potential introduction of smart contracts does raise several issues for consideration. For example, what is the legal status of a smart contract, which is written in code? Would consumers and businesses rely on smart contracts to perform certain services traditionally done by their banks or other intermediaries? Could the widespread automated interaction of multiple counterparties lead to any unwanted dynamics for financial markets? These and other considerations will be important factors in determining the extent of the application of smart contracts. Regardless of the application, much of the industry is at a "proof of concept" stage of development. These proofs of concept are often simple, experimental uses of the technology on a small scale that help stakeholders understand the potential and limitations of the technology for a specific purpose, which in turn typically lead to refinements and more developed proofs of concept. As such, many potential applications are in their infancy, and the industry may still be several years away from an application that is ready to be fully implemented. Even so, the industry seems to be making announcements daily on new proofs of concept and progress that may lead to pilots, so that timeline could accelerate. In some cases, there have been announcements the technology will be used within the next year or two in actual production environments. The initial relatively simple proofs of concept must be followed by much more complex demonstrations in real-world situations before these technologies can be safely deployed in today's highly interconnected, synchronized, and far-reaching financial markets. Although many private and inward-facing projects are being explored, the industry has also recognized the need to collaborate at early stages of development. An important positive development is that industry participants are actively engaging with each other to look for common approaches. Some groups are creating standards that facilitate common platforms to enable greater interoperability of often proprietary applications that are built on them and interoperate through application program interfaces, or APIs. In coming months and years, innovators, investors, and financial practitioners will no doubt make important strides in addressing key challenges such as adopting common standards, achieving interoperability between and among legacy systems and evolving distributed ledgers, improving scalability and computational throughput, and improving cryptographic security. These are positive developments that we will monitor closely. Managing RisksAll of this activity demonstrates that we are in a very innovative period. The industry is eager to get on with adopting the various possibilities that distributed ledger technology may bring. However, established players and, increasingly, new entrants understand that there are important guardrails that have been carefully developed over many years in the arena of payments, clearing, and settlement. The safety and soundness of financial institutions, safety and efficiency of the payment system, and broader financial stability are critical to a healthy financial environment that fosters innovation with broad public benefits over the long run. We expect the private sector to bear important responsibility for developing and deploying new financial technologies in a safe and sound manner, even as we all seek an innovative and efficient payment system over the long run. The deployment of any new financial technology must be undertaken with a thorough understanding and management of risks. Like many new financial technologies, distributed ledgers could ameliorate or exacerbate traditional financial risks. What matters to us as policymakers and regulators is not only whether the migration to a new technological platform increases or reduces risks, but also whether risks are rendered more or less opaque, and how they are distributed among and between financial intermediaries and end users. In the payments, clearing, and settlement arena, some important risk areas for consideration include settlement, operations, and cybersecurity, as well as money laundering and terrorist financing. In managing risks, important considerations include system resiliency and governance as well as the role of licensing in ensuring proper oversight. In securities settlements, for example, a difference in timing between the delivery of securities and the delivery of funds introduces settlement risk between counterparties and other institutions involved in this process. To the extent that distributed ledger technologies are designed to supplant the traditional reliance on trusted intermediaries to ensure settlement, they will need to reliably demonstrate their ability to mitigate or even eliminate settlement risk, especially in cases where the delivery of the securities and the associated payment take place on different platforms. Traditional payment, clearing, and settlement are subject to operational risk, and it is critically important that new technologies operate reliably, securely, and with integrity. The daily operation of markets and their clearing and settlement functions are built on trust and confidence. Market participants trust that clearing and settlement functions and institutions will work properly every day. Confidence has built over time that when market participants trade, accurate and timely clearing and settlement will follow. Thus, robust security is an important element of any system. The distributed nature of this new technology, combined with the fact that many connected participants can update the shared ledger, means that end-point security is another critical component of any successful implementation of the technology. Adverse actors that can take over a participant's access to the ledger remains a key security concern, as thefts of cryptographic keys in Bitcoin continue to demonstrate. Thus, advances in cryptography will remain a key priority to enable widespread adoption of distributed ledger technologies, along with systems for securing private keys, the management of access to private keys, and differentiated permissions for participants in the system to read and write to the ledger. Recent episodes have illustrated the importance of having protocols agreed at the outset to determine whether and under what circumstances to reverse transactions once they have been recorded in a distributed master ledger. Finally, it will be important that users and administrators of distributed ledger technologies can meet their responsibilities to combat money laundering, terrorist financing, and other key law enforcement concerns. Some of the new technologies would potentially allow authorized access to certain data records in a much more efficient manner than has previously been possible. For example, distributed ledgers could be developed to collect personally identifiable information and country identifiers that enable banks to identify and report on suspicious activity. It will be important that these new technological developments and their implementation perform in a safe and sound manner that is transparent and satisfies regulatory requirements. While prevention will remain the preferred approach, realistically, resiliency and recovery will also need to be high-priorities. Indeed, many firms have suggested that the distributed data storage concept has the potential to increase the level of resiliency and data integrity. The basic idea is it should be harder to corrupt multiple copies of the same data simultaneously such that digital ledgers could reduce the vulnerability associated with a single point of failure. We must press firms and experts to identify the strengths and vulnerabilities of this concept, even as we all look for ways to make databases more secure and resilient. In an interesting development, some financial institutions have also begun to consider using distributed ledgers to back up critical databases and enable quick recovery from potentially virulent cyberattacks. We will be interested in whether such techniques can make new contributions to cybersecurity. Overall, the public needs to have confidence that any system employing distributed ledgers will operate properly, particularly in stressed conditions, and know that when adverse scenarios do occur, there will be robust management and governance to respond effectively. Recent events, such as thefts from accounts on distributed ledger platforms, highlight the challenge that distributed ledgers may have when adverse scenarios occur and there is uncertainty around what an appropriate response would be. Such uncertainty around management and governance can raise doubts about the integrity of a system employing distributed ledgers. Traditionally, financial regulators in the United States have been given licensing authority as a key way of ensuring that responsibility for managing risks is transparently assigned with appropriate oversight. The development of new business models associated with evolving financial technologies has raised questions about the applicability of existing licenses and their adequacy to new business models. For instance, the Monetary Authority of Singapore recently issued a consultation paper that proposes an activity-based payments framework as a way to address the introduction of non-traditional payment providers.2The United States has seen several noteworthy recent developments, including the New York State Department of Financial Services' BitLicense, a distributed ledger company, securing Federal Reserve Bank of New York approval for participation in the National Settlement Service, and, most recently, discussion by the OCC of a limited-purpose charter. Ongoing EngagementBecause of the notable potential of distributed ledger technology, financial authorities, both domestic and international, will follow these developments with keen interest. At the Federal Reserve, we expect to publish a research paper later this year that summarizes some of the key findings from our industry engagement so far. Going forward, we will continue to deepen our engagement with a range of financial institutions, technologists, multi-stakeholder consortia, and academic experts to refine our understanding of the new technologies, along with their possibilities and limitations, with a particular focus on our responsibilities for the payments system, as well as our oversight of financial market intermediaries. We will also continue to discuss these issues with other central banks and authorities around the world. We will work together to foster socially beneficial innovation, while insisting that risks are thoroughly understood, managed, and controlled. I am grateful to David Mills for his assistance in preparing this text. 1.Seehttp://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20160414a.htm. Also, see the forthcoming Feds working paper, "Staff Study on Distributed Ledger Technology in Payments, Clearing, and Settlement," 2016.Return to text 2.Seewww.mas.gov.sg/~/media/resource/publications/consult_papers/2016/Proposed Activity Based Payments Framework and Establishment of a National Payments Council.pdf.Return to text
On October 20, 2016, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on October 20, 2016, and will mature on October 27, 2016. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the annual indexing of two amounts used in determining reserve requirements of depository institutions. These amounts are the reserve requirement exemption amount and the low reserve tranche. All depository institutions must hold a percentage of certain types of deposits as reserves in the form of vault cash, as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or as a deposit in a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). Depository institutions must also regularly submit reports of their deposits and other reservable liabilities. For net transaction accounts in 2017, the first $15.5 million, up from $15.2 million in 2016, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $15.5 million up to and including $115.1 million, up from $110.2 million in 2016. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts in excess of $115.1 million. These annual adjustments, known as the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment and the low reserve tranche adjustment, are based on growth in total reservable liabilities and net transaction accounts, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 2015 and June 30, 2016. The new low reserve tranche and reserve requirement exemption amount will apply to the 14-day reserve maintenance period that begins January 19, 2017. For depository institutions that report deposit data weekly, this maintenance period corresponds to the 14-day computation period that begins Tuesday, December 20, 2016. For depository institutions that report deposit data quarterly, this maintenance period corresponds to the seven-day computation period that begins Tuesday, December 20, 2016. The Board also announced changes in two other amounts, the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit, that are used to determine the frequency with which depository institutions must submit deposit reports. The attachedFederal Registernotice contains a description of the new boundaries for deposit reporting that will be effective in 2017. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by BNC Bancorp to merge with High Point Bank Corporation and thereby indirectly acquire High Point Bank and Trust Company, all of High Point, North Carolina. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by River Holding Company, Stoddard, Wisconsin, to merge with Sparta Union Bancshares, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary bank, Union National Bank & Trust Company, both of Sparta, Wisconsin. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Wintrust Financial Corporation, Rosemont, Illinois, to merge with First Community Financial Corporation and thereby indirectly acquire First Community Bank, both of Elgin, Illinois. The Board also approved the applications, under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act, by St. Charles Bank & Trust Company, St. Charles, Illinois, to merge with First Community Bank and to establish and operate a branch at the main office and at a branch of First Community Bank. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Monday it has voted to affirm the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) at the current level of 0 percent. In making this determination, the Board followed the framework detailed in the Board's policy statement for setting the CCyB for private-sector credit exposures located in the United States. The buffer is a macroprudential tool that can be used to increase the resilience of the financial system by raising capital requirements on internationally active banking organizations when there is an elevated risk of above-normal future losses and when the banking organizations for which capital requirements would be raised by the buffer are exposed to or are contributing to this elevated risk--either directly or indirectly. The CCyB would then be available to help banking organizations absorb higher losses associated with declining credit conditions. Implementation of the buffer could also help moderate fluctuations in the supply of credit. The Board consulted with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in making this determination. Should the Board decide to modify the CCyB amount in the future, banking organizations would have 12 months before the increase became effective, unless the Board establishes an earlier effective date. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced Friday that it plans to collect data from banks for secondary market transactions in U.S. Treasury securities and will enter into negotiations with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) to potentially act as the Board's collection agent for the data. The Board will seek public comment on its proposal. The Board's data collection would complement the work of the Securities and Exchange Commission, which recently approved a rule change by FINRA to require its broker-dealer members to report secondary market transactions in U.S. Treasury securities. "The collection of this data would allow the U.S. official sector a more complete view of Treasury securities trading in the secondary market," said Federal Reserve Governor Jerome Powell. "Enhanced data collection was a key recommendation by the Inter Agency Working Group's Joint Staff Report on the market events of October 15, 2014." For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Capital Commerce Bancorp, Inc., Milwaukee, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated December 31, 2010Terminated September 28, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: SouthFirst Bancshares, Inc., Sylacauga, AlabamaWritten Agreement dated September 20, 2012Terminated October 19, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the approval of fee schedules, effective January 3, 2017, for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to depository institutions (priced services). The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 100 percent of their priced services costs in 2017. The Reserve Banks expect to fully recover actual and imputed expenses, including profit that would have been earned if a private business firm provided the services. Overall, the Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 3.2 percent average price increase. The Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 5.3 percent average price increase for FedACH®customers. The FedACH price increase is in response to increasing operating costs associated with an ongoing technology upgrade. The Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 3.3 percent average price increase for Fedwire®Funds customers. The Reserve Banks also estimate that the price changes will result in an 18 percent average price increase for Fedwire Securities Service customers. The Fedwire Securities price increase reflects an increase in operating costs associated with new initiatives to improve resiliency and operational functionality and an expected decrease in volume. The fees will remain unchanged for the Reserve Banks' National Settlement Service and check service. The check service announced earlier this year a restructuring of its product and pricing, effective on January 3, to reflect today's electronic check-processing environment. The Reserve Banks estimate that the previously-announced price changes will result in a 3.5 percent average price decrease for check customers. Lastly, the Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in an 8.1 percent average price increase for FedLine®customers. The 2017 fee schedule for each of the priced services is available on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial services website atFRBservices.org. The Board approved the 2017 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) of $16.6 million for Reserve Bank priced services. The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and profit that would have been earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve establish fees to recover the costs of providing priced services, including imputed costs, over the long run, to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector service providers. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday took action to bar two former foreign exchange (FX) traders of HSBC from employment in the banking industry. Mark Johnson and Stuart Scott, former senior HSBC managers, were recently indicted for criminal wire fraud in connection with their trading activities at HSBC Bank plc, a subsidiary of HSBC which is a U.S. bank holding company. Johnson was a managing director and the global head of FX cash trading. In that role, Johnson supervised FX trading desks for HSBC. Scott reported to Johnson and was head of FX trading for Europe, the Middle East, and Africa and was also employed by HSBC Bank plc. According to the indictment, Johnson and Scott made multiple misrepresentations to an FX client of HSBC in connection with a large pre-arranged currency transaction. The indictment also alleges Johnson and Scott engaged in conduct to trade to the detriment of HSBC's client and for their own (and HSBC's) benefit. In issuing today's enforcement actions, the Board found that given the indictment, Johnson's and Scott's continued participation in any depository institution may threaten to impair public confidence in that institution. The prohibition is effective until the criminal charges against Johnson and Scott are resolved or disposed of. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve plans to continue its previously announced periodic testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) with one operation in October. These operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve plans to conduct a similar routine TDF test operation each quarter in 2016. The schedule and terms for future test operations will be announced at later dates. On October 20, 2016, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its TDF. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $5,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. EDT to 12:30 p.m. EDT, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. EDT and 12:00 p.m. EDT. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttp://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The 160-member task force convened by the Federal Reserve to advance the safety, security and resiliency of the national payment system is asking the industry for comments on its efforts to enhance payment identity management, data protection, and information sharing related to payments risk and fraud. The Secure Payments Task Force has been working across payment industry segments to define challenges and develop potential solutions. Anonline surveyhas been created to gather comments on how the task force is addressing challenges related to the three focus areas. The goal is to help ensure that the solutions being pursued will meet industry needs. The survey will be open for comment through Tuesday, November 8. "Tackling today's security challenges will require the commitment of all payment system participants," said Gordon Werkema, who, as Payments Strategy Director for the Federal Reserve System, is overseeing initiatives to make the national payment system faster and more secure. "The Secure Payments Task Force is particularly interested in understanding any barriers that may exist to implementing the planned solutions." The work groups created by the Secure Payments Task Force to focus on the three priority areas are led by payment industry experts: For each of these focus areas, work group members have been meeting to document the current environment, the attributes of a more effective environment, the desired outcomes in each area, and the barriers to implementation of recommended solutions. A team of standards experts was established to support the work groups. Todd Aadland, the Federal Reserve's Payments Security Strategy Leader, chairs the Secure Payments Task Force and stressed the importance of industry participants sharing their opinions as the effort moves forward. "Payment security issues such as data breaches and identity theft affect everyone," Aadland said. "We encourage people who are knowledgeable about or interested in payment security to take the survey and share their thoughts." More information about the survey and the work of the Secure Payments Task Force is available atwww.FedPaymentsImprovement.org. The Secure Payments Task Force is one of two Federal Reserve-convened task forces working to improve the payment system. The other is focused on identifying approaches for implementing safe and ubiquitous faster payment capabilities in the United States. Information about the Faster Payments Task Force can also be found atwww.FedPaymentsImprovement.org. Media Contacts:Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago:Doug Tillett312-322-5201 (O)312-493-8088 (M)[email protected] Federal Reserve Board:Susan Stawick(202) 452-2955[email protected] NOTE TO MEDIA:The following Federal Reserve senior officials will be available for interviews during the Money 20/20 Conference in Las Vegas, October 25, 26. Federal Reserve Booth: Exhibit Hall # 2946Federal Reserve Meeting Room: Exhibit Hall # 3638
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the 40th Annual Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York I would like to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for establishing this seminar 40 years ago and for maintaining it since then. This event has always been a useful forum for sharing knowledge and experiences among the world's central banks, something that has become especially valuable in the years since the Great Recession. This seminar has also fostered a stronger sense of community among central banks, whose interactions undergird the global financial system.1 I will talk today about an issue that currently confronts almost all central banks: historically low interest rates. Indeed--as shown infigure 1--in an increasing number of countries, they have even dipped below zero. Ultralow interest rates have not been limited to the short end of the yield curve, which is most directly affected by monetary policy.Figure 2shows that longer-term interest rates--which embed market participants' expectations of where real short-term rates and inflation are likely to be in the future--have also been exceptionally low. The low interest rate environment presents us with four key questions: (1) Are ultralow interest rates part of the so-called new normal for the global economy, or are they mostly transitory? (2) How concerned should we be, if at all, about the current interest rate environment? (3) What determines the level of interest rates over the longer run? (4) What can policymakers do about chronically low interest rates? The fact that interest rates have remained so low in the United States over the past eight years--well into the recovery from the severe strains of the Great Recession--suggests that ultralow rates may reflect more than just cyclical forces. Here is a simple observation that illustrates this point: The unemployment rate in the United States has dropped from a peak of 10 percent in the aftermath of the Great Recession to just 4.9 percent today. Yet, over the same period, yields on nominal and inflation-indexed 10-year U.S. Treasury securities have fallen around 180 basis points and 140 basis points, respectively. This observation suggests that perhaps structural factors are pulling down what economists often refer to as the longer-run equilibrium ornatural rate of interest. Knut Wicksell, the great Swedish economist, emphasized the concept of an equilibrium level of interest rates in his influential work. In his 1898 book,Interest and Prices,he wrote that "there is a certain level of the average rate of interest which is such that the general level of prices has no tendency to move either upwards or downwards."2In modern language, this level of the interest rate is usually referred to as the natural rate of interest. Applying Wicksell's insights to the circumstances we face today, the fact that both inflation and interest rates have remained very low over the past several years suggests that our current interest rate environment may well reflect, at least in part, a very low level of the natural rate of interest. If we knew the natural rate precisely, conducting monetary policy would be relatively straightforward. Central bankers could easily assess their policy stance--which could be measured, for instance, as the difference between actual and natural interest rates--and adjust it as needed. If only life were that simple! In reality, given that the natural rate of interest cannot be directly observed, Wicksell proposed that the central bank follow a simple interest rate rule. Given that he believed that the sole function of monetary policy should be to pursue price stability, a modern interpretation of Wicksell's rule would suggest that the central bank should raise the interest rate if inflation is above target and reduce the interest rate if inflation is below target.3When inflation stabilized, the central bank would know that the interest rate was at its natural level. In principle, this method could be extended to a reaction function that included both an inflation and a maximum-employment objective for the central bank, as is the case for the Federal Reserve. But there is another way of measuring the natural rate of interest. Instead of backing out the value of the natural rate of interest by following Wicksell's rule-based approach, one could try to estimate the natural rate directly with the help of an economic model. One prominent example of this approach is the work of my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams.4 Laubach and Williams estimated the natural rate in a small-scale Keynesian model where inflation responds to the gap between actual and potential gross domestic product (GDP) and economic activity is determined by a simple equation that links deviations of actual from potential GDP to the gap between actual and natural interest rates. In their model, as in Wicksell's framework, inflation generally will rise if the interest rate is low relative to the natural rate and fall if the interest rate is high relative to the natural rate. Their empirical results point to the growth rate of potential GDP as an important determinant of the natural rate of interest, a topic that I will discuss shortly. In a recent update to their work--cowritten with another Federal Reserve colleague, Kathryn Holston--Laubach and Williams report that, for the United States as well as other advanced economies, estimates of the natural rate have fallen since the late 1990s, with particularly large declines following the global financial crisis.5Their results--summarized infigure 3--support the informal assessment that chronically low interest rates could well be, at least in part, the result of very low natural interest rates and not just a consequence of the cyclical state of the economy. Now, to our second big question: Having concluded that the natural rate appears to have fallen, how concerned should we be, if at all? We should be concerned because a low natural interest rate can have major economic significance. Let me start elaborating on this point by making two simple observations: First, nothing dictates that the natural rate of interest should be positive; indeed, the natural rate has no effective lower bound. Second, there is an effective lower bound for nominal interest rates (and, consequently, for the actual real rate). Why? Because currency is a government obligation that pays a nominal interest rate of zero and, instead of buying government bills or bonds at a negative interest rate, one can always hold currency.6 To see why these two simple observations can be so consequential, we need only go back to the work of another great economist from the past. In John Maynard Keynes'sGeneral Theory, this contrast between equilibrium and actual interest rates was at the heart of the so-called liquidity trap, a situation where the equilibrium interest rate is so low that even a zero (or slightly negative) nominal interest rate is not low enough to stimulate economic activity.7Keynes's bottom line was that, when the economy falls into the liquidity trap, traditional monetary policy loses its effectiveness and fiscal policy has to be used for countercyclical stabilization. And here lies the first reason why we should be concerned about chronically low interest rates: When the equilibrium interest rate is very low, the economy is more likely to fall into the liquidity trap; it becomes more vulnerable to adverse shocks that might render conventional monetary policy ineffective. Of course, as we have all learned over the past several years, unconventional monetary policy tools developed and used since the Great Recession--such as large-scale asset purchases and extended forward guidance--have significantly mitigated concerns about the liquidity trap.8Nonetheless, the question of whether unconventional tools are perfect substitutes for cutting short-term interest rates remains a topic of active research.9 Let me briefly mention a second reason for worrying about ultralow interest rates: The transition to a world with a very low natural rate of interest may hurt financial stability by causing investors to reach for yield, and some financial institutions will find it harder to be profitable. On the whole, however, the evidence to date does not point to notable risks to financial stability stemming from ultralow interest rates. For instance, the financial sector has appeared resilient to recent episodes of market stress, supported by strong capital and liquidity positions. Last but definitely not least, a very low natural rate of interest is worrisome because it may reflect more deep-seated economic problems. For instance, economic theory--along with some empirical evidence--suggests that real interest rates and the growth of real GDP tend to move together over the long run.10Thus, a decline in longer-run equilibrium real rates--as suggested by my observations today and by the careful work of Laubach and Williams--could be yet another indication that the economy's growth potential may have dimmed considerably. This deeply concerning conjecture--which suggests that the slowdown of productivity growth that we have experienced in recent years could be long lasting--has played an important role in Larry Summers's revival of the "secular stagnation" hypothesis.11 Given what a fall in the natural rate of interest might mean for economic performance for years to come, we should reflect on the forces that may have caused that decline--my third question--and on what, if anything, can be done to reverse them--my fourth and last question. Ultimately, the level of the natural interest rate reflects businesses', households', and governments' saving and investment decisions over the medium to longer run. Indeed, the saving-investment channel provides a useful framework for thinking about the relationship between the natural rate and the growth rate of potential GDP. For instance, a lasting slowing in the pace of technological innovation--a key determinant of potential growth--may result in fewer profitable opportunities for businesses, which could dampen their propensity to invest in physical capital.12At the same time, households might see the slower pace of technological innovation as reducing their future income prospects, which could increase their propensity to save. If persistent, this slowing in the growth rate of potential GDP--and the resulting combination of lower investment and higher saving propensities--would put downward pressure on the natural rate of interest. More generally, any persistent factors that affect saving and investment decisions will also affect the natural rate. Recent studies point to trends that may have had a sizable and lasting effect on the balance between saving and investment at the macro level.13Some of these trends may have worked more directly on the demand for investment goods, whereas others may have had a more direct bearing on saving. Potential factors that others have mentioned as having contributed to reduced investment in physical capital include heightened economic uncertainty in the aftermath of the Great Recession and the lower physical capital needs of many of today's growing firms, particularly information technology firms.14On the saving side, some researchers have noted that high saving rates in some emerging market countries, combined with a lack of suitable domestic investment opportunities in those countries, may have put downward pressure on interest rates in advanced economies.15Others have raised the possibility that the trauma associated with the Great Recession may have contributed to a persistent increase in precautionary saving and greater demand for safe and liquid assets.16 Thus, both increased saving and reduced investment have potentially driven the sizable decline in the natural rate of interest. If some of the forces behind these shifts prove to be quite persistent, then we could be stuck in a new longer-run equilibrium characterized by sluggish growth and recurrent reliance on unconventional monetary policy. Nonetheless, there is a silver lining. Monetary and fiscal policies could ameliorate some, though not all, of the potential causes of ultralow rates--such as excessive precautionary saving and weak demand for physical capital. In other words, ultralow interest rates are not necessarily here to stay, especially if the right policies are put in place to address at least some of their root causes. What are some of these policies? First, transparent and sound monetary policies here and abroad have helped mitigate downside risks and improve economic conditions, likely boosting confidence in the sustainability of the recovery. Without them, we probably would have had a more pronounced increase in precautionary saving and a deeper decline in fixed investment, which together would have put additional downward pressure on the natural rate of interest and, more important, further damaged the economy's growth potential. But, second, the virtues of sound monetary policy notwithstanding, we must not forget, as former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke reminded us on numerous occasions, that "monetary policy is not a panacea."17For instance, as I mentioned recently elsewhere, policies to boost productivity growth and the longer-run potential of the economy are more likely to be found in effective fiscal and regulatory measures than in central bank actions.18Some combination of improved public infrastructure, better education, more encouragement for private investment, and more-effective regulation is likely to promote faster growth, which would increase the natural rate of interest and, thus, reduce the probability that we may find ourselves again struggling to avoid Keynes's infamous liquidity trap. If the natural rate can be lifted by appropriate policies, the economic near-stagnation that many countries have experienced in recent years may well turn out not to be that secular after all. References Bean, Charles, Christian Broda, Takatoshi Ito, and Randall Kroszner (2015).Low for Long? Causes and Consequences of Persistently Low Interest Rates (PDF), Geneva Reports on the World Economy 17. Geneva and London: International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies and Centre for Economic Policy Research. Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, St. Louis, April 14. -------- (2012). "U.S. Monetary Policy and International Implications," speech delivered at "Challenges of the Global Financial System: Risks and Governance under Evolving Globalization," a seminar sponsored by Bank of Japan-International Monetary Fund, Tokyo, October 14. Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2008). "An Equilibrium Model of 'Global Imbalances' and Low Interest Rates,"American Economic Review,vol. 98 (March), pp. 358-93. Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio (2016). "Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2016-05. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David Lopez-Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effects (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-85. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Fernald, John, and Bing Wang (2015). "The Recent Rise and Fall of Rapid Productivity Growth (PDF)," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February. Fischer, Stanley (2016). "Remarks on the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Program on the World Economy," a conference sponsored by The Aspen Institute, Aspen, Colo., August 21. Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Haldane, Andy (2015). "Stuck (PDF)," speech delivered at Open University, London, June 30. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier). Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Keynes, John Maynard (1936).The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.London: Macmillan. Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2011). "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy," NBER Working Paper Series 17555. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70. Lo, Stephanie, and Kenneth Rogoff (2015). "Secular Stagnation, Debt Overhang and Other Rationales for Sluggish Growth, Six Years On (PDF)," BIS Working Papers 482. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, January. Meaning, Jack, and Feng Zhu (2011). "The Impact of Recent Central Bank Asset Purchase Progammes (PDF),"BIS Quarterly Review, December, pp. 73-83. Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull (2009). "Financial Integration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 117 (June), pp. 371-416. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December. Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73. -------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65. Wicksell, Knut (1936).Interest and Prices(Geldzins und Güterpreise): A Study of the Causes Regulating the Value of Money,trans. R.F. Kahn. London: Macmillan. Woodford, Michael (2012). "Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., Aug. 30-Sept. 1, pp. 185-288, available athttps://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/symposiums/escp-2012. 1.I am grateful to Antulio Bomfim of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. Wicksell'sInterest and Prices, published in German in 1898 asGeldzins und Güterpreiseby Gustav Fischer (Jena), was first published in English in 1936--see Wicksell (1936).Return to text3. Wicksell's proposed rule was based on the pricelevelrather than inflation: "So long as prices remain unaltered the banks' rate of interest is to be raised; and if prices fall, the rate of interest is to be lowered; and the rate of interest is henceforth to be maintained at its new level until a further movement of prices calls for a further change in one direction or the other" (Wicksell, 1936, p. 189).Return to text4. See Laubach and Williams (2003). See also Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016) and Johannsen and Mertens (2016).Return to text5. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming).Return to text6. It has turned out in practice that nominal interest rates can dip (and have dipped) into negative territory. In part, that is because anyone who wants to hold a substantial amount of wealth in currency will have to pay for storage, safeguarding, and insurance of their currency holdings. This fact means that the lower bound on the nominal interest rate is below zero to an extent that depends on the full costs of holding wealth in the form of currency. In addition, investors appear to be willing to pay for the safety and liquidity of certain government securities. Hence, the term we now use in the Federal Reserve is not thezerolower bound on nominal interest rates, but rather theeffectivelower bound, which may well be less than zero. By how much? We do not know, but probably not that far from zero. The lowest nominal policy rate among the central banks with negative rates today can be found in Denmark and Switzerland--currently negative 0.75 percent.Return to text7. See Keynes (1936).Return to text8. See Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015).Return to text9. See, for instance, D'Amico and others (2012); Meaning and Zhu (2011); Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011); and Woodford (2012).Return to text10. See Laubach and Williams (2003).Return to text11. See, for instance, Fernald and Wang (2015), Gordon (2016), and Summers (2014, 2015).Return to text12. A lasting slowing in the pace of technological innovation may also help explain the significant decline in the past 10 years in the growth rate of total factor productivity (TFP), the portion of productivity that is not accounted for by measurable inputs to production--see Fischer (2016). The available data suggest that, compared with reduced business investment, the decline in TFP growth accounts for a larger share of the slowing in the growth rate of potential GDP in recent years and, thus, may also be an important factor behind the decline in the natural rate of interest.Return to text13. See, for instance, Bean and others (2015) and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016).Return to text14. See Summers (2014) and Rachel and Smith (2015).Return to text15. See Bernanke (2005); Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008); and Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2009).Return to text16. See Haldane (2015) and Lo and Rogoff (2015).Return to text17. See, for instance, Bernanke (2012).Return to text18. See Fischer (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version 1.I am grateful to Antulio Bomfim of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Wicksell'sInterest and Prices, published in German in 1898 asGeldzins und Güterpreiseby Gustav Fischer (Jena), was first published in English in 1936--see Wicksell (1936).Return to text 3. Wicksell's proposed rule was based on the pricelevelrather than inflation: "So long as prices remain unaltered the banks' rate of interest is to be raised; and if prices fall, the rate of interest is to be lowered; and the rate of interest is henceforth to be maintained at its new level until a further movement of prices calls for a further change in one direction or the other" (Wicksell, 1936, p. 189).Return to text 4. See Laubach and Williams (2003). See also Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016) and Johannsen and Mertens (2016).Return to text 5. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming).Return to text 6. It has turned out in practice that nominal interest rates can dip (and have dipped) into negative territory. In part, that is because anyone who wants to hold a substantial amount of wealth in currency will have to pay for storage, safeguarding, and insurance of their currency holdings. This fact means that the lower bound on the nominal interest rate is below zero to an extent that depends on the full costs of holding wealth in the form of currency. In addition, investors appear to be willing to pay for the safety and liquidity of certain government securities. Hence, the term we now use in the Federal Reserve is not thezerolower bound on nominal interest rates, but rather theeffectivelower bound, which may well be less than zero. By how much? We do not know, but probably not that far from zero. The lowest nominal policy rate among the central banks with negative rates today can be found in Denmark and Switzerland--currently negative 0.75 percent.Return to text 7. See Keynes (1936).Return to text 8. See Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015).Return to text 9. See, for instance, D'Amico and others (2012); Meaning and Zhu (2011); Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011); and Woodford (2012).Return to text 10. See Laubach and Williams (2003).Return to text 11. See, for instance, Fernald and Wang (2015), Gordon (2016), and Summers (2014, 2015).Return to text 12. A lasting slowing in the pace of technological innovation may also help explain the significant decline in the past 10 years in the growth rate of total factor productivity (TFP), the portion of productivity that is not accounted for by measurable inputs to production--see Fischer (2016). The available data suggest that, compared with reduced business investment, the decline in TFP growth accounts for a larger share of the slowing in the growth rate of potential GDP in recent years and, thus, may also be an important factor behind the decline in the natural rate of interest.Return to text 13. See, for instance, Bean and others (2015) and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016).Return to text 14. See Summers (2014) and Rachel and Smith (2015).Return to text 15. See Bernanke (2005); Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008); and Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2009).Return to text 16. See Haldane (2015) and Lo and Rogoff (2015).Return to text 17. See, for instance, Bernanke (2012).Return to text 18. See Fischer (2016).Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At "The Elusive 'Great' Recovery: Causes and Implications for Future Business Cycle Dynamics" 60th annual economic conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts Watch live:https://www.bostonfed.org/live Extreme economic events have often challenged existing views of how the economy works and exposed shortcomings in the collective knowledge of economists. To give two well-known examples, both the Great Depression and the stagflation of the 1970s motivated new ways of thinking about economic phenomena. More recently, the financial crisis and its aftermath might well prove to be a similar sort of turning point. Today I would like to reflect on some ways in which the events of the past few years have revealed limits in economists' understanding of the economy and suggest several important questions I hope the profession will try to answer. Some of these questions are not new, though recent events have made them more urgent. Appropriately, some are addressed by the papers prepared for this conference. Pursuing answers to these questions is vital to the work of Federal Reserve and other economic policymakers, and the Fed is likewise engaged in ongoing research to seek answers. The Influence of Demand on Aggregate SupplyThe first question I would like to pose concerns the distinction between aggregate supply and aggregate demand:Are there circumstances in which changes in aggregate demand can have an appreciable, persistent effect on aggregate supply? Prior to the Great Recession, most economists would probably have answered this question with a qualified "no." They would have broadly agreed with Robert Solow that economic output over the longer term is primarily driven by supply--the amount of output of goods and services the economy is capable of producing, given its labor and capital resources and existing technologies. Aggregate demand, in contrast, was seen as explaining shorter-term fluctuations around the mostly exogenous supply-determined longer-run trend.1This conclusion deserves to be reconsidered in light of the failure of the level of economic activity to return to its pre-recession trend in most advanced economies. This post-crisis experience suggests that changes in aggregate demand may have an appreciable, persistent effect on aggregate supply--that is, on potential output.2 The idea that persistent shortfalls in aggregate demand could adversely affect the supply side of the economy--an effect commonly referred to as hysteresis--is not new; for example, the possibility was discussed back in the mid-1980s with regard to the performance of European labor markets.3But interest in the topic has increased in light of the persistent slowdown in economic growth seen in many developed economies since the crisis. Several recent studies present cross-country evidence indicating that severe and persistent recessions have historically had these sorts of long-term effects, even for downturns that appear to have resulted largely or entirely from a shock to aggregate demand.4With regard to the U.S. experience, one study estimates that the level of potential output is now 7 percent below what would have been expected based on its pre-crisis trajectory, and it argues that much of this supply-side damage is attributable to several developments that likely occurred as a result of the deep recession and slow recovery.5In particular, the study finds that in the wake of the crisis, the United States experienced a modest reduction in labor supply as a result of reduced immigration and a fall in labor force participation beyond what can be explained by cyclical conditions and demographic factors, as well as a marked slowdown in the estimated trend growth rate of labor productivity. The latter likely reflects an unusually slow pace of business capital accumulation since the crisis and, more conjecturally, the sharp decline in spending on research and development and the very slow pace of new firm formation in recent years.6 If we assume that hysteresis is in fact present to some degree after deep recessions, the natural next question is to ask whether it might be possible to reverse these adverse supply-side effects by temporarily running a "high-pressure economy," with robust aggregate demand and a tight labor market. One can certainly identify plausible ways in which this might occur. Increased business sales would almost certainly raise the productive capacity of the economy by encouraging additional capital spending, especially if accompanied by reduced uncertainty about future prospects. In addition, a tight labor market might draw in potential workers who would otherwise sit on the sidelines and encourage job-to-job transitions that could also lead to more-efficient--and, hence, more-productive--job matches.7Finally, albeit more speculatively, strong demand could potentially yield significant productivity gains by, among other things, prompting higher levels of research and development spending and increasing the incentives to start new, innovative businesses. Hysteresis effects--and the possibility they might be reversed--could have important implications for the conduct of monetary and fiscal policy. For example, hysteresis would seem to make it even more important for policymakers to act quickly and aggressively in response to a recession, because doing so would help to reduce the depth and persistence of the downturn, thereby limiting the supply-side damage that might otherwise ensue. In addition, if strong economic conditions can partially reverse supply-side damage after it has occurred, then policymakers may want to aim at being more accommodative during recoveries than would be called for under the traditional view that supply is largely independent of demand. More research is needed, however, to better understand the influence of movements in aggregate demand on aggregate supply.8From a policy perspective, we of course need to bear in mind that an accommodative monetary stance, if maintained too long, could have costs that exceed the benefits by increasing the risk of financial instability or undermining price stability. More generally, the benefits and potential costs of pursuing such a strategy remain hard to quantify, and other policies might be better suited to address damage to the supply side of the economy. HeterogeneityMy second question asks whether individual differences within broad groups of actors in the economy can influence aggregate economic outcomes--in particular,what effect does such heterogeneity have on aggregate demand? Many macroeconomists work with models where groups of individual actors, such as households or firms, are treated as a single "representative" agent whose behavior stands in for that of the group as a whole. For example, rather than explicitly modeling and then adding up the separate actions of a large number of different households, a macro model might instead assume that the behavior of a single "average" household can describe the aggregate behavior of all households. Prior to the financial crisis, these so-called representative-agent models were the dominant paradigm for analyzing many macroeconomic questions. However, a disaggregated approach seems needed to understand some key aspects of the Great Recession. To give one example, consider the effects of negative housing equity on consumption. Although households typically reduce their spending in response to wealth declines, the many households whose equity positions in their homes were actually drivennegativeby the reduction in house prices may have curtailed their spending even more sharply because of a markedly reduced ability to borrow. Such a development, in turn, would shift the relationship between housing equity (which remained solidly positive in the aggregate) and consumer spending for the economy as a whole. Such a shift in an aggregate relationship would be difficult to understand or predict without using disaggregated data and models. More generally, studying the effects of household and firm heterogeneity might help us better account for the severity of the recession and the slow recovery. At the household level, recent research finds that heterogeneity can amplify the effects of adverse shocks, a result that is largely driven by households with very little net worth that sharply increase their savings in a recession.9At the firm level, there is evidence that financial constraints had a particularly large adverse effect on employment at small firms and the start-up of new firms, factors that may be part of the explanation for the Great Recession's long duration and the subsequent slow recovery.10More generally, if larger firms seeking to expand have better access to credit than smaller ones, overall growth in investment and employment could depend in part on the distribution of sales across different types of businesses. Modeling any of these issues quantitatively will likely require the use of a heterogeneous-agent framework. Economists' understanding of how changes in fiscal and monetary policy affect the economy might also benefit from the recognition that households and firms are heterogeneous. For example, in simple textbook models of the monetary transmission mechanism, central banks operate largely through the effect of real interest rates on consumption and investment. Once heterogeneity is taken into account, other important channels emerge. For example, spending by many households and firms appears to be quite sensitive to changes in labor income, business sales, or the value of collateral that in turn affects their access to credit--conditions that monetary policy affects only indirectly. Studying monetary models with heterogeneous agents more closely could help us shed new light on these aspects of the monetary transmission mechanism. While the economics profession has long been aware that these issues matter, their effects had been incorporated into macro models only to a very limited extent prior to the financial crisis.11I am glad to now see a greater emphasis on the possible macroeconomic consequences of heterogeneity, including in work by economists at the Federal Reserve.12Nevertheless, the various linkages between heterogeneity and aggregate demand are not yet well understood, either empirically or theoretically. More broadly, even though the tools of monetary policy are generally not well suited to achieve distributional objectives, it is important for policymakers to understand and monitor the effects of macroeconomic developments on different groups within society. Financial Linkages to the Real EconomyMy third question concerns a key issue for monetary policy and macroeconomics that is less directly addressed by this conference:How does the financial sector interact with the broader economy? In light of the housing bubble and subsequent events, policymakers clearly need to better understand what kinds of developments contribute to financial crises. What is the relationship between the buildup of excessive leverage and the value of real estate and other types of collateral, and what factors impede or facilitate the deleveraging process that follows? Does the economic fallout from a financial crisis depend on the particulars of the crisis, such as whether it involves widespread damage to household balance sheets? How does the nature and degree of the interconnections between financial firms affect the propagation and amplification of stress through the financial system and overall economy? Finally--and most importantly--what can monetary policy and financial oversight do to reduce the frequency and severity of future crises? Although the scope of these questions extends beyond the themes of this conference, it does include issues that are closely related. Consider the influence of balance sheet conditions and noninterest credit terms on spending and overall activity--an area where it is important to take account of differences across individual households and firms, as I just noted. Research on this topic has, of course, been ongoing for some time, and it has expanded greatly in the wake of the financial crisis.13But I believe we have a lot more to learn about the ways in which changes in underwriting standards and other determinants of credit availability interact with interest rates to affect such things as consumer spending, housing demand and home prices, business investment (especially for small firms), and the formation of new firms.14For example, is the persistent increase in the personal saving rate that we have observed since the collapse of the housing bubble primarily a result of a sustained shift toward more prudent underwriting standards by lenders? Is it something that will ultimately prove transitory once householdsfinish repairing their balance sheets or become more confident about their future prospects for employment and income?15The answer to thislatter question could have significant implications for the longer-run normal, or neutral, level of interest rates and thus for the conduct of monetary policy. Inflation DynamicsMy fourth question goes to the heart of monetary policy:What determines inflation? From my perspective, the standard framework for thinking about inflation dynamics used by central bank economists and others prior to the financial crisis remains conceptually useful today. A simple description of this framework might go something like this:16Inflation is characterized by an underlying trend that has been essentially constant since the mid-1990s; previously, this trend seemed to drift over time, influenced by actual past inflation or other economic conditions. Theory and evidence suggest that this trend is strongly influenced by inflation expectations that, in turn, depend on monetary policy. In particular, the remarkable stability of various measures of expected inflation in recent years presumably represents the fruits of the Federal Reserve's sustained efforts since the early 1980s to bring down and then stabilize inflation at a low level. The anchoring of inflation expectations that has resulted from this policy does not, however, prevent actual inflation from fluctuating from year to year in response to the temporary influence of movements in energy prices and other disturbances. In addition, inflation will tend to run above or below its underlying trend to the extent that resource utilization--which may serve as an indicator of firms' marginal costs--is persistently high or low.17 While this general framework for thinking about the inflation process remains useful, questions about some of its quantitative features have arisen in the wake of the Great Recession and the subsequent slow recovery. For example, the influence of labor market conditions on inflation in recent years seems to be weaker than had been commonly thought prior to the financial crisis. Although inflation fell during the recession, the decline was quite modest given how high unemployment rose; likewise, wages and prices rose comparatively little as the labor market gradually recovered. Whether this reduction in sensitivity was somehow caused by the recession or instead pre-dated it and was merely revealed under extreme conditions is unclear.18Either way, the underlying cause is unknown. Does the reduced sensitivity reflect structural changes, such as globalization or a greater role for intangible capital in production that have reduced the importance of cyclical swings in domestic activity for firms' marginal costs and pricing power? Or does it perhaps reflect the well-documented reluctance--or, alternatively, limited ability--of firms to cut the nominal wages of their employees, which could help to explain the relatively moderate movements in inflation we saw during and after the recession?19 Another gap in our knowledge about the nature of the inflation process concerns expectations. Although many theoretical models suggest that actual inflation should be most closely related toshort-runinflation expectations, as an empirical matter, measures oflong-runexpectations appear to explain the data better.20Yet another unresolved issue concernswhoseexpectations--those of consumers, firms, or investors--are most relevant for wage and price setting, a point on which theory provides no clear-cut guidance. More generally, the precise manner in which expectations influence inflation deserves further study.21 Perhaps most importantly, we need to know more about the manner in which inflation expectations are formed and how monetary policy influences them. Ultimately, both actual and expected inflation are tied to the central bank's inflation target, whether that target is explicit or implicit.22But how does this anchoring process occur? Does a central bank have to keep actual inflation near the target rate for many years before inflation expectations completely conform? Can policymakers instead materially influence inflation expectations directly and quickly by simply announcing their intention to pursue a particular inflation goal in the future? Or does the truth lie somewhere in between, with a change in expectations requiring some combination of clear communications about policymakers' inflation goal, concrete policy actions to demonstrate their commitment to that goal, and at least some success in moving actual inflation toward its desired level in order to demonstrate the feasibility of the strategy? Although historical experience suggests that changing the public's inflation expectations would be neither quick nor easy, it is not clear which of these possibilities is correct.23 With nominal short-term interest rates at or close to their effective lower bound in many countries, the broader question of how expectations are formed has taken on heightened importance. Under such circumstances, many central banks have sought additional ways to stimulate their economies, including adopting policies that are directly aimed at influencing expectations of future interest rates and inflation. The unusually explicit and extended guidance about the likely future path of the federal funds rate that was provided by the FOMC from 2011 through 2014 is an example of such a policy, as is the Bank of Japan's upward revision to its official inflation objective in 2013. Moreover, these and other expectational strategies may be needed again in the future, given the likelihood that the global economy may continue to experience historically low interest rates, thereby making it unlikely that reductions in short-term interest rates alone would be an adequate response to a future recession.24 For all of these reasons, I hope that researchers will strive to improve our understanding of inflation dynamics and its interactions with monetary policy. International LinkagesBefore closing, let me mention one additional area where more study is needed--the effects of changes in U.S. monetary policy on financial and economic conditions in the rest of the world and the ways in which those foreign effects can feed back to influence conditions here at home. Of course, cross-country monetary policy spillovers have been the subject of scholarly debate since the Great Depression, and much of the formal analysis of this topic dates back to the early 1960s.25But this issue has received renewed interest with the advent of unconventional monetary policies after the Great Recession and, more recently, the divergence of monetary policies among major advanced-economy central banks. Broadly speaking, monetary policy actions in one country spill over to other economies through three main channels: changes in exchange rates; changes in domestic demand, which alter the economy's imports; and changes in domestic financial conditions--such as interest rates and asset prices--that, through portfolio balance and other channels, affect financial conditions abroad. Research by Federal Reserve staff suggests that, all told, U.S. monetary policy spillovers to other economies are positive--that is, policies designed to provide stimulus to the U.S. economy also boost activity abroad, as negative effects of dollar depreciation are offset by positive effects of higher U.S. imports and easier foreign financial conditions.26However, this issue is far from settled, as are a host of other related questions, including the following: Do U.S. monetary policy actions affect advanced and emerging market countries differently? Do conventional and unconventional monetary policies spill over to other countries differently? And to what extent are U.S. interest rates and financial conditions influenced by easing measures abroad? ConclusionIn closing, I would like to commend the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston for organizing this conference and fostering research and debate on questions vital to our understanding of the economy. Answering these questions will help the Federal Reserve's efforts to promote a healthy economy, and I am grateful for the opportunity to speak to you today and be part of this important discussion. ReferencesAgnello, Luca, and Ludger Schuknecht (2011). "Booms and Busts in Housing Markets: Determinants and Implications,"Journal of Housing Economics,vol. 20 (September), pp. 171-90. Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry (1996). "The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 1-76. Akerlof, George A., Andrew K. Rose, and Janet L. Yellen (1988). "Job Switching and Job Satisfaction in the U.S. Labor Market (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 2, pp. 495-594. Ammer, John, Michiel De Pooter, Christopher Erceg, and Steven Kamin (2016). "International Spillovers of Monetary Policy," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 8. Auclert, Adrien (2016). "Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel (PDF)," unpublished paper, Stanford University, Department of Economics, January. Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1989). "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,"American Economic Review,vol. 79 (March), pp. 14-31. Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999a). "The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework," in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Macroeconomics,vol. 1C. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1341-93. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999b).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Blanchard, Olivier (2016). "The Phillips Curve: Back to the '60s?"American Economic Review,vol.106 (May), pp. 31-34. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Blanchard, Olivier J., and Lawrence H. Summers (1986). "Hysteresis and the European Unemployment Problem," in Stanley Fischer, ed.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1986,vol. 1. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 15-90. Blinder, Alan S., and Janet L. Yellen (2001).The Fabulous Decade: Macroeconomic Lessons from the 1990s.New York: Century Foundation Press. Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena (2008). "Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery,"American Economic Review,vol. 98 (March), pp. 439-57. Chaney, Thomas, David Sraer, and David Thesmar (2012)."The Collateral Channel: How Real Estate Shocks Affect Corporate Investment,"American Economic Review,vol. 102 (October), pp. 2381-409. Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel (2014). "The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2008-9 Financial Crisis,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 129 (February), pp. 1-59. Clark, Todd E., and Troy Davig (2008). "An Empirical Assessment of the Relationships among Inflation and Short- and Long-Term Expectations (PDF)," Research Working Paper RWP 08-05. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, November. Clementi, Gian Luca, and Berardino Palazzo (2016)."Entry, Exit, Firm Dynamics, and Aggregate Fluctuations,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 8 (July), pp. 1-41. Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn (2014). "Downward Nominal Rigidities Bend the Phillips Curve,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 46 (October), pp. 51‑93. Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Frank Schorfheide (2015). "Inflation in the Great Recession and New Keynesian Models,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 7 (January), pp. 168-96. Dokko, Jane, Brian M. Doyle, Michael T. Kiley, Jinill Kim, Shane Sherlund, Jae Sim, and Skander Van Den Heuvel (2011). "Monetary Policy and the Global Housing Bubble,"Economic Policy,vol. 26 (April), pp. 237-87. Duygan-Bump, Burcu, Alexey Levkov, and Judit Montoriol-Garriga (2015). "Financing Constraints and Unemployment: Evidence from the Great Recession,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 75 (October), pp. 89-105. Fair, Ray C. (2004).Estimating How the Macroeconomy Works.Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Fallick, Bruce C., Michael Lettau, and William L. Wascher (2016). "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity in the United States during and after the Great Recession (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-001. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, eds.,Handbook of Economic Forecasting,vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 3-56. Fernald, John G. (2015). "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," in Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014,vol. 29. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 1-51. Fleming, J. Marcus (1962). "Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under Floating Exchange Rates,"International Monetary Fund Staff Papers,vol. 9 (November), pp. 369-80. Fukuda, Yoshiyuki, Yuki Kimura, Nao Sudo, and Hiroshi Ugai (2013). "Cross-Country Transmission Effect of the U.S. Monetary Shock under Global Integration (PDF)," Bank of Japan Working Paper Series 13-E-16. Tokyo: BOJ, November. Georgiadis, Georgios (2015). "Determinants of Global Spillovers from U.S. Monetary Policy (PDF)," ECB Working Paper Series 1854. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: European Central Bank, September. Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi (2015). "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 7 (January), pp. 44-76. Glick, Reuven, and Sylvain Leduc (2015). "Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Dollar: Conventional Signs, Unconventional Magnitudes (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2015-18. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November. Gordon, Robert J. (2013). "The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU during the Slow Recovery (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19390. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Gornemann, Nils, Keith Kuester, and Makoto Nakajima (2016). "Doves for the Rich, Hawks for the Poor? Distributional Consequences of Monetary Policy (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1167. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Gourio, Francois, Todd Messer, and Michael Siemer (2016). "Firm Entry and Macroeconomic Dynamics: A State-Level Analysis,"American Economic Review,vol. 106 (May), pp. 214-18. Guvenen, Fatih (2011). "Macroeconomics with Heterogeneity: A Practical Guide (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,Economic Quarterly,vol. 97 (Third Quarter), pp. 255-326. Holzer, Harry J., Steven Raphael, and Michael A. Stoll (2006). "Employers in the Boom: How Did the Hiring of Less-Skilled Workers Change during the 1990s?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 88 (May), pp. 283-99. Howard, Greg, Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2011). "Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different? (PDF)" International Finance Discussion Papers 1037. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Ilzetski, Ethan, and Keyu Jin (2013). "The Puzzling Change in the International Transmission of U.S. Macroeconomic Policy Shocks (PDF)," working paper. London: London School of Economics, February. Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti (2015). "Household Leveraging and Deleveraging,"Review of Economic Dynamics,vol. 18 (January), pp. 3-20. Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante (2016). "Monetary Policy According to HANK," NBER Working Paper Series 21897. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein (2000). "What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say about the Transmission of Monetary Policy?"American Economic Review,vol. 90 (June), pp. 407-28. Katz, Lawrence F., and Alan B. Krueger (1999). "The High-Pressure U.S. Labor Market of the 1990s (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 1-87. Khan, Aubhik, and Julia K. Thomas (2013). "Credit Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations in an Economy with Production Heterogeneity,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 121 (December), pp. 1055-107. Kiley, Michael T. (2008). "Monetary Policy Actions and Long-Run Inflation Expectations (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-03. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Krueger, Dirk, Kurt Mitman, and Fabrizio Perri (2016). "Macroeconomics and Household Heterogeneity," CEPR Discussion Paper 11038. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, June. Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr. (1998). "Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 106 (October), pp. 867-96. Martin, Robert F., Teyanna Munyan, and Beth Anne Wilson (2015). "Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves? (PDF)" International Finance Discussion Papers 1145. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Mavroeidis, Sophocles, Mikkel Plagborg-Moller, and James H. Stock (2014). "Empirical Evidence on Inflation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 52 (March), pp. 124-88. Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi (2013). "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 128 (November), pp. 1687-726. Mundell, Robert A. (1963). "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates,"Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science,vol. 29 (November), pp. 475-85. Okun, Arthur M. (1973). "Upward Mobility in a High-Pressure Economy,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 207-52. Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland (2013). "Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,"American Economic Review,vol. 103 (October), pp. 2530-53. Peek, Joe, and Eric S. Rosengren (2013). "The Role of Banks in the Transmission of Monetary Policy," Public Policy Discussion Papers 13-5. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, September. Peek, Joe, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell (2003). "Identifying the Macroeconomic Effects of Loan Supply Shocks,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 35 (December), pp. 931-46. Quadrini, Vincenzo, and Jose-Víctor Rios-Rull (2015). "Inequality in Macroeconomics," in Anthony B. Atkinson and Francois Bourguignon, eds.,Handbook of Income Distribution,vol. 2B. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1229-302. Reifschneider, Dave, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2015). "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (May), pp. 71-109. Siemer, Michael (2014). "Firm Entry and Employment Dynamics in the Great Recession (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-56. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Solow, Robert M. (1997). "Is There a Core of Usable Macroeconomics We Should All Believe In?"American Economic Review,vol. 87 (May), pp. 230-32. Sterk, Vincent, and Silvana Tenreyro (2016). "The Transmission of Monetary Policy through Redistributions and Durable Purchases (PDF)," CEP Working Paper 2016/1. Zurich: Council on Economic Policies, January. Summers, Laurence H. (2014). "Reflections on the ‘New Secular Stagnation Hypothesis,'" in Coen Teulings and Richard Baldwin, eds.,Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes, and Cures.London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, pp. 27-38. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, Amherst, Mass., September 24. Yellen, Janet L. (2016). "The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present and Future," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26. 1.See Solow (1997).Return to text 2.Or, as Summers (2014) asked in a pithy inversion of Say's law, is it true that "lack of demand creates lack of supply?" (p. 37).Return to text 3.As Blanchard and Summers (1986) discuss, the question at the time was whether the long-run equilibrium, or "natural," rate of unemployment in European economies had been permanently raised by previous periods of high actual unemployment.Return to text 4.For example, see Cerra and Saxena (2008); Howard, Martin, and Wilson (2011); Martin, Nunyan, and Wilson (2014); and Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015).Return to text 5.See Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox (2015).Return to text 6.Fernald (2015), however, argues that much of the apparent slowdown in U.S. potential GDP growth began prior to the 2007-09 recession.Return to text 7.See Okun (1973) for an early discussion of the benefits of a high-pressure economy. Importantly, not all of these benefits might show up as measured output, but they would nonetheless be welfare improving--for example, higher job satisfaction from better matches between workers and employers, as noted by Akerlof, Rose, and Yellen (1988).Return to text 8.For example, the experience of the 1990s might seem to provide a natural case study of whether reverse hysteresis is possible. Unfortunately, most studies of the labor market during this period do not directly speak to this issue, although Holzer, Raphael, and Stoll (2006) investigate changes in employers' willingness to hire less-skilled workers during these years, while Katz and Krueger (1999) and my own study with Blinder (2001) explore the somewhat related question of how the U.S. economy was able to simultaneously experience rapid growth, low unemployment, and low inflation in the late 1990s.Return to text 9.See Krueger, Mitman, and Perri (2016).Return to text 10.On the role of financing constraints for firm employment, see Siemer (2014); Chodorow-Reich (2014); and Duygan-Bump, Levkov, and Montoriol-Garriga (2015). A general-equilibrium model with heterogeneity among firms and credit frictions is studied in Khan and Thomas (2013). For the role of entry and exit in macroeconomic dynamics, see Clementi and Palazzo (2016) as well as Gourio, Messer, and Siemer (2016).Return to text 11.For early quantitative work on the relationship between income and wealth heterogeneity and the macroeconomy, see Krusell and Smith (1998).Return to text 12.Guvenen (2011) reviews several issues related to macroeconomics with heterogeneity. For an overview of the interactions between distribution and aggregate outcomes, see the work by Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2015). For recent work on the effects of monetary policy in models with heterogeneous agents, see Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2016); Gornemann, Kuester, and Nakajima (2016); Auclert (2016); and Sterk and Tenreyro (2016).Return to text 13.For an example of early research on this topic, see Bernanke and Gertler (1989). Other important pre-crisis studies include the development of the financial accelerato­r model by Bernanke and others (1999a) and work by Kashyap and Stein (2000) and Peek, Rosengren, and Tootell (2003) on the bank balance sheet channel and the effects of bank loan supply shocks. For a more recent summary of the role of banks in the monetary transmission mechanism, see Peek and Rosengren (2013). Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmer (2012) provide evidence for the collateral channel of real estate for corporate investment, while Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) examine the influence of household balance sheets on consumption.Return to text 14.More empirical work would be useful to disentangle the spending effects that result from changes in credit conditions from those that result from movements in interest rates, as estimates of the latter likely often inadvertently incorporate the former. Most empirical models of the overall economy do not explicitly control for the influence of noninterest credit factors on consumption and investment; as a result, estimated interest rate effects will partially reflect the influence of these factors to the extent these factors are correlated with interest rates. There are many reasons to suspect that this is the case. Movements in interest rates influence a firm's cash flow and the value of its collateral, all else being equal. Higher interest rates also adversely affect consumer spending and especially residential investment, both by forcing households to devote a greater portion of their income to debt service and by making it more difficult to qualify for a loan because of maximum payment-to-income rules. Evidence for these effects is provided by Gertler and Karadi (2015), who show that relatively small changes in short-term interest rates are correlated with large movements in credit costs. Such correlations and interactions may explain why some types of spending appear to be more correlated with movements innominalinterest rates than with real interest rates; see Fair (2004, ch. 3) for evidence on this point. Finally, the relative contributions of relaxed lending standards, low interest rates, and other factors to housing bubbles, both in the United States and abroad, remains an open and unsettled topic; Agnello and Shucknecht (2011) present cross-country evidence that monetary policy plays an important role, while Dokko and others (2011) argue that monetary policy was a minor influence in the most recent episode.Return to text 15.See Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) for an assessment of the role of leverage and housing wealth shocks in driving consumption during the Great Recession. Work by Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2015) suggests that debt overhang alone cannot explain the slow recovery from the Great Recession.Return to text 16.See Yellen (2015) for a more extensive discussion.Return to text 17.In the economic literature, this general description of the inflation process is referred to as the expectations-augmented Phillips curve. In its simplest form, the Phillips curve relates inflation to expected inflation and the intensity of resource utilization in the economy. In practice, however, empirical specifications also typically include measures of supply shocks, such as changes in the relative prices of energy or imported goods, as additional determinants. Two well-known variants of the Phillips curve are the traditional "accelerationist" specification and the so-called New Keynesian Phillips curve; the former approximates inflation expectations using a moving average of past inflation, while the latter assumes that inflation expectations are "rational" and consistent with the predictions of a structural model of the entire economy. Some adherents of either type of Phillips curve argue that their preferred model can explain the behavior of inflation during and after the financial crisis. For example, Gordon (2013) presents evidence in favor of an accelerationist model, while Del Negro, Giannoni, and Schorfheide (2015) make this claim for a New Keynesian model.Return to text 18.See Blanchard (2016) for evidence on how the responsiveness of inflation to resource utilization has changed over time. Interestingly, research suggests that this sensitivity began declining well before the crisis.Return to text 19.For an early discussion of the potential macroeconomic effects of downward nominal wage rigidity, see Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996). More recently, Daly and Hobijn (2014) develop a model in which the reluctance or inability of firms to cut nominal wages (or both) creates important nonlinearities in the relationship between labor utilization and wage inflation. Finally, Fallick, Lettau, and Wascher (2015) review the evidence for downward nominal wage rigidity in recent years and explore the ways in which it has interacted with labor market stress over time.Return to text 20.Specifically, survey measures of long-run inflation expectations are broadly correlated with estimates of inflation's longer-term trend. See Clark and Davig (2008); see also Faust and Wright (2013, who make a related point in the context of inflation forecasting.Return to text 21.As Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Moller, and Stock (2014) conclude from their exhaustive survey, empirical estimates of the New Keynesian inflation equation are "unable to pin down the role of expectations in the inflation process sufficiently accurately for the results to be useful for policy analysis" (p. 172).Return to text 22.For a discussion of the theoretical and empirical influence of monetary policy on inflation in the context of a formal inflation-targeting regime, see Bernanke and others (1999b).Return to text 23.See Kiley (2008) for a discussion of the relationship between U.S. monetary policy and survey measures of long-run inflation expectations; his results suggest that it took many years for the Federal Reserve to succeed in anchoring long-run expectations at a low level. In a similar vein, Bernanke and others (1999b) conclude that inflation expectations "respond only after a lag following declines in [actual] inflation" (p. 298) based on their study of the effects of adopting inflation targeting in different countries.Return to text 24.I discussed this likelihood in a recent speech (Yellen, 2016).Return to text 25.See Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962).Return to text 26.See Ammer, De Pooter, Erceg, and Kamin (2016). Other recent research on this topic includes Fukuda, Kimura, Sudo, and Ugai (2013); Georgiadis (2015); Glick and Leduc (2015); and Ilzetski and Jin (2013).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for August 29 and September 19, 2016. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 20-21, 2016. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 20-21, 2016:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Governor Jerome H. Powell At The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market: Second Annual Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York Watch live This panel will focus on the settlement infrastructure for U.S. government securities--a vital component of the Treasury market and one that is undergoing an important transition. This segment of the industry has been in a period of slow but steady consolidation for several decades now. Thirty years ago, there were six banks providing a full suite of settlement services for U.S. government securities. Due to mergers and exits, two firms, Bank of New York Mellon (BNYM) and J.P. Morgan Chase (JPMC), have been the two dominant providers of these services since the 1990s. And soon there will be just one, given JPMC's planned exit. Given the importance of these services, the official sector has had a long involvement as the market structure has evolved. After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the Federal Reserve convened the private-sector Working Group on Government Securities Clearance and Settlement to recommend steps to mitigate risks to the financial system from a disruption to these services. That work led to the "NewBank" proposal.1Although the proposal was ultimately put aside, NewBank would have been a dormant financial institution that could spring into action in the event of potential disruptions from an exit from this business by either of the clearing banks. Some of today's panelists were actively involved in that work. Of course, at that time, the business was roughly evenly split between the two providers. Today's situation is very different--BNYM now has over 80 percent market share, due mainly to consolidation among end users. The Federal Reserve has been working closely with the Department of the Treasury to ensure a smooth transition as JPMC prepares to exit. JPMC has said that it recognizes the need for, and its own interest in, ensuring that its exit does not disrupt the market. Indeed, JPMC will itself need to rely on these services going forward. The timeline set for a gradual transition over the next two years should be sufficient to avoid significant dislocations; however, if unexpected complications arise, that timeline may need to be adjusted. In the near term, this exit will leave BNYM as the sole provider of U.S. government securities settlement and triparty repo services for broker-dealers. We have been working intensively with BNYM in anticipation of this transition. We have long recognized that any disruptions to these critical market services could have serious consequences for financial stability, and have calibrated our supervisory expectations accordingly. To ensure financial stability, we expect the provision of U.S. government securities settlement services to be robust in nearly all contingencies. As BNYM becomes the sole provider, we will raise our expectations even higher. The bank has anticipated and welcomed this higher bar. BNYM is one of 8 U.S.-based systemically important banks. The bank is therefore subject to heightened capital and liquidity requirements and a resolution process that explicitly requires planning to ensure the continuity of critical services even in the event of a default. BNYM is unique in that it also plays the dominant--and soon the sole--role in government securities settlement and in the triparty repo market. These activities are comparable in their importance to those of the financial market utilities that have been designated as systemically important by the FSOC. Thus, BNYM will continue to be held to the high standards to which all U.S. bank SIFIs are held. And it will also be expected to operate in a manner that provides confidence that it is as resilient and robust as a systemically important financial market utility (FMU). Such FMUs are, of course, held to the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMIs).2The PFMIs overlap with our banking regulation in many areas; for example, both emphasize the need for sound risk management and the importance of resilience and recovery. The PFMIs also emphasize a strong governance role in support of financial stability and the interests of market functioning, and this has been a focus of our work with Bank of New York Mellon regarding the transition. Although our current task is to establish appropriate expectations for Bank of New York Mellon as a sole operator, that focus should not be taken as an indication that the Federal Reserve or other public authorities have pre-judged what the longer-term landscape for government securities settlement should look like. In fact, we do not have a specific market design end state in mind. Rather, we recognize the systemic importance of these activities and the need to ensure their continued availability in nearly all states of the world, regardless of the firms that offer them or the specific market structure. The industry as a whole should play an important role in shaping the evolution of the settlement infrastructure. Other firms may seek to enter this market. There have also been discussions over time of a settlement utility, and the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation is currently considering a new variant of such a model. Our focus is on the quality of the services offered--their safety, resilience, and support of the market--and not on the particular mechanism for offering them. If new proposals come forward that are consistent with our goals of a safe and resilient settlement system, then they will receive fair consideration. 1.Report to the Federal Reserve Board by the Working Group on NewBank Implementation (PDF), December 2005.Return to text 2. See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012),Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures, report (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, April).Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Conference on the New Pedagogy of Financial Regulation, Columbia Law School, New York, New York Let me begin with the most prosaic of observations: The events of 2007-09 will be remembered not as a banking crisis, but as a financial crisis. Neither the origins nor the transmission of stress were limited to the traditional banking system of commercial banks and thrifts. While Wachovia and Washington Mutual failed, and other large depository institutions survived only because of government support, the more spectacular failures were those of nonbank financial firms--including American International Group (AIG), Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Repurchase agreement (repo) and commercial paper markets depended on government liquidity to continue operating, as did money market funds. It is thus unsurprising that, in approaching regulatory reform after the crisis, both the official sector and academics have focused more on the financial system as a whole. The shift is apparent in the very diction of post-crisis regulatory initiatives. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) refers dozens of times to "financial stability" and "systemic risk." A special regulatory structure has been developed for "G-SIBs"--that is, banks of global systemic importance--and a new category of designated systemically important nonbank financial companies has been created. This shift is also reflected in the titles and intellectual approaches of the two books that were discussed at this conference earlier this morning--that is,financialregulation. The authors of both books have eschewed the traditional concentration on banking or securities law alone, and have even moved beyond the more innovative pre-crisis casebooks that focused on the differential regulation of various forms of financial institutions.1 This broader category of "financial regulation" as the relevant delineation of an academic subject area seems right to me. For one thing, different forms of financial intermediation are--if not equally attractive for the preferences of specific investors and users of capital--at least significantly overlapping in the roles they can play. Beginning in the 1970s these overlaps multiplied, as the traditional separation of lending and capital market activities--which had been reinforced by the Glass-Steagall Act--began to break down under the weight of macroeconomic turbulence, technological and business innovation, and competition. In the 30 years that followed, these activities were progressively integrated further, both within bank holding companies and beyond, ultimately producing the explosive growth of money market, securitization, and derivative instruments. More fundamentally, the broader category of "financial regulation" reflects the importance of a macroprudential, or systemic, perspective on the financial system. This means taking account of the relationships among the circumstances and activities of significant financial actors through such channels as funding dependencies and correlated assets. The financial crisis has made what was formerly a minority view--the need to incorporate systemic considerations into the regulatory regime--into something approaching a consensus. But this shift of perspective--whether in pedagogy or in policy--raises as many questions as it answers. My remarks this morning will detail some of the questions that have recurred in regulatory deliberations in recent years, which I believe to be salient for policy, scholarship, and pedagogy. Then, more briefly, I will make a few observations about teaching and scholarship from the broadened perspective of financial regulation. I should note at the outset that, in the interest of time, I will confine myself to the prudential aspects of financial regulation. Thinking Through a More Integrated Approach to Financial RegulationIt is only moderately reductionist to say that, from the New Deal through the crisis, the nature and scope of regulation was determined by the categorization of financial actors. If an entity was classified as a bank or a broker-dealer or an investment company, it was subject to a regulatory regime fashioned to deal with the risks associated with that form of intermediation or, perhaps more precisely, the risks that wereperceivedto be so associated. Such an approach always provided for some interesting legal discussions, since forms of intermediation that served similar purposes and carried broadly similar risks might be subject to quite different regulatory constraints. But when, as noted earlier, nonbank forms of intermediation began to threaten traditional bank intermediation and when, in what was at least partly an effort to maintain the franchise value of commercial banks, strictures on bank activities and affiliations were significantly relaxed, the foundation of the New Deal regime was substantially eroded. With the notable exception of an increased emphasis on capital, which itself was decidedly microprudential in focus, the prudential regime was not shored up or extended to other kinds of intermediaries, much less replaced--a signal failure that contributed to the severity of the crisis. This may be a good point at which to note in passing that the pre-crisis failures were not limited to the underappreciation of systemic or macroprudential risks. Even from a purely microprudential perspective, for example, the Basel II changes to the capital requirements for large banks were ill-conceived.2 A natural reaction to this legacy might be to shift from a regime based predominantly on the form of an intermediary to one built predominantly on its functions. As a practical matter, though, much post-crisis regulatory reform has been directed at strengthening the traditional form-based foundation, though perhaps to a somewhat greater degree in the United States than in some other financially important jurisdictions. And, at a conceptual level, some features of particular forms of intermediaries--such as being an insured depository institution rather than a money market fund--remain rightly important for regulatory purposes. So we will probably continue to build on a form-based regulatory regime, though the potential range of complementary function-based measures could be quite extensive. And, at the very least, analyses based on function rather than form can be valuable heuristic exercises for identifying inconsistencies and lacunae in the financial regulatory system. A first set of questions follows from just such an identification of gaps in the regulatory system, which are arguably most troubling when they relate to systemic considerations--that is, when a financial intermediary or activity may contribute to risk in the financial system because of the related positions or activities of others. Two critical gaps highlighted by the crisis were the inadequate prudential regulation of the most systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) and the sometimes nonexistent prudential regulation of the many activities now denominated as "shadow banking." The SIFI issue has received the most public attention, often in the context of too-big-to-fail concerns. It was at the center of some of the most notable provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, many of which follow from the important principle enunciated in section 165 that prudential regulation should become increasingly stringent for institutions of greater systemic importance. Precisely because a satisfactory treatment of this topic would require at least one lengthy speech on its own, it seems reasonably clear that teaching and scholarship should highlight the SIFI problem, appraise the regulatory approach toward such institutions since the crisis, and consider alternatives. An appraisal of whether more or, as some would have it, fewer measures are needed under the approach taken in the Dodd-Frank Act and related regulatory actions will, I admit, be a little challenging. Some measures--including stress testing, capital requirements, and resolution planning--are still in train, and others may be forthcoming as a result of the research program the Federal Reserve is launching to consider the potential for additional explicitly macroprudential features in capital and liquidity stress testing.3Still, I think it is feasible to teach and assess the general approach of using multiple regulatory tools that impose requirements that force systemically important firms to internalize the costs their distress or failure would impose on the financial system, and then leaving the regulated firms to make decisions as to how to alter their size and activities in order to make themselves most profitable within the stricter regulatory constraints. This approach can be usefully compared to structural or other approaches to the SIFI issue, such as caps on overall size or reimposition of the Glass-Steagall separation of commercial and investment banking. In addressing this topic, I have found it useful to try to specify as clearly as possible the adverse systemic consequences that may be feared by public authorities confronting the possible failure of a systemically important institution. This exercise helps identify the regulatory measures that would be most effective in promoting the resiliency and orderly resolvability of such institutions. On virtually any short list of concerns would be reliance on short-term wholesale funding sources, which may dry up quickly under stressed conditions. A firm with inadequate sources of liquidity may then be forced into responses with systemic implications, such as fire sales of assets and termination of credit extensions to their own counterparties. The other major vulnerability revealed by the financial crisis was systemic risk that may be created through so-called shadow banking activities--that is, credit intermediation outside the prudentially regulated banking system. Here is where the integration of traditional lending and capital markets is most clearly in evidence, albeit in quite different ways. In truth, many shadow banking channels passed through prudentially regulated institutions, as with the notorious structured investment vehicles and asset-backed commercial paper conduits. Changes in accounting and in bank capital and liquidity requirements have done a great deal to guard against a recurrence of such patterns in the future, though continued monitoring will be needed to prevent the development of other forms of support that elude these regulatory measures. Of greater interest for financial regulation going forward will be the constantly changing, and largely unrelated, set of intermediation activities pursued by very different types of financial market actors. While the extent of shadow banking has significantly diminished since the crisis, there is good reason to believe that it will grow in the future. Indeed, the very rigor of new regulations applicable to firms within the prudential perimeter may well incentivize more innovation outside that perimeter. It will be essential to disaggregate all the activities that might be characterized as shadow banking in order to regulate those that pose risks to the financial system while not unduly burdening forms of credit extension that may more or less benignly help meet the savings and investment needs of households and businesses. This task is perhaps summed up by the fact that activities which in one context are called "shadow banking" are in other contexts called "market-based financing." One might fairly characterize the current regulatory approach to shadow banking as one that examines, in turn, significant forms of credit intermediation outside the banking system and determines whether some type of prudential regulation is needed. In the terms I introduced a moment ago, regulators look at a particular form, such as money market funds. If no significant risks to financial stability are identified, or if some regulation to counteract those risks is implemented, the form of intermediation may then be thought of as relatively safe (at least from a systemic perspective) market-based finance. The virtue of this approach is that it allows for a very tailored regulatory response. But, as you can imagine, this approach necessarily involves a good bit of active oversight on an ongoing basis, both of measures previously taken and of new channels of nonbank intermediation as they arise. An alternative approach would be to define shadow banking in broadly applicable terms, with specified regulatory consequences that ensue more or less automatically, regardless of whether the entity conducting the shadow banking is otherwise subject to prudential regulation. To date, the attempts I have seen along these lines look likely to entail substantial overinclusion, substantial underinclusion, or regulatory consequences that are inappropriately uniform. And, in the United States and other jurisdictions, it is not clear that authority exists to take this approach, either by an individual regulatory agency or even collectively. But, as with hypothesizing a functionally-based regulatory system more generally, hypothesizing a broadly applicable regulatory definition can usefully inform the direction of the current regulatory approach of activity-by-activity scrutiny. Of course, while the current approach allows for an ad hoc consideration of the particulars of each activity, it still requires at least a general filter for identifying sources of systemic risk. My own sense is that the greatest risks to financial stability lie in activities with vulnerability to funding runs and asset fire sales. These may be associated either with some of the same kinds of short-term funding found in systemically important banking organizations or in the potential for rapid and substantial investor redemptions of their holdings in certain investment funds. Where substantial leverage--either nominal or synthetic--is also present, the risks are only greater. Efforts to calibrate these, and possibly other, risks will remain an important feature of shadow banking regulation, along with refining ways in which such risks may be mitigated. Before turning to another, though related, set of questions, let me digress a bit to note another implication of a regime in which regulation is developed with a view to risks to the financial system as a whole. The motivation both for more stringent regulation of systemically important firms and for regulation of shadow banking arises in large part from the potential contribution of each to systemwide contagion. A complementary motivation for some macroprudential measures is the importance of maintaining effective financial intermediation even during a period of severe recession or financial stress. But this reasoning should, I think, move us toward less regulatory stringency for some parts of the financial system, as well as greater stringency in other parts. For example, as banking regulation is strengthened to take account of the progressively more systemic significance of larger or more complicated institutions, there is a good argument for a less demanding regime for smaller institutions whose contribution to systemic contagion would almost surely be somewhere between modest and inconsequential. This observation raises the issue, which I have discussed previously, as to whether even within a particular form-based area of financial regulation we should be moving toward quite different regimes.4 The next set of questions raised by a systemwide perspective on financial regulation can be described much more briefly. It pertains to the appropriate target once a need for regulation has been established. The selection among, and mix of targets for, systemically-motivated regulation will be an important determinant of the character of financial regulation in the years ahead. The relevant choices here are frequently identified in binary terms--that is, the regulation may be directed either at financial institutions or financial activities. This leads to confusion because, for example, what has been described as an "activities-based" approach to dealing with the potential risks posed by certain asset management activities actually involves regulation of the firms involved in those activities, such as through liquidity and risk management requirements. I suspect this confusion has arisen because, in the minds of some, "institution-based" regulation has become close to synonymous with banking regulation. Thus those opposed to, say, capital requirements for a particular kind of intermediary will advocate for activities-based regulation. My own sense is that it is useful to distinguish three possible targets of regulation--specific financial institutions, financial business models, and financial transactions. Most financial regulation, historically and contemporaneously, falls within what I would describe as business model regulation. So, for example, any entity engaged in the "business of banking" is subject to the panoply of requirements found in Title 12 of the U.S. Code. Similarly, the requirements imposed on money market funds by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and being considered for application to asset management activities, are also targeted at a business model, even though the kind of regulation is quite different from that applicable to insured depository institutions. In contrast, my taxonomy would categorize regulation as targeted at a specific institution when it applies because of the particular characteristics of that institution, not simply because of its business model (or models). Thus, the designation of a nonbanking firm as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) under the authority of the Dodd-Frank Act is made because the size, portfolios, activities, and other characteristics of the specific firm are found on an individualized basis to meet the statutory standard of nonbank systemic importance. Similarly, the determination of the capital surcharge applicable to SIFIs is made on the basis of the particular "systemic footprint" of the firm. Finally, a transaction-based requirement is one that would be binding on anyone involved in such a transaction (with perhaps some de minimis exceptions), regardless of their status as a particular kind of financial intermediary. An example would be the minimum margining requirements on securities financing transactions that have been agreed to at the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which the Federal Reserve will be proposing through a rulemaking next year. Of course, a particular firm may be a target under two, or possibly all three, approaches. But it is important to identify clearly why a regulation is deemed necessary and, accordingly, how it should be targeted. In the framework I have set forth, for example, institution-specific measures may be thought of as those needed to protect financial stability even though a firm is already subject to business model regulation. And a transaction-based measure may be thought of as one needed to protect financial stability regardless of whether all entities that might engage in such a transaction need to be regulated because of the risks associated with their business models. My third set of questions pertains to the scope and allocation of government authority for financial regulation. With some relatively modest exceptions, authority in the New Deal regime was determined based on the distinct regulatory aims established for different kinds of financial intermediaries, the oversight of which was assigned to different agencies. The allocation basically followed the Glass-Steagall Act's separation of commercial and investment banking. But, over time, both markets and regulatory change complicated this fairly simple picture: markets complicated this as both banks and broker-dealers invented new ways of doing business that allowed each to take on risks previously reserved for the other, and regulatory changes saw shifts in the relationship of the Federal Reserve's authority as holding company regulator and that of the SEC or Commodity Futures Trading Commission as primary regulator of important nonbank holding company subsidiaries. The additional regulatory authorities and mandates in the Dodd-Frank Act have created a quite different landscape from the pre-crisis regulatory terrain. Many of these authorities and mandates are explicitly tied to financial stability goals--a sharp departure from pre-crisis circumstances. Many must be exercised jointly by two or more agencies--in rulemakings, implementation, or both. And, of course, the Dodd-Frank Act created the FSOC--an unusual entity in U.S. administrative law. Appreciating this new configuration of authorities is important as a positive matter for understanding how regulation will be shaped over time and identifying possible remaining gaps in regulatory authority. It is also important as a normative matter in considering whether the allocation of authorities proves optimal over time. Here one would want to look at factors of efficacy, expertise, and excessive concentrations of authority, among others. In this regard, I would suggest that a comparison of the reconfigured financial regulatory system in the United Kingdom serves as an instructive counterpoint to the U.S. system. Some Thoughts on Post-Crisis Scholarship Topics and PedagogyScholarshipInsofar as I have succeeded in identifying questions that will be central to the further development and refinement of a regulatory system that takes account of the financial system as a whole, all of what I have already said should be fertile ground for legal and economic scholarship. However, not every important topic for research fits neatly into one of these cross-cutting issues, so let me mention some policy issues that may especially benefit from academic work. First is the issue of measures and standards for evaluating systemic risk. Numerous financial economists have done very useful work in creating metrics for the systemic importance of financial institutions--a literature that has already informed regulatory efforts to designate and categorize such institutions and, as it develops further, will surely continue to do so.5But there are also specific legal standards, such as the financial stability factor now mandated in the review of proposed bank and holding company mergers, that could also benefit from academic work.6 Second is the set of issues associated with corporate governance in a prudentially regulated institution. John Armour, Lucien Bebchuk, Jeff Gordon, Jon Macey, and others have already tackled some of these issues--such as incentive compensation arrangements, the appropriate duties for boards of directors in such institutions, and the appropriate scope of supervisory expectations for boards.7These issues remain worthy of discussion. The preceding questions and others, such as the advisability of a requirement for a non-executive chair of the board, have only grown in significance since I spoke to this topic a couple of years ago.8 Third is the subject of overseeing the regulators, which includes such matters as the advisability of publicly releasing some or all supervisory ratings and informal enforcement actions. You may recall that our decision in 2009 to release the results of our stress test--a practice that we have continued in subsequent years--was quite controversial, but has proven to be enormously helpful both for giving investors in the firms and the public a better sense for how the Federal Reserve is conducting its capital regulation policies. Fourth is the rather broad topic of the implications of technological innovation for financial services regulation and, indeed, for the competitive position of insured depository institutions. Many innovations now promising dramatic change in the way that credit is extended will probably end up having considerably less impact. But some could prove significant. I suspect that innovations in payments systems are quite likely to have far-reaching effects, including the growth of what might be termed the "shadow payment system" at the retail level. Here, by the way, I am departing a bit from my self-limitation to prudential issues, since consumer protection issues around alternative payments systems may be quite significant. Fifth is the organization of the international system for financial regulation. The issues here are in some sense familiar from pre-crisis days: To what degree can host countries responsibly rely on home jurisdiction consolidated regulation and supervision of large and internationally active financial institutions? How should international cooperative efforts to set minimum prudential standards be brought together with domestic legal processes for financial regulation? These familiar questions have taken on new significance in light of the post-crisis emphasis on the financial system as a whole, including the varieties of shadow banking. So too the differing circumstances and legal systems of notable financial jurisdictions, which raise anew the question of how much international harmonization is ultimately desirable. The creation of the FSB, and greater emphasis on international standards in the International Organization of Securities Commissions and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors have substantially changed the relevant international organization chart from the days when only the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision produced such standards. PedagogyHaving not taught financial regulation since the interesting months of the fall 2008 semester, I am probably at a comparative disadvantage to most of this audience in reflecting on the new pedagogy of financial regulation. However, that will not stop me from making a couple of comments--though only a couple--on the core topic of this conference. First, I would urge everyone teaching in this area to place much more emphasis on the liability side of the balance sheets of financial institutions. Traditional banking law casebooks gave some treatment to deposits and deposit insurance, which provided a good point in a course to engage students on the subject of moral hazard. But the whole concept of runnable liabilities--whether uninsured deposits, repo, commercial paper, or other forms--was left largely untouched, even for commercial banks, much less for broker-dealers like Lehman Brothers or insurance holding companies like AIG. And, of course, in the pre-crisis period there was no quantitative liquidity regulation to include in a casebook. Yet the financial crisis was, at least in its more virulent periods, as much a funding crisis as it was a solvency crisis. Indeed, the very fact that it may be difficult to distinguish clearly between the two is indicative of the primacy of funding to the crisis. Particularly in the context of systemic risk, funding and liquidity issues accordingly deserve something close to the attention devoted to capital if students are to understand the origins of the crisis, the regulatory response, and the challenges of regulation going forward. A focus on liabilities will help students understand why, for example, the Federal Reserve plans on setting capital standards differently for traditional insurance companies (that is, not the pre-crisis AIG) than for bank holding companies and their affiliates. An emphasis on runnable funding will help them see why systemic concerns extend beyond SIFIs as such. It also provides a good occasion for introducing students to the role of a lender of last resort, now perhaps more of a contested concept than had previously been assumed. I have considerably less conviction regarding my second comment, but I offer it anyway, perhaps to contribute to the pedagogical discussions that will be bred by this conference. Let me preface the observation by noting that were I to teach financial regulation again, the course would have to differ markedly from that fall 2008 version. Still, I wonder whether students will acquire a strong enough foundation for understanding how a financial regulatory system works in a course that is taught essentially as a survey of financial regulatory issues, without some point of reference to which they can return as they proceed through the course (or, more probably, as they cram for the exam). I was always struck by how much of a conceptual anchor for a banking law course was provided by the famous Corrigan/Aspinwall debate on whether banks were "special."9One could note, for example, that Aspinwall's observation that banks were becoming less special might have suggested that other forms of intermediaries should bemoreregulated, rather than the implication that banks should be less regulated. Indeed, my rereading of the companion pieces suggests that despite--or maybe because of--the fact that the debate is now more than 30 years old, it might profitably introduce a course that ventures well beyond traditional banking regulation, by its invitation to consider why we regulate in the first place. ConclusionI began teaching in this area just as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act was culminating three decades of bank deregulation. At the time, I suggested to students that the regulation of banking organizations was in an unstable equilibrium. While I initially meant the adjective mostly to refer to doctrine, it became progressively more applicable to the financial system itself. The implementation of the regulatory aims established after the crisis, along with the inevitable refinements of what has already been done, will continue to play out for some time. The upshot, I think, is both an unusually important time to be researching and writing in this area and an unusually challenging time to be teaching it. This conference has been an excellent occasion for helping to shape both a research agenda and a new pedagogy. 1. Howell E. Jackson and Edward J. Symons, Jr. (1999),Regulation of Financial Institutions(St. Paul, MN: West Group).Return to text2. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2008),Banking on Basel: The Future of International Financial Regulation(Washington, DC: Peter G. Peterson Institute for International Economics), pp. 178-82.Return to text3. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2016), "Next Steps in the Evolution of Stress Testing," speech delivered at the Yale University School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, CT, September 26.Return to text4. See, e.g., Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Rethinking the Aims of Prudential Regulation," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Bank Structure Conference, Chicago, IL, May 8.Return to text5. Tobias Adrian and Markus K. Brunnermeier (2016), "CoVaR,"American Economic Review, vol. 106 (July), pp. 1705-41; Fernando Duarte and Thomas M. Eisenback (2013; revised 2015), "Fire-Sale Spillovers and Systemic Risk,"Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report, no. 645; and Christian T. Brownlees and Robert F. Engle (2016), "SRISK: A Conditional Capital Shortfall Measure of Systemic Risk," available athttps://ssrn.com/abstract=1611229orhttp://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1611229.Return to text6. Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), "Financial Stability Regulation," speech given at the University of Pennsylvania School of Law Distinguished Jurist Lecture, Philadelphia, PA, October 10.Return to text7. See, e.g., John Armour and Jeffrey Gordon (2014), "Systemic Harms and Shareholder Value,"Journal of Legal Analysis,vol. 6, no. 1 (Spring), pp. 35-85; Lucian A. Bebchuk and Holger Spamann (2010), "Regulating Bankers' Pay,"Georgetown Law Journal, vol. 98, no. 2, pp. 247-87; Jonathan Macey and Maureen O'Hara (2016), "Bank Corporate Governance: A Proposal for the Post-Crisis World," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review, vol. 22, no. 1 (August), pp. 85-105.Return to text8. Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Corporate Governance and Prudential Regulation," speech given at the Association of American Law Schools 2014 Midyear Meeting, Washington, DC, June 9.Return to text9. See E. Gerald Corrigan (1982), "Are Banks Special?"Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Annual Report, available atwww.minneapolisfed.org/publications/annual-reports/are-banks-special; and Richard Aspinwall (1983), "On the 'Specialness' of Banking,"Issues in Banking Regulation, vol. 7 (Autumn), pp. 16-22.Return to text 1. Howell E. Jackson and Edward J. Symons, Jr. (1999),Regulation of Financial Institutions(St. Paul, MN: West Group).Return to text 2. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2008),Banking on Basel: The Future of International Financial Regulation(Washington, DC: Peter G. Peterson Institute for International Economics), pp. 178-82.Return to text 3. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2016), "Next Steps in the Evolution of Stress Testing," speech delivered at the Yale University School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, CT, September 26.Return to text 4. See, e.g., Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Rethinking the Aims of Prudential Regulation," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Bank Structure Conference, Chicago, IL, May 8.Return to text 5. Tobias Adrian and Markus K. Brunnermeier (2016), "CoVaR,"American Economic Review, vol. 106 (July), pp. 1705-41; Fernando Duarte and Thomas M. Eisenback (2013; revised 2015), "Fire-Sale Spillovers and Systemic Risk,"Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report, no. 645; and Christian T. Brownlees and Robert F. Engle (2016), "SRISK: A Conditional Capital Shortfall Measure of Systemic Risk," available athttps://ssrn.com/abstract=1611229orhttp://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1611229.Return to text 6. Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), "Financial Stability Regulation," speech given at the University of Pennsylvania School of Law Distinguished Jurist Lecture, Philadelphia, PA, October 10.Return to text 7. See, e.g., John Armour and Jeffrey Gordon (2014), "Systemic Harms and Shareholder Value,"Journal of Legal Analysis,vol. 6, no. 1 (Spring), pp. 35-85; Lucian A. Bebchuk and Holger Spamann (2010), "Regulating Bankers' Pay,"Georgetown Law Journal, vol. 98, no. 2, pp. 247-87; Jonathan Macey and Maureen O'Hara (2016), "Bank Corporate Governance: A Proposal for the Post-Crisis World," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review, vol. 22, no. 1 (August), pp. 85-105.Return to text 8. Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Corporate Governance and Prudential Regulation," speech given at the Association of American Law Schools 2014 Midyear Meeting, Washington, DC, June 9.Return to text 9. See E. Gerald Corrigan (1982), "Are Banks Special?"Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Annual Report, available atwww.minneapolisfed.org/publications/annual-reports/are-banks-special; and Richard Aspinwall (1983), "On the 'Specialness' of Banking,"Issues in Banking Regulation, vol. 7 (Autumn), pp. 16-22.Return to text
Members of the two national task forces convened by the Federal Reserve to make payments faster and more secure have begun to review and discuss 19 specific proposals submitted by interested task force members across the payments industry that outline potential approaches for a faster payment system in the United States. The detailed proposals and preliminary assessments have been distributed to the nearly 500 members of the two task forces, each of which includes representatives of financial institutions, consumer groups, payment service providers, financial technology firms, businesses, government agencies, and other interested parties. One task force is focused on faster payment capabilities, while the other is working to enhance payment system security. The review by the two task forces follows an independent analysis of the proposals by the global consulting firm McKinsey & Company, which assessed the proposals against criteria created by members of both task forces. A final two-part report will result from the Faster Payments Task Force work effort. The first section, slated for release in January 2017, will describe the task force history and background, including the process undertaken to identify and assess faster payments solutions. In addition, the report will detail gaps in the current payments landscape and identify opportunities for improvements. It will also outline the benefits to the public of a faster payment system and the needs it would serve. The second section of the final report, targeted for release in mid-year 2017, will include a discussion and assessment of the specific proposals. The proposals will offer models of what an end-to-end faster payment system in the United States could look like and will show how each proposal measured up against the various effectiveness criteria. In addition to the proposals and the assessments, this section will identify strategic issues deemed important to the successful development of faster payments in the United States and recommend industry actions required to advance their implementation and adoption. Gordon Werkema, Payments Strategy Director for the Federal Reserve System, said, "The review that began yesterday is the next step in the ongoing process to improve the speed and safety of payments in the United States." "The ultimate goal of the Faster Payments Task Force is to help payment system stakeholders implement faster payment capabilities that are safe and ubiquitous," he said. Sean Rodriguez, the Federal Reserve's Faster Payments Strategy Leader and chair of the Faster Payments Task Force, added that, "The task force review process is designed to facilitate diverse stakeholder input for the benefit of potential operators of faster payments capabilities, end users of these systems, and the public at large. The goal of this process is to create broad adoption of these capabilities by consumers and businesses over the coming years." "The Federal Reserve is extremely pleased with the level of enthusiasm and commitment demonstrated across both task forces as they continue to work to help develop faster payments capabilities for the United States," Rodriguez said. The task forces unveiled 36 effectiveness criteria earlier this year. An advisory group comprised of steering committee members from both task forces is overseeing the assessment process.
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the 31st Annual Group of Thirty International Banking Seminar, Washington, D.C. With Friday morning's labor market data prominently in the news, I will start with the labor market and end with a discussion of monetary policy.1 Recent reports pertaining to the labor market, including Friday's release, have been solid, showing continued improvement. So far this year, payrolls are reported to have increased by 180,000 per month. That is down from last year's gains of 230,000 per month but well above what is needed to provide jobs for new entrants into the labor force. Despite the strong job growth, the unemployment rate, at 5 percent in September, has essentially moved sideways this year as individuals have come back into the labor market in response to better employment opportunities and higher wages. As a consequence, the labor force participation rate has edged up against a backdrop of a declining longer-run trend owing to aging of the population. This increase is a very welcome development. All told, with the unemployment rate not far from levels that most Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants view as normal in the longer run and the rise in the participation rate, I see the U.S. economy as close to full employment, with some further improvement expected. Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a subdued 1 percent pace during the first half of the year and only 1-1/4 percent over the past four quarters. This pace likely underestimates the momentum in aggregate demand because it includes a sizable inventory correction that began early last year. It is likely that this correction has by now run its course, and most analysts are expecting inventories to make a positive contribution to demand over the second half of the year and for GDP to increase in the neighborhood of 2-3/4 percent.2 Household spending has been the main contributor to real GDP growth over the past four quarters, and, with solid gains in employment and household income and upbeat consumer sentiment, this sector should continue to support growth over the second half of the year. In contrast, residential construction has cooled this year despite rising home prices and low interest rates. Housing starts have been moving sideways, suggesting little pickup in construction over the near term. In addition, business investment spending has been weak, held down in part by declining activity in the energy sector, which has obviously been hard hit by the steep drop in oil prices. The recent stabilization of rig counts in the United States suggests that this source of restraint on business investment may be coming to an end. That said, business investment outside of the energy sector has been unusually soft for the past three quarters, and this weakness will bear close watching. Perhaps investment is being held down as firms respond to the flat trajectories for manufacturing and exports, reflecting subdued foreign demand and the appreciation of the dollar since mid-2014. Another possibility could be that firms are reassessing the prospects for growth and profitability in an environment of weak productivity growth and are accordingly scaling back investment plans. Notwithstanding these downside possibilities, I expect that business investment will pick up in the second half of the year as the drag from the oil sector wanes and as firms expand capacity to meet rising demand. The combination of strong job gains and lackluster GDP growth over the past four quarters reflects exceptionally poor labor productivity growth. Indeed, productivity declined 1/2 percent over the most recent four quarters and has increased only about 1/4 percent per year, on average, since 2011. While improving labor market conditions have led to higher household incomes in recent years, the key to improved living standards over the long haul will be a revival in productivity growth--at least to more normal levels, possibly in the range of 1-1/2 percent per annum. Foreign economies have been growing at a moderate pace, even in the face of numerous shocks, including concerns about China's exchange regime at the start of the year and Brexit over the summer. The economic effects of the steep appreciation of the dollar that began in mid-2014 have begun to fade, and U.S. exports have returned to growth following a weak 2015. Turning to inflation, I believe that transitory effects of the fall in oil prices and the rise in the dollar are the primary reason that inflation has fallen short of the FOMC's 2 percent goal. Total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation was 1 percent in August on a 12-month basis, held down by earlier declines in gasoline prices, but core PCE inflation has moved up somewhat, and its 12-month change stood at 1.7 percent in August. As oil prices and the dollar stabilize, the drag on consumer price inflation from these sources ought to dissipate, and inflation will likely move closer to 2 percent. This projection, however, depends critically on expectations for future inflation remaining reasonably well anchored; as the FOMC has noted, low readings for some indicators of expected inflation deserve close watching. Let me now turn to the monetary policy outlook. As you know, at our September meeting, the FOMC decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent. As we noted in the statement, the recent pickup in economic growth and continued progress in the labor market have strengthened the case for an increase in the federal funds rate.3Indeed, in our individual economic projections prepared in advance of the September meeting, nearly all FOMC participants anticipated an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate by the end of this year. Moreover, as economic growth has picked up and some of the earlier concerns about the global outlook have receded, the Committee judged the risks to the U.S. economic outlook to be roughly balanced. Given that generally positive view of the economic outlook, one might ask, why did we not raise the federal funds rate at our September meeting? Our decision was a close call, and leaving the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged did not reflect a lack of confidence in the economy. Conditions in the labor market are strengthening, and we expect that to continue. And while inflation remains low, we expect it to rise to our 2 percent objective over time. But with labor market slack being taken up at a somewhat slower pace than in previous years, scope for some further improvement in the labor market remaining, and inflation continuing to run below our 2 percent target, we chose to wait for further evidence of continued progress toward our objectives. As we noted in our statement, we continue to expect that the evolution of the economy will warrant some gradual increases in the federal funds rate over time to achieve and maintain our objectives. That assessment is based on our view that the neutral nominal federal funds rate--that is, the interest rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary and keeps the economy operating on an even keel--is currently low by historical standards. With the federal funds rate modestly below the neutral rate, the current stance of monetary policy should be viewed as modestly accommodative, which is appropriate to foster further progress toward our objectives. But since monetary policy is only modestly accommodative, there appears little risk of falling behind the curve in the near future, and gradual increases in the federal funds rate will likely be sufficient to get monetary policy to a neutral stance over the next few years. This view is consistent with the projections of appropriate monetary policy prepared by FOMC participants in connection with our September meeting.4The median projection for the federal funds rate rises only gradually to 1.1 percent at the end of next year, 1.9 percent at the end of 2018, and 2.6 percent by the end of 2019. Most participants also marked down their estimate of the longer-run normal federal funds rate, with the median now at 2.9 percent. However, as we have noted on many previous occasions, policy is not on a preset course. The economic outlook is inherently uncertain, and our assessment of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate will change in response to changes to the economic outlook and associated risks. 1.I am grateful to James Clouse and Glenn Follette of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.The September Blue Chip forecast projects real GDP to increase at an annual rate of 2.9 percent in the third quarter and 2.4 percent in the fourth quarter.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 21.Return to text 4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee Release Economic Projections from the September 20-21 FOMC Meeting," press release," September 21.Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York I am grateful to the Economic Club of New York for inviting me to speak today. My subject is the historically low level of interest rates, a topic not far from the minds of many in this audience and of many others in the United States and all over the world.1 Notwithstanding the increase in the federal funds rate last December, the federal funds rate remains at a very low level. Policy rates of many other major central banks are lower still--even negative in some cases, even in countries long famous for their conservative monetary policies. Long-term interest rates in many countries are also remarkably low, suggesting that participants in financial markets expect policy rates to remain depressed for years to come. My main objective today will be to present a quantitative assessment of some possible factors behind low interest rates--and also of factors that could contribute to higher interest rates in the future. Now, I am sure that the reaction of many of you may be, "Well, if you and your Fed colleagues dislike low interest rates, why not just go ahead and raise them? You are the Federal Reserve, after all." One of my goals today is to convince you that it is not that simple, and that changes in factors over which the Federal Reserve has little influence--such as technological innovation and demographics--are important factors contributing to both short- and long-term interest rates being so low at present. There are at least three reasons why we should be concerned about such low interest rates. First, and most worrying, is the possibility that low long-term interest rates are a signal that the economy's long-run growth prospects are dim. Later, I will go into more detail on the link between economic growth and interest rates. One theme that will emerge is that depressed long-term growth prospects put sustained downward pressure on interest rates. To the extent that low long-term interest rates tell us that the outlook for economic growth is poor, all of us should be very concerned, for--as we all know--economic growth lies at the heart of our nation's, and the world's, future prosperity. A second concern is that low interest rates make the economy more vulnerable to adverse shocks that can put it in a recession. That is the problem of what used to be called thezero lower boundon interest rates. In light of several countries currently operating with negative interest rates, we now refer not to the zero lower bound, but to theeffective lower bound, a number that is close to zero but negative. Operating close to the effective lower bound limits the room for central banks to combat recessions using their conventional interest rate tool--that is, by cutting the policy interest rate. And while unconventional monetary policies--such as asset purchases, balance sheet policies, and forward guidance--can provide additional accommodation, it is reasonable to think these alternatives are not perfect substitutes for conventional policy. The limitation on monetary policy imposed by low trend interest rates could therefore lead to longer and deeper recessions when the economy is hit by negative shocks. And the third concern is that low interest rates may also threaten financial stability as some investors reach for yield and compressed net interest margins make it harder for some financial institutions to build up capital buffers. I should say that while this is a reason for concern and bears continual monitoring, the evidence so far does not suggest a heightened threat of financial instability in the post-financial-crisis United States stemming from ultralow interest rates. However, I note that a year ago the Fed did issue warnings--successful warnings--about the dangers of excessive leveraged lending, and concerns about financial stability are clearly on the minds of some members of the Federal Open Market Committee, FOMC. Those are three powerful reasons to prefer interest rates that are higher than current rates. But, of course, Fed interest rates are kept very low at the moment because of the need to maintain aggregate demand at levels that will support the attainment of our dual policy goals of maximum sustainable employment and price stability, defined as the rate of inflation in the price level of personal consumption expenditures (or PCE) being at our target level of 2 percent. That the actual federal funds rate has to be so low for the Fed to meet its objectives suggests that the equilibrium interest rate--that is, the federal funds rate that will prevail in the longer run, once cyclical and other transitory factors have played out--has fallen.2Let me turn now to my main focus, namely an assessment of why the equilibrium interest rate is so low. To frame this discussion, it is useful to think about the real interest rate as the price that equilibrates the economy's supply of saving with the economy's demand for investment. To explain why interest rates are low, we look for factors that are boosting saving, depressing investment, or both.3For those of you lucky enough to remember the economics you learned many years ago, we are looking at a point that is on the IS curve--the investment-equals-saving curve. And because we are considering the long-run equilibrium interest rate, we are looking at the interest rate that equilibrates investment and saving when the economy is at full employment, as it is assumed to be in the long run. I will look at four major forces that have affected the balance between saving and investment in recent years and then consider some that may be amenable to the influence of economic policy. The economy's growth prospects must be at the top of the list. Among the factors affecting economic growth, gains in productivity and growth of the labor force are particularly important. Second, an increase in the average age of the population is likely pushing up household saving in the U.S. economy. Third, investment has been weak in recent years, especially given the low levels of interest rates. Fourth and finally, developments abroad, notably a slowing in the trend pace of foreign economic growth, may be affecting U.S. interest rates. To assess the empirical importance of these factors in explaining low long-run equilibrium interest rates, I will rely heavily on simulations that the Board of Governors' staff have run with one of our main econometric models, the FRB/US model. This model, which is used extensively in policy analyses at the Fed, has many advantages, including its firm empirical grounding, and the fact that it is detailed enough to make it possible to consider a wide range of factors within its structure. Going through the four major forces I just mentioned, I will look first at the effect that slower trend economic growth, both on account of the decline in productivity growth as well as lower labor force growth, may be having on interest rates. Starting with productivity, gains in labor productivity have been meager in recent years. One broad measure of business-sector productivity has risen only 1-1/4 percent per year over the past 10 years in the United States and only 1/2 percent, on average, over the past 5 years. By contrast, over the 30 years from 1976 to 2005, productivity rose a bit more than 2 percent per year. Although the jury is still out on what is behind the latest slowdown in productivity gains, prominent scholars such as Robert Gordon and John Fernald suggest that smaller increases in productivity are the result of a slowdown in innovation that is likely to persist for some time.4 Lower long-run trend productivity growth, and thus lower trend output growth, affects the balance between saving and investment through a variety of channels. A slower pace of innovation means that there will be fewer profitable opportunities in which to invest, which will tend to push down investment demand. Lower productivity growth also reduces the future income prospects of households, lowering their consumption spending today and boosting their demand for savings. Thus, slower productivity growth implies both lower investment and higher savings, both of which tend to push down interest rates.5 In addition to a slower pace of innovation, it is also likely that demographic changes will weigh on U.S. economic growth in the years ahead, as they have in the recent past. In particular, a rising fraction of the population is entering retirement. According to some estimates, the effects of this population aging will trim about 1/4 percentage point from labor force growth in coming years.6 Lower trend increases in productivity and slower labor force growth imply lower overall economic growth in the years ahead. This view is consistent with the most recent Summary of Economic Projections of the FOMC, in which the median value for the rate of growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) in the longer run is just 1-3/4 percent, compared with an average growth rate from 1990 to 2005 of around 3 percent.7 We can use simulations of the FRB/US model to infer the consequences of such a slowdown in longer-run GDP growth for the equilibrium federal funds rate. Those simulations suggest that the slowdown to the 1-3/4 percent pace anticipated in the Summary of Economic Projections would eventually trim about 120 basis points from the longer-run equilibrium federal funds rate.8 Let me move now to the second major development on my list. In addition to its effects on labor force growth, the aging of the population is likely to boost aggregate household saving. This increase is because the ranks of those approaching retirement in the United States (and in other advanced economies) are growing, and that group typically has above-average saving rates.9One recent study by Federal Reserve economists suggests that population aging--through its effects on saving--could be pushing down the longer-run equilibrium federal funds rate relative to its level in the 1980s by as much as 75 basis points.10 In addition to slower growth and demographic changes, a third factor that may be pushing down interest rates in the United States is weak investment. Analysis with the FRB/US model suggests that, given how low interest rates have been in recent years, investment should have been considerably higher in the past couple of years. According to the model, this shortfall in investment has depressed the long-run equilibrium federal funds rate by about 60 basis points. Investment may be low for a number of reasons. One is that greater perceived uncertainty could also make firms more hesitant to invest. Another possibility is that the economy is simply less capital intensive than it was in earlier decades.11 Fourth on my list are developments abroad: Many of the factors depressing U.S. interest rates have also been working to lower foreign interest rates. To take just one example, many advanced foreign economies face a slowdown in longer-term growth prospects that is similar to that in the United States, with similar implications for equilibrium interest rates in the longer run. In the FRB/US model, lower interest rates abroad put upward pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar and thus lower net exports. FRB/US simulations suggest that a reduction in the equilibrium federal funds rate of about 30 basis points would be required to offset the effects in the United States of a reduction in foreign growth prospects similar to what we have seen in the United States. The first figure shows the effects of these four factors. You will see that each factor is considered separately; there is no attempt to add them together. That is because the broad factors we are considering here could well overlap--particularly the link between slower growth and the remaining three factors. Still, the comparison gives us a notion of the relative importance of some of the leading explanations for the decline in interest rates. I started by noting the costs of low interest rates, including the limits on the ability of monetary policy to respond to recessions, and possible risks to financial stability. Now that we have some notion of where lower interest rates might be coming from, I want to turn to the question of what might contribute to raising longer-runequilibriuminterest rates.12 One development that would boost the equilibrium interest rate would be a further waning in the investor precaution that seems to have been holding back investment--in Keynesian terms, an improvement in animal spirits. The first bar in the second slide illustrates the effects on the longer-run equilibrium federal funds rate of an increase in business-sector investment equal to 1 percent of GDP. As can be seen, such a rebound in investment would raise the equilibrium funds rate by 30 basis points, according to the FRB/US model. In addition, higher investment would improve the longer-run growth prospects of the U.S. economy, although the effects in this particular case are fairly small, with real GDP growth about 0.1 percentage point higher on account of the higher investment. Over the years, many economists--some of them textbook authors--have noted that expansionary fiscal policy could raise equilibrium interest rates.13To illustrate this possibility, the next two bars on the slide show the estimated effect on interest rates of two possible expansionary fiscal policies, one that boosts government spending by 1 percent of GDP and another that cuts taxes by a similar amount. According to the FRB/US model, both policies, if sustained, would lead to a substantial increase in the equilibrium federal funds rate. Higher spending of this amount would raise equilibrium interest rates by about 50 basis points; lower taxes would raise equilibrium rates by 40 basis points. I should note that the FRB/US model does not contain a great deal of detail about taxes and government spending. These are thus the effects of very broad changes in income taxes and government spending, and not those of any specific, detailed, policy measures. It is important to emphasize that these estimates are from just one model and other models may give different results. Still, I think these implications of fiscal policy measures are qualitatively correct--they are a standard result in many models, including the simplest textbook IS-LM model. Stimulative fiscal policies such as these could be beneficial if the economy confronted a recession. Of course, it would be important to ensure that any fiscal policy changes during a recession did not compromise long-run fiscal sustainability. Government policies that boost the economy's long-run growth rate would be an even better means of raising the equilibrium interest rate. This is a point I have also made in the past.14While there is disagreement about what the most effective policies would be, some combination of more encouragement for private investment, improved public infrastructure, better education, and more effective regulation is likely to promote faster growth of productivity and living standards--and also to reduce the probability that the economy and, particularly, the central bank will in the future have to contend with the effective lower bound. In summary, a variety of factors have been holding down interest rates and may continue to do so for some time. But economic policy can help offset the forces driving down longer-run equilibrium interest rates. Some of these policies may also help boost the economy's growth potential. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Fall), pp. 197-255.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee Release Economic Projections from the September 20-21 FOMC Meeting," press release, September 21.Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio (2016). "Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2016-05. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April.Fernald, John, and Bing Wang (2015). "The Recent Rise and Fall of Rapid Productivity Growth (PDF)," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February.Fischer, Stanley (2016). "Remarks on the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Program on the World Economy," a conference sponsored by The Aspen Institute, Aspen, Colo., August 21.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August).Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Fall), pp. 197-255.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee Release Economic Projections from the September 20-21 FOMC Meeting," press release, September 21.Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio (2016). "Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2016-05. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April.Fernald, John, and Bing Wang (2015). "The Recent Rise and Fall of Rapid Productivity Growth (PDF)," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February.Fischer, Stanley (2016). "Remarks on the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Program on the World Economy," a conference sponsored by The Aspen Institute, Aspen, Colo., August 21.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August).Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Fall), pp. 197-255.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee Release Economic Projections from the September 20-21 FOMC Meeting," press release, September 21.Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio (2016). "Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2016-05. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April.Fernald, John, and Bing Wang (2015). "The Recent Rise and Fall of Rapid Productivity Growth (PDF)," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February.Fischer, Stanley (2016). "Remarks on the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Program on the World Economy," a conference sponsored by The Aspen Institute, Aspen, Colo., August 21.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August).Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Fall), pp. 197-255. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee Release Economic Projections from the September 20-21 FOMC Meeting," press release, September 21.Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio (2016). "Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2016-05. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April.Fernald, John, and Bing Wang (2015). "The Recent Rise and Fall of Rapid Productivity Growth (PDF)," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February.Fischer, Stanley (2016). "Remarks on the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Program on the World Economy," a conference sponsored by The Aspen Institute, Aspen, Colo., August 21.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August).Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee Release Economic Projections from the September 20-21 FOMC Meeting," press release, September 21. Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio (2016). "Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2016-05. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April.Fernald, John, and Bing Wang (2015). "The Recent Rise and Fall of Rapid Productivity Growth (PDF)," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February.Fischer, Stanley (2016). "Remarks on the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Program on the World Economy," a conference sponsored by The Aspen Institute, Aspen, Colo., August 21.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August).Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio (2016). "Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2016-05. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April. Fernald, John, and Bing Wang (2015). "The Recent Rise and Fall of Rapid Productivity Growth (PDF)," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February.Fischer, Stanley (2016). "Remarks on the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Program on the World Economy," a conference sponsored by The Aspen Institute, Aspen, Colo., August 21.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August).Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Fernald, John, and Bing Wang (2015). "The Recent Rise and Fall of Rapid Productivity Growth (PDF)," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February. Fischer, Stanley (2016). "Remarks on the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Program on the World Economy," a conference sponsored by The Aspen Institute, Aspen, Colo., August 21.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August).Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Fischer, Stanley (2016). "Remarks on the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Program on the World Economy," a conference sponsored by The Aspen Institute, Aspen, Colo., August 21. Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August).Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August).Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August).Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF)" NBER Working Paper no. 21476 (August). Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1.Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Hilsenrath, Jon and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs,"Wall Street Journal, vol. 168, no. 88 (October 13, 2016), p. 1. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier).Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers,NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.Amsterdam:Journal of International Economics(Elsevier). Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8.-------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Kocherlakota, Narayana (2015). "Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate," speech delivered at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., September 8. -------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16.Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version -------- (2016). "Write Your Congressperson! (If You Want Higher Interest Rates),"Kocherlakota's Thoughts on Policy(blog), January 19, https://sites.google.com/site/kocherlakota009/home/policy/thoughts-on-policy/1-19-16. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70.Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December.Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate (PDF)," Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December. Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73.-------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,"Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73. -------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65.-------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version -------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation,"American Economic Review, vol. 105 (May), pp 60-65. -------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version -------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,"Foreign Affairs, vol. 95 (March/April), pp. 2-9, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation. 1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version 1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version 1. I am grateful to John Roberts and Robert Tetlow of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. More formally, my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003) have developed a statistical procedure that decomposes the movement in interest rates into the contribution of long-run and short-run factors. They conclude that the long-run component of the level of the real federal funds rate is currently very low--around 1/4 percent--compared with a pre-2000 average of 2-1/2 percent. Other assessments have reached similar conclusions. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); and Kiley (2015). However, it is important to note that there is a great deal of statistical uncertainty around all of these estimates.Return to text 3. While the analysis that follows relates to interest rates in the long run, these factors are also important determinants of interest rates in the short run.Return to text 4. See Gordon (2016) and Fernald and Wang (2015).Return to text 5. These effects are what we would expect from our textbook models; they are also at work in the FRB/US model being used here. The empirical evidence on the link between trend growth and long-run equilibrium interest rates is mixed. Laubach and Williams (2003) find evidence of a link that is consistent with the predictions of models such as FRB/US. However, in their well-known paper, Hamilton et al. (2016) conclude that while "the theoretical presumption that there is a link between aggregate growth and real rates is very strong," the empirical link between the real equilibrium interest rate and real GDP growth is weak. As stressed by Hamilton et al. there a great deal of uncertainty over the relationship between growth and interest rates, likely, in part because of the multitude of shocks to which the economy is subject. A structural model, such as FRB/US, provides one method of estimating the link between growth and interest rates by examining the reaction of the interest rate to a clearly defined shock to the trend growth rate. However, this reaction occurs within the model economy, and is therefore subject to the particular structure and assumptions of the FRB/US model.Return to text 6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to textAppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version 6. See, for example, Aaronson et al (2014).Return to text 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Return to text 8. Details of the simulations are included in an Appendix to the speech.Return to text 9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); Rachel and Smith (2015); and Carvalho, Ferrero, and Necchio (2016).Return to text 10. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12.Return to text 11. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). See also Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).Return to text 12. By emphasizing "longer-runequilibrium"interest rates, I am excluding monetary policy (which is unlikely to have major effects on the equilibrium real interest rate), and thereby also relating to concerns about monetary policy being the only game in town.Return to text 13. See, for example, Kocherlakota (2015, 2016) and Summers (2016).Return to text 14. For instance, in Fischer, 2016.Return to text AppendixHere we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures.1. BackgroundOur point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule.The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly.2. The shocksAll simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable.Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow.Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years.Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001.Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace.Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount.Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase.Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased.Table A.1. Summary of Shocks Affecting the Neutral Rate of InterestShockFRB/US MnemonicSpecification of shockΔrr*1 Population growthN161 ppt, 20 years1.152 Productivity growthHMFPT1 ppt, 40 years0.853 InvestmentEPD, EPS, EPI1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.294 Cost of capitalRPD2 ppts, 20 years0.635 Foreign interest ratesFRSTAR1 ppt, indefinitely0.276 Government spendingEGFO1 pct of GDP, 25 years0.507 Tax cutTRFPDeficits as in line 60.41* In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule.3. Calculations for figuresFigure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rateSlower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points.Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points.Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points.Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points.Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest ratesThis figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1.ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors.Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41.Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27.-------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24.-------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2.-------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6.1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version Appendix Here we review the simulations that underlie the estimates of the effects of various economic disturbances for their implications for the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate, using simulations of the staff's FRB/US model. We first provide background on the methodology we use. We then review the nature of the shocks that are discussed in the speech and show the effects of those shocks on the long-run federal funds rate. Finally, we provide details about the results shown in the figures. 1. Background Our point of departure is a definition of the equilibrium interest rate that corresponds with theneutral rate of interest. In particular, we use the definition of the neutral rate of interest that Chair Yellen used in a 2015 speech: "the real rate consistent with the economy achieving maximum employment and price stability over the medium term," which, in an elaboration in a footnote, is said to be "usually thought of as independent of the cyclical disturbances that routinely buffet the economy...[that] fade away after a few years."1The sort of disturbances being captured under the rubric of shifts in r* are thus rarer and more persistent than the usual business cycle phenomena and are associated with the "various adjustment processes that are unusually drawn out by historical standards...[and have] slow-moving influences on both aggregate demand and supply."2This definition corresponds reasonably closely with the (possibly time-varying) intercept of a Taylor-type rule in that the standard arguments of the Taylor (1999) rule--the output gap and the deviation of inflation from target--can be thought of as capturing the influence of the drivers of monetary policy at business cycle frequencies, with the longer-lasting (lower-frequency) determinants of the level of the policy rate being subsumed into movements in r*.3 Using this definition of r*, we identify several economic disturbances that have long-lasting consequences for the savings-investment balance of the U.S. economy. We shock the FRB/US model with each of these disturbances and compute what long-lasting (but not necessarily permanent) shift in the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule is the best perturbation to the rule. The thought experiment behind the simulations is as follows. We assume that the public views the Taylor (1999) rule as a good approximation of the conduct of monetary policy, and, accordingly, they price assets and formulate expenditure decisions on the expectation that this policy will prevail. Then policymakers identify that the economy is encountering a shock with durable implications for the savings-investment balance of the economy. At this point, policymakers communicate to the public a long-lasting shift to the intercept of the rule. Private-sector agents are assumed to understand this communication, and find it credible, and thus adjust their expectations accordingly. 2. The shocks All simulations were carried out using the database from the public release of the FRB/US model, starting in 2036:Q1, at which time the economy is in steady state.4Accordingly, the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is never a binding constraint under these circumstances. Consistent with the definition of a steady state, at the start of the simulations, the output gap is closed, the unemployment rate is equal to its natural rate of 4.8 percent, inflation is 2 percent, the nominal federal funds rate is 3 percent, the 10-year Treasury bond rate is 3.5 percent, and potential output growth is 2 percent. Except as otherwise noted, tax rates are held fixed at their baseline levels for four years, after which fiscal policy is allowed to respond by gradually adjusting the federal personal income tax rate to stabilize the ratio of federal government fiscal deficits to gross domestic product (GDP) at its assumed baseline target level. In all instances, monetary policy is assumed to be governed by the (non-inertial) Taylor (1999) rule, with an intercept shift where applicable. Table A.1 summarizes the effects of several shocks on the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate in the FRB/US model. The details of how these shocks were implemented follow. Labor force.The growth rate of the U.S. population (variable N16 in the FRB/US model) is assumed to climb over the course of a year to a pace that is 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline, with commensurate effects on the labor force, employment, potential output, and actual output. The elevated pace of population growth lasts for 20years before returning to baseline rates over the succeeding 5 years. Productivity.The growth rate of total factor productivity (HMFPT) is increased 0.7 percentage point, which implies an acceleration in labor productivity (output per worker hour) of 1.0 percentage point. The shock lasts for 40 years before fading out at a moderate pace. Investment.Sequences of shocks to the FRB/US model's three equations for business fixed investment--producer durables (EPD), intellectual property (EPI), and nonresidential structures (EPS)--are constructed such that the total increase in gross fixed capital investment equals 1 percent of GDP for 25 years. Thereafter, the shocks fade at a moderate rate over time. The shocks are scaled such that the split between the three components is about equal to their relative shares of GDP since 2001. Cost of capital.Relative to its average over the period from 2000 to 2007, the financial cost of capital (RPD) has declined by about two percentage points, according to the FRB/US model database. That should have produced a boom in investment, which seems not to have happened. This shock computes the magnitude of this "missing effect" by simulating the effect of an increase in the financial cost of capital. RPD affects the user cost of capital for the model's four investment categories: equipment, intellectual property, nonresidential structures and inventories. Those, in turn, influence target rates of investment, all else equal. The shock lasts for 20 years before fading out at a moderate pace. Foreign interest rates.The equilibrium real interest rate in (trade-weighted) foreign economies (FRSTAR) is assumed to decline by 1 percentage point for an indefinite period. This decline has the effect of reducing both foreign long- and short-term interest rates by a comparable amount. Government spending.An increase in the level of federal expenditures on goods (EGFO) equal to 1 percent of GDP is sustained for 25 years and then phased out at a moderate pace thereafter. All other components of government spending are held at their baseline levels. The federal personal income tax rate is held at baseline for 10 years, and then the model's fiscal policy reaction function is allowed to adjust the tax rate so as to return the ratio of federal deficits to GDP to its previous target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is therefore allowed to permanently increase. Tax cut.The model's fiscal policy reaction function is suspended for 10 years, similar to the case of the government spending shock described previously. A sequence of shocks to the FRB/US model's equation for the average federal personal income tax rate (TRFP) is constructed such that the resulting decrease in taxes increases the federal budget deficit very similarly to the government spending shock described previously, in order to make the two simulations of comparable magnitude. After 10 years, the personal federal tax rate is allowed to adjust to bring the ratio of government deficits to GDP back to the baseline target level. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio is permanently increased. * In the current context,rr*is defined as the intercept of the Taylor (1999) rule. 3. Calculations for figures Figure 1: Effects on the long-run equilibrium federal funds rate Slower growth.The slower growth of 1-1/4 percentage points in this scenario assumes that labor force growth is 1/4 percentage point lower and that labor productivity growth is 1 percentage point lower. According to table A.1, an increase of 1 percentage point in labor force growth would raise the equilibrium real federal funds rate by 1.15 percentage points. The contribution of the slower labor force growth to the equilibrium federal funds rate is therefore negative 0.25 x 1.15, or negative 30 basis points. Similarly, the contribution of slower productivity growth is negative 1.00 x 0.85 = negative 85 basis points, for a total effect of negative 115 basis points. Demographics.As explained in the text, the effect of demographics on the equilibrium federal funds rate is based on the study of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), who emphasize that demographic changes since the 1980s would imply a reduction of 125 basis points in the equilibrium federal funds rate. However, this number includes the effects of demographics on the labor force, which have already been included in the growth effect. As suggested by figure 12 of Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), adjusting for the effects of employment would trim about 50 basis points from the total effect (the distance between the solid-blue and dashed-green lines as of 2015). Thus, in Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), the effects excluding those via labor force growth are about negative 75 basis points. Lower investment.This experiment corresponds to the cost of capital shock discussed in section 2, with the sign reversed. As can be seen in line 4 of table A.1, the "missing effects" of a 2 percentage point decrease in the financial cost of capital would have lowered the equilibrium real funds rate by 63 basis points. Slower foreign growth.Here, we assume that foreign trend GDP growth has fallen as much as U.S. trend GDP growth and thus has had a similar effect on interest rates--namely, 115 basis points. That assumption would imply a reduction in the (U.S.) equilibrium federal funds rate of negative 1.15 x 0.27, or negative 30 basis points. Figure 2: Long-run effects of animal spirits and fiscal policy on interest rates This figure shows the effects of shocks that lead to 1 percentage point shifts in each of the variables indicated. These simulations can be found directly in table A.1. Thus, the animal spirits shock in figure 2 corresponds to the investment shock shown in line 3 of table A.1. And the government spending and tax cut simulations shown in figure 2 line up with the simulations shown in lines 6 and 7 of table A.1. References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "FRB/US Model," webpage, Board of Governors. Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41. Williams, John C. (2016). "Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August. Yellen, Janet L. (2015a). "Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27. -------- (2015b). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24. -------- (2015c). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2. -------- (2016). "Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, June 6. 1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to textView speech charts and figuresAccessible Version 1. See Yellen (2015a), paragraph 15 and footnote 4.Return to text 2. See Yellen (2015a), footnote 4. Other definitions of the neutral rate used by the Chair in her public communications include the short-term real interest rate "that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential" (Yellen, 2015c, 2016) and the short-term real interest rate "that would be consistent with real GDP expanding in line with potential" (Yellen, 2015b). There may be circumstances in which the nuances of these definitions would matter, but, for our purposes, we can take them as one and the same.Return to text 3. Williams (2016) defines thenatural rate of interestas the short-term real rate "that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation." This description is close to that of the neutral rate (but not the natural rate) in the main text and in note 2 but adds a reference to inflation, which does not appear in definitions of the neutral rate.Return to text 4. See Board of Governors (2016).Return to text