Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At "A Conference in Honor of Michael Woodford’s Contributions to Economics" cosponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Columbia University Program for Economic Research, and Columbia University Department of Economics, New York, New York It is an honor for me to speak at the opening of this conference in honor of Michael Woodford, whose contributions to the theory of economic policy are frequently a central part of the economic analysis that takes place in the policy discussions at the Federal Reserve.1 The main story I want to tell today is about the quality of Michael's major book,Interest and Prices(henceforthMWIP).I will start with his predecessors, beginning as Michael does in hisInterest and Priceswith Wicksell.23I shall quote key points from and about Wicksell'sInterest and Prices(henceforthKWIP), and following that, from Patinkin'sMoney, Interest, and Prices(second edition, 1965) (henceforthMIP), which are relevant toMWIP,Michael Woodford'sInterest and Prices(2003). Wicksell follows this opening by discussing the difference between the ability of the economic system to adjust to changes in relative prices and to changes in the general level of prices. In the latter case, Wicksell states that both inflation and deflation are evils, but that it is generally believed that what is most desirable is a situation "in which prices arerising[italics in original] slowly but steadily" (p.3). He likens the arguments for this viewpoint as reminding one "of those who purposely keep their watches a little fast so as to be more certain of catching their trains" (p.3). Rational man that he was, he dismisses such behavior--of which I am guilty--as not being able to survive in the long run. And optimist as he must have been, he concludes the opening chapter of hisInterest and Pricesby saying that "the prevention of these troubles by the provision of a constant measure of value cannot, in the present state of economic development, be regardeda priorias unthinkable" (p.7) He concludes the chapter (p.50) by saying that ........... He then sets out the specie-flow mechanism, and concludes on that subject by saying that while this explanation (the specie-flow mechanism) must be correct, the He then goes on to discuss potential reasons for the more rapid adjustment, the most important of which is that the price pressures on individual commodities that are imported or exported as a result of changes in prices in the two countries exert a direct influence--in the direction of equilibrium--in the prices of individual goods. ........... But To make this possible, Wicksell suggests the suspension of the free coinage of gold, as a "first step towards the introduction of an ideal standard of value"--"an international paper standard" (p.193). And, on a soaring personal note at the end of the formal text of the book (p.196), he writes If this were a paper about Wicksell, there would be no choice but to stop after this inspiring crescendo. But although Wicksell plays a key role in this paper, the paper is not primarily about him. Let me nonetheless conclude this section of the paper with a few additional comments. And here comes the essence of Samuelson's evaluation of his great predecessor: What Samuelson saw in 1962 had gradually become the accepted view of Wicksell in the English-speaking world after the translation of bothInterest and Pricesand the two volumes of hisLectures on Political Economy6in the 1930s. And the references by Samuelson to the many topics on which Wicksell made important contributions should remind us that Wicksell'sInterest and Priceswas but one of his major contributions, and that Volume II of hisLectures on Political Economyis about money, banking and credit. In discussing Patinkin's work, I need to mention that I was his research assistant when he visited MIT in about 1967-8, and that I was an admirer of his work and of his reputation as the founder of modern Israeli economics, and that later I became his friend, albeit a junior among friends. Now I turn to his major work. The first paragraph of the introduction to both editions ofMIPis In Note M ofMIP(pp. 651-664) Patinkin reviews empirical investigations of the real-balance effect, noting that most of the studies are in effect estimates of the impact of liquid wealth holdings, rather than just real balances, on consumption. Reviews of the book.In an article published in 1993 in a festschrift for Patinkin8, I reviewed both editions ofMIP.The book had been reviewed by at least twelve reviewers, whose verdicts were largely favorable, with almost all recognizing that they were dealing with a major work. Supplementary Notes.MIPincludes excellent "Supplementary Notes and Studies in the Literature" including on the work of Walras (Notes B and C), Wicksell (Note E), of whom like almost all who studied him became admirers, on Newcomb, Fisher and the Transactions Approach to the Quantity Theory (Note F), Marshall, Pigou and the Cambridge Cash-Balance Approach (Note G), Monetary Aspects of the Casselian System (Note H), The Classical and Neoclassical Theory of Money and Interest (Note J), and Keynes'General Theory(Note K).In his review ofMIP,Kenneth Arrow9described the literature notes as "sparkling"--not a word frequently used in such a context. Harry Johnson's comments.In his 1962 review article on recent work on monetary theory and policy,10Harry Johnson devoted almost a quarter of the review toMIP, which he described as "monumentally scholarly", but argued that its analysis of the real balance effect was "conceptually inadequate and crucially incomplete".11 Johnson (1962) argued further that Possibly Johnson was thinking of the central bank having to operate via open-market operations, through exchanges of assets, which would induce substitution effects, rather than through the printing of money, which in the first instance produced increases in real balances, which would produce wealth effects, but which are typically fiscal rather than monetary actions. Involuntary unemployment.Chapters 13 and 14 ofMIPdeal with the consumption function when unemployment takes the household off its labor supply curve, and with other interactions between markets. They are based on research by Leijonhufvud and Clower, and do an excellent job of clarifying the implications of disequilibrium in one market for behavior in other markets. This approach was developed further by Robert Barro and Herschel Grossman in their 1976 volume,Money, Employment, and Inflation,but began to go out of use and fashion in the 1980s.12 Surprising omissions.MIPdefinitely achieves its goal of integrating monetary and value theory, but shows signs of its age in two omissions: first, that expectations are not emphasized and indeed barely discussed; and second, there is no analysis inMIPof ongoing inflation--the latter omission being particularly striking given Israel's inflationary history. Now we come to modern times, to Michael Woodford's 2003 magnum opus,Interest and Prices.Many of the results that appear in the book were developed and published earlier, for Michael has been a creative and insightful researcher from the start of his career. But in the interests of time, I will start with the book. And since the book is massive and comprehensive, I will focus on just a few topics of interest selected from it. I also add discussion of Michael's views on quantitative easing and forward guidance--topics that would have received far more attention in MWIP if it had been written a decade later than it was. And let me note explicitly that Michael has continued to be remarkably productive, and that the topics I focus on below are among those best known by modern macroeconomists, but that there is far more to be learned from reading Michael's work than I am able to discuss today. The Structure ofMWIP.Interest and Prices(MWIP)is divided into two parts. Part I, Analytic Framework, is essentially an advanced textbook on modern macro models and some of their monetary policy implications, which introduces the reader to both useful techniques of analysis and recurrent and important issues in the field. Its chapter headings are: Price-Level Determination under Interest Rate Rules; Optimizing Models with Nominal Rigidities; A Neo-Wicksellian Framework for the Analysis of Monetary Policy; and Dynamics of the Response to Monetary Policy. Part II, Optimal Policy, is more directly policy-focused, with chapter headings: Inflation Stabilization and Welfare; Gains from Commitment to a Policy Rule; and finally, Optimal Monetary Policy Rules. Analyzing Monetary Policy without Money.One of Woodford's most interesting results is that it is often possible to study monetary policy without having money in the model. In these cases, monetary policy is conducted using the interest rate as the monetary policy instrument. As Woodford notes in Chapter 4, "A Neo-Wicksellian Framework", a money demand equation can under some circumstances be added to the model, with the amount of money supplied by the central bank having to be consistent with the money demand equation. But inflation in such a situation is not necessarily caused by the quantity of money; rather the quantity of money may be caused by and consistent with the inflation rate resulting from the three basic equations in which the money stock does not appear--in particular from the gap between the natural and actual rates of interest. For this result to go through, the money stock cannotper sebe among the variables that determine the equilibrium of the remaining--the non-monetary--part of the model. This means that the separation result is not possible if there is a real balance effect operating in the goods markets. Or to put the result differently, the separation feature is consistent with an inside money monetary system, while it may well not be consistent with an outside money structure. It is thus consistent with the suggestion by Harry Johnson mentioned above, that monetary analysis might better be carried out primarily in an inside-money than an outside-money model. This neo-Wicksellian result is somewhat surprising. It provides justification for the behavior of those central banks that think and talk of monetary policy purely in terms of the policy interest rate and other financial return variables, but not of the money stock. However, we need to remind ourselves that it is built on an assumption that the money stockper sedoes not appear in the basic three-equation model--and that is an assumption, not a theorem.14 The Goals of Policy.When he turns to optimal policy, Woodford starts Chapter 6 by asking what the goals of monetary policy should be. He states that there is a fair amount of consensus in the literature that a desirable monetary policy is one that achieves a low expected value of an objective function that includes inflation and "some measure of output relative to potential." He then goes on to point out the many questions such a formulation leaves unanswered, including whether to target the price level or the inflation rate, should greater priority be given to reducing the variability of unforecastable inflation, should one seek to stabilize output deviations from a smooth trend or from the short-run aggregate supply curve, and so forth? And then the surprising comment (p.382) This sounds simple but it is not, for the explanation that Woodford provides is that That is not a simple thought, but it is logical--and that insight enables Michael to derive a utility or loss function with inflation in it. Interestingly, Woodford recognizes that his result is based on several approximations (pp. 383-392), but is nonetheless prepared to go ahead. While that choice is to some extent a matter of taste, it is also highly pragmatic--and some might say, a reflection of his MIT training, a comment that I would take as a compliment. The importance of the long-term interest rate.Another key result is that when you solve forward the system above, you find, as Woodford notes (p.244), that --and in a footnote he notes that this can also be explained by saying that it is thelongrate of interest and not the short rate that determines aggregate demand in this model. What to do at the ZLB, Forward Guidance, The Role of Expectations.MWIPwas completed well before the Fed had to contend with the ZLB--zero lower bound--which later became the ELB--effective lower bound--even though there were discussions in the U.S. economy in 2003 and earlier about what to do if the economy were ever to be at the ZLB.15 Woodford's views on forward guidance can be understood from the discussion above of the forward solution of the basic model. Woodford has long emphasized the importance of policy commitment, even in the absence of a binding ZLB constraint. At the ZLB, explicit forward guidance can potentially offset a lot of the distortion, by, in effect, reducing all interest rates across the maturity spectrum at least up to the time that policy changes. Indeed, as shown by Eggertson and Woodford (2003), optimal forward guidance should commit to maintain lower interest rates during the recovery than would otherwise have been warranted by economic conditions.16Importantly, the appropriate commitment can be framed as a history-dependent policy function responding only to the history of the price level and the output gap, in such a way that the impact on policy decisions of economic conditions at the lower bound continue, even as the economy recovers. A history-dependent policy rule introduces a wedge between what the central bank has promised and what contemporary circumstances, taken by themselves, would call for. This wedge may raise difficult questions regarding the credibility of the policy. Woodford believes that credibility can be enhanced by spelling out an explicit framework describing the nature of any history-dependence. For example, as Woodford suggests in his 2012 Kansas City Fed paper, The very powerful effects of forward guidance have been called "the forward guidance puzzle". But the puzzle is not a deep one, for the ability of any central bank to commit to follow a particular monetary policy rule must be a diminishing function of the length of the horizon that is being considered. This fact serves to limit the extent to which policy can deliberately shape private expectations. However, the strength of forward guidance is just one manifestation of a very high interest elasticity in the DSGE models typically used by Woodford that shows up pervasively. For example, any combination of shocks that brings the economy to the ZLB for an appreciable length of time will display the effects of the elevated interest elasticity in such models, whether or not the central bank is assumed to issue explicit forward guidance. This high elasticity is also in evidence in attempts to evaluate alternative monetary policy regimes.17 What to do at the Lower Bound, Quantitative Easing.Woodford is much less impressed by the potential power of quantitative easing (or "targeted asset purchases" as he describes them in his Jackson Hole paper). He argues that portfolio balance effects do not exist in a modern, general-equilibrium theory of asset prices, and that it does not matter whether a particular risk is held in the portfolio of private investors or the central bank, for in the end the gains or losses of the central bank are transferred to the government, and via the government budget constraint, are returned to private individuals. This is Ricardian equivalence in a slightly different context than examined by Robert Barro.18 Whether it applies in practice is an empirical issue, with empirical evidence from many papers written in the Fed and elsewhere suggesting a significant impact in the expected direction from quantitative easing actions undertaken by the Fed and other central banks.19 Money Supply versus Interest Rate.At present, the Neo-Wicksellian approach developed by Woodford and others is dominant, relative to the explicitly monetary approach to monetary policy used by Patinkin and others. I suspect this situation will continue. But I believe that we need to consider both approaches to monetary policy, for monetary policy affects the economy not only through the Euler equation as in Woodford, but also through direct effects on current demands for goods described by Patinkin's use of the real-balance effect and by Wicksell's explanation of price dynamics described earlier. The fundamental impact of Michael Woodford on Fed thinking:20The most direct impact of Woodford on Fed thinking and analysis comes from his neo-Wicksellian analysis of monetary policy. Essentially, Woodford has developed the links between fluctuations of output and inflation around their natural21or long-run equilibrium values and economic welfare--a point22made clear by the discussion above of his analysis of the optimal goals of monetary policy. Many Fed researchers--among them more than a dozen Woodford students--have attempted to measure the natural rates of interest and the natural output gap. Early work on these topics using DSGE models produced very volatile estimates of these concepts, leading to the development of DSGE models with more realistic features, including important roles for financial frictions, which fit the data better--and which bear some resemblance to more traditional estimates of the output gap. As a result, these models are now routinely used in monetary policy discussions. One key lesson from these models is that measuring the natural rate of interest or the output gap is hard. However, estimates of the natural rate of interest from a collection of structural models across the Federal Reserve System indicate that the natural rate fell considerably during the financial crisis, became quite negative in its aftermath, and has subsequently recovered only slowly.23 While estimates of the natural rate from DSGE models provide some information needed for the proper conduct of monetary policy, these estimates are closely tied to the structure of the DSGE models, and essentially ignore the possibility of long-term structural changes in the balance between saving and investment. As a result, an alternative longer-run concept, theequilibrium rate of interest,has also played an important role in recent policy discussions. Estimates of this concept, which follow a statistical approach introduced by Thomas Laubach and John Williams24, have also fallen to quite low levels. A priority for researchers in the field is to develop improved estimates of the long-run equilibrium interest rate, and to develop policies that can influence it. In that regard, one should recognize that in a more complete model than the basic three equation model laid out above, the natural and long-run equilibrium interest rates would be functions of many variables, among them fiscal variables--with respect to both infrastructure spending and taxation. In particular, faster trend growth would increase the long-run equilibrium interest rate, and what we need most, now that we are near full employment and approaching our target inflation rate, is faster potential growth. The neo-Wicksellian and Woodfordian approach to macroeconomics is well suited also to study that problem, which is critical to the future of the United States and global economies. 1. I am grateful to Hess Chung, Rochelle Edge, William English, Michael Kiley, Thomas Laubach, Matthias Paustian, David Reifschneider, Jeremy Rudd, and Stacey Tevlin of the Federal Reserve Board for their advice and assistance.Return to text 2. Wicksell'sInterest and Prices, published in German in 1898 asGeldzins und Guterpreiseby Gustav Fischer (Jena), was first published in English (translated by R.F. Kahn) by Macmillan & Co. in 1936. It was published in the United States by Augustus Kelley in 1965 in the series Reprints of Economic Classics.Return to text 3. See Torsten Gardlund (1958),The Life of Knut Wicksell, trans. Nancy Adler (Brookfield, Vt.: Edward Elgar). Wicksell was not only a superb economist but also a remarkably interesting man, whose major works in economics were published starting in the late 1890s, when he was nearing the age of 50 (he was born in 1851 and died in 1926). Much of his earlier work was on Malthus and Malthusianism. The last paragraph of the text of Gardlund's book (p. 330) is about Wicksell's funeral and reads "Various associations and academic institutions sent the customary wreaths, but many of Wicksell's friends and disciples, honoring a request, instead sent their contributions to the Malthusian Advice Bureau."Return to text 4. He gives several reasons that the assumptions have little relation to practice, including that there is "a kind of collective holding of balances, arising out of the acceptance by banks of deposits."Return to text 5. See Joseph E. Stiglitz, ed. (1966-2011),The Collected Scientific Papers of Paul Samuelson,vol. II (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), pp. 1682-92.Return to text 6. See Knut Wicksell (1935),Lectures in Political Economy,vol. I:General Theoryand vol II:Money(London: George Routledge and Sons); reprinted in 1967 (Fairfield, N.J.: Augustus M. Kelley).Return to text 7. The first edition ofMoney, Interest, and Priceswas published in 1956 by Row, Peterson (Evanston, Ill.); the second edition in 1965 by Harper & Row (New York).Return to text 8. See Stanley Fischer (1993), "Money, Interest, and Prices" in Haim Barkai, Stanley Fischer, and Nissan Liviatan, eds.,Monetary Theory and Thought: Essays in Honour of Don Patinkin(London: Palgrave Macmillan).Return to text 9. See Kenneth J. Arrow (1957), "Review ofMoney, Interest, and Prices," Mathematical Reviews,vol. 18 (September).Return to text 10. See Harry G. Johnson (1962), "Monetary Theory and Policy,"American Economic Review, vol. 52 (June), pp. 335-84.Return to text 11. As noted in my 1993 article, I did not find that criticism compelling.Return to text 12. See Robert Barro and Herschel Grossman (1976),Money, Employment and Inflation(New York: Cambridge University Press).Return to text 13. These are equations (1.12), (1.13), and (1.14), respectively, in chapter 4, which appear on page 246 of MWIP, the derivation of which is discussed on pp. 243-45.Return to text 14. It is worth noting that the money stock dropped out of many models in the 1980s because standard relationships between money and real variables became unstable and because money aggregates became difficult to control. Or, as Gerald Bouey, former governor of the Bank of Canada, once said to the House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Trade and Economic Affairs, "We did not abandon M1, M1 abandoned us."Return to text 15. See Michael Woodford (2012), "Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound," inProceedings--Economic Policy Symposium--Jackson Hole(Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp. 185-288.Return to text 16. See Gauti B. Eggertsson and Michael Woodford (2003), "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 139-211.Return to text 17. I am grateful to Hess Chung of the Federal Reserve Board for drawing to my attention the general point made in this paragraph.Return to text 18. See Robert J. Barro (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 82 (November-December), pp. 1095-1117.Return to text 19. See Joseph E. Gagnon (2016), "Quantitative Easing: An Underappreciated Success," Policy Brief 16-4 (Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, April).Return to text 20. I draw here on notes provided by Michael Kiley of the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 21. In Woodford's and Wicksell's analyses, natural values are those that would prevail in the absence of nominal rigidities.Return to text 22. See, for example, Katharine Neiss and Edward Nelson (2002), "Inflation Dynamics, Marginal Cost, and the Output Gap: Evidence from Three Countries," unpublished paper, Bank of England, July; Rochelle Edge, Michael Kiley, and Jean-Philippe Laforte (2008), "Natural Rate Measures in an estimated DSGE model of the U.S. economy,"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,vol. 32, pp. 2512-35.Return to text 23. See, for example,figure 1in Janet Yellen (2015), "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, D.C., December 2.Return to text 24. See Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003), "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85, pp. 305-25.Return to text
Six federal agencies are inviting public comment on a proposed rule to prohibit incentive-based compensation arrangements that encourage inappropriate risks at covered financial institutions. The deadline for comments on the proposed rule, which was submitted for publication in the Federal Register, is July 22, 2016. Section 956 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires the agencies to jointly prescribe such regulations or guidelines. There is evidence that flawed incentive-based compensation packages in the financial industry were one of the contributing factors in the financial crisis that began in 2007. The proposed rules would apply to covered financial institutions with total assets of $1 billion or more. The requirements are tailored based on assets, and covered institutions would be divided into three categories: Much of the proposed rules would address requirements for senior executive officers and employees who are significant risk-takers at Level 1 and Level 2 institutions. All institutions that would be covered by the proposed rules would be required to annually document the structure of incentive-based compensation arrangements and retain those records for seven years. Boards of directors of covered institutions would be required to conduct oversight of the arrangements. All covered institutions would be subject to general prohibitions on incentive-based compensation arrangements that could encourage inappropriate risk-taking by providing excessive compensation or that could lead to a material financial loss. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Comments:View
The federal banking agencies proposed a rule to strengthen the resilience of large banking organizations by requiring them to maintain a minimum level of stable funding relative to the liquidity of their assets, derivatives, and commitments, over a one-year period. The rule, the net stable funding ratio, or NSFR, is being proposed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Reserve, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The proposal is designed to reduce the likelihood that disruptions to a banking organization's sources of funding will compromise its liquidity position. The proposal would require institutions subject to the rule to maintain sufficient levels of stable funding, thereby reducing liquidity risk in the banking system. By requiring firms to have more stable funding profiles, the proposal would also enhance financial stability. The NSFR proposal would complement the liquidity coverage ratio rule, which requires large banking organizations to hold a minimum amount of high-quality liquid assets that can be easily and quickly converted into cash to meet net cash outflows over a 30-day stress period. The proposed rule would be tailored to the risk of the banking organizations. The most stringent requirements would apply to the largest firms--those with $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets or $10 billion or more in on-balance sheet foreign exposure, as well as those banking organizations' subsidiary depository institutions that have assets of $10 billion or more. Holding companies with less than $250 billion, but more than $50 billion in total consolidated assets, and less than $10 billion in on-balance sheet foreign exposure would be subject to a less stringent, modified NSFR requirement. The rule would not apply to holding companies with less than $50 billion in total consolidated assets and would not apply to community banks. Holding companies subject to the proposal would be required to publicly disclose information about their NSFR levels each quarter. The NSFR would become effective on January 1, 2018, and is consistent with the liquidity standard agreed to by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The public is invited to submit comments on the proposed rule through August 5, 2016. Proposal for comment:Submit|View Opening Statement by Chair Janet L. Yellen Opening Statement by Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Board Votes
On May 19, 2016, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on May 19, 2016, and will mature on May 26, 2016. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Monday that it is accepting applications from individuals who wish to be considered for membership on the Community Advisory Council (CAC). The CAC was formed in 2015. It advises the Board on issues affecting consumers and communities and complements two of the Board's other advisory councils--the Federal Advisory Council and the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council--whose members represent depository institutions. The CAC is made up of a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer and community development organizations and interests, including affordable housing, community and economic development, small business, and asset and wealth building. CAC members meet semiannually with members of the Board of Governors in Washington to provide a range of perspectives on the economic circumstances and financial services needs of consumers and communities, with a particular focus on the concerns of low- and moderate-income consumers and communities. The Board expects to announce the appointment of CAC members in the fall of 2016. Additional information about the selection process, including instructions for submitting an application, can be found in the attachedFederal RegisterNotice. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal RegisterNotice:PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the applications under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Origin Bank, Choudrant, Louisiana, to establish a branch at 2049 West Gray Street, Houston, Texas, and a mobile branch in Harris County, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Republic Bancorp, Inc., Louisville, Kentucky, to merge with Cornerstone Bancorp, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire Cornerstone Community Bank, both of St. Petersburg, Florida. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced it has approved a joint agency notice of proposed rulemaking to implement the incentive compensation provisions of section 956 of the Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The vote was unanimous. The preamble and regulatory text approved by the Board may be found on the Board's website. Publication of this preamble and proposed rule in the Federal Register will be delayed to allow all of the agencies to consider the proposal, and comments will be accepted until July 22. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the Office of Financial Policy and Research (OFS) has been designated a division of the Board and renamed as the Division of Financial Stability (FS). The change reflects the growth in responsibilities and staffing associated with the Board's commitment to identifying and analyzing risks to financial stability and to developing and evaluating macroprudential policy responses to those risks. Board economist Nellie Liang, appointed to establish the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research in November 2010, will continue to serve as director. FS will remain responsible for developing and coordinating the Board's work on financial stability, and will continue to bring together a cross-disciplinary staff of economists, banking supervisors, markets experts and others in the Federal Reserve to execute its mandate. FS also coordinates the Board's interagency and international work on financial stability, including the Board's responsibilities as a member of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and the Financial Stability Board (FSB). To fulfill these responsibilities, FS conducts an active research and analysis program, and it monitors financial institutions, markets and infrastructure to assess the resilience of the financial system and identify potential risks vulnerabilities. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: American Bancorporation of Minnesota, Inc., Baxter, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated February 16, 2011Terminated May 19, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Broadway Financial Corporation, Los Angeles, CaliforniaCease and Desist Order issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated September 9, 2010Terminated February 5, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Farmers & Merchants Bank of Ashland, Ashland, NebraskaOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty dated April 26, 2016 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First Mutual of Richmond, Inc. and Richmond Mutual Bancorporation, Inc., both of Richmond, IndianaWritten Agreement dated June 29, 2012Terminated April 28, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: First Community Bank, Glasgow, MontanaOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated May 11, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. American families overall reported continued mild improvement in their financial well-being in 2015 although many families were struggling financially and felt excluded from economic advancement, according to the Federal Reserve Board's latestReport on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households. The report, based on the Board's third annualSurvey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, presents a contrasting picture of the financial well-being of U.S. families. Aggregate-level results show several signs of improvement. Sixty-nine percent of respondents said they are either "living comfortably" or "doing okay," up 4 percentage points from 2014 and up 6 percentage points from 2013. Seventy-seven percent of non-retired adults without a disability are confident that they have the skills necessary to get the kind of job that they want now--an increase of 10 percentage points from the 2013 survey results. "The new survey findings shed important light on the economic and financial security of American families seven years into the recovery," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Lael Brainard. "Despite some signs of improvement overall, 46 percent say they would struggle to meet emergency expenses of $400, and 22 percent of workers say they are juggling two or more jobs. It's important to identify the reasons why so many families face continued financial struggles and to find ways to help them overcome them," she said. The survey results also emphasize that not all groups report improvement in their financial well-being. Respondents with higher levels of education are most likely to say that their financial situation has improved over the past year. Thirty-one percent of respondents with at least a bachelor's degree reported an improvement in 2015 and 15 percent reported a decline. Among those with a high-school degree or less, 22 percent of respondents say that their well-being improved over the past 12 months, while 21 percent say that their well-being has declined. The survey found that individuals with lower incomes, racial and ethnic minorities, and individuals with parents of modest financial means report greater financial challenges. Forty-three percent of adults with a family income under $40,000 do not have a bank account or use an alternative financial service; non-Hispanic blacks are 19 percentage points less likely to be satisfied with the overall quality of their neighborhood than are non-Hispanic whites; and young adults whose parents did not attend college are 48 percentage points less likely to attend college--and more likely to attend a for-profit institution if they do--than are those whose parents have a bachelor's degree. Educational satisfaction differed significantly by the type of institution attended. Forty-nine percent of adults who attended a for-profit institution report that if they could make their educational decisions again they would have attended a different school. Among individuals who went to college, education debt is common. More than half of adults younger than 30 who went to college took on at least some debt to do so. This debt extends beyond just student loans. Twenty-one percent of all adults with debt from their own education have education-related credit card debt, with a median balance of $3,000. The survey also provide insights into saving for retirement. Thirty-one percent of non-retired respondents have no retirement savings or pension. Among those who have a defined contribution pension plan or other self-directed retirement account, 49 percent are either "not confident" or just "slightly confident" in their ability to make the right investment decisions in these accounts. Previous surveys have informed the Federal Reserve and other government agencies about consumer financial behavior and opinions. The survey was conducted on behalf of the Board in October and November 2015. More than 5,600 respondents completed the survey. Topics covered in the survey and the report include savings behavior, economic preparedness, banking and credit access, housing and living arrangements, auto lending, education and student debt, and retirement planning. The report and a video summarizing the survey's findings may be found at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/shed.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2015 (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday proposed a rule to support U.S. financial stability by enhancing the resolvability of very large and complex financial firms. The proposal would require U.S. global systemically important banking institutions (GSIBs) and the U.S. operations of foreign GSIBs to amend contracts for common financial transactions to prevent the immediate cancellation of the contracts if the firm enters bankruptcy or a resolution process. This change should reduce the risk of a run on the solvent subsidiaries of a failed GSIB caused by a large number of firms terminating their financial contracts at the same time. These contracts, called qualified financial contracts (QFC), are used for derivatives, securities lending, and short-term funding transactions such as repurchase agreements. The proposal would apply to bilateral, uncleared QFCs. Because GSIBs conduct a large volume of transactions through these contracts, the mass termination of QFCs may lead to the disorderly unwind of the GSIB, spark asset fire sales, and transmit financial risk across the U.S. financial system. The proposal ensures consistency with restrictions on financial contracts under Title II of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act that support the orderly resolution of financial firms. By requiring GSIBs to make clear in their QFCs that the U.S. special resolution regimes apply, the proposal would help ensure that all QFC counterparties--domestic and foreign--would be treated in the same way in an orderly resolution. The proposal would also require GSIBs to ensure that their QFCs restrict the ability of counterparties to terminate the contract, liquidate collateral, or exercise other default rights based on the resolution of an affiliate of the GSIB. This restriction on default rights will help ensure that the affiliates of a GSIB that are able to meet their obligations are not forced to enter resolution by the failure of another affiliate of the GSIB. Under the proposal, GSIBs may also comply by using QFCs that are modified by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) 2015 Resolution Stay Protocol. The ISDA Protocol was developed by market participants that are members of ISDA, in coordination with the Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and foreign regulators. "The proposal would complement earlier steps by the Federal Reserve Board and the FDIC to address the risk QFCs pose to financial stability through their review of the firms' resolution plans," said Gov. Daniel K. Tarullo. "It also complements industry efforts, pursued in coordination with the Federal Reserve and other regulators, to amend these contracts through adherence to the ISDA Protocol." The comment period on the proposal will be open until August 5, 2016. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Comment on proposal:Submit|View Opening Statement by Chair Janet L. Yellen Opening Statement by Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Board Votes Open Board Meeting on May 3, 2016
The Federal Reserve Board is cosponsoring a policy forum next week to explore changing demographic and economic trends that affect housing and community development policy in rural communities. The aim of "The Future of Rural Communities: Implications for Housing," is to explore methods and resources for encouraging initiatives and partnerships that increase access to capital and strengthen local economies. The conference will begin at 8:30 a.m. EDT on Tuesday, May 10, and it will be streamed live on the Board's website. The conference is cosponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development, with key partners NeighborWorks America and the Housing Assistance Council. Featured speakers include: Eric Belsky, director of the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs; Julie Stackhouse, executive vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; Lisa Mensah, under secretary for rural development of the U.S. Department of Agriculture; Paul Weech, chief executive officer of NeighborWorks America; and Moises Loza, executive director of the Housing Assistance Council. Participants in the conference will discuss policies and practices that are supporting, or hindering, rural economic vitality and the efficient delivery of housing supply and mortgage credit to various rural populations and communities, as well as the changing nature of housing and service needs that could affect the economic potential of rural communities. For more information, and to view the conference online, visithttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/conferences/ruralconf.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve plans to continue its previously announced periodic testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) with one operation in May. These operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve plans to conduct a similar routine TDF test operation each quarter in 2016. The schedule and terms for future test operations will be announced at later dates. On May 19, 2016, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its TDF. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $5,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. EDT to 12:30 p.m. EDT, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. EDT and 12:00 p.m. EDT. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttp://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the National Association of Insurance Commissioner’s International Insurance Forum, Washington, D.C. It is a pleasure to be here with you this morning to discuss the statutory role of the Federal Reserve in supervising and regulating insurance firms. Since we inherited from the Office of Thrift Supervision the oversight of savings and loan holding companies (SLHCs) that contain insurance companies, we have looked at our role as complementing the role you--as insurance regulators--play. We value the interaction we have had with state insurance commissioners on policy matters and are pleased with the growth of ongoing, regularized cooperation in supervising the firms over which we both have oversight authority. Personally, I have profited enormously from the assistance provided by the staff of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) as I delved into the history and practice of capital regulation of insurance companies. Today I would like to begin by describing how I view the Federal Reserve's role in insurance regulation and supervision--both what it is and what it is not. As I think you will find, we have tried to occupy that role in a way that is closely grounded in the duties that Congress has given us. Then I will present current thinking on a topic that I know has occasioned great interest--the Federal Reserve's plans for adopting capital requirements for the insurance firms over which we now have statutory responsibilities. The Federal Reserve's Role in Insurance Regulation and SupervisionThe U.S. insurance industry has historically been, and remains, a significant part of the U.S. economy. For the industry across all sectors, written premiums last year totaled nearly $2 trillion and earned premiums totaled nearly $1.8 trillion, representing increases from 2014 of approximately 6 percent and 4 percent, respectively.1This represents over 7 percent of U.S. gross domestic product, as it has in recent years.2The two largest sectors in the U.S. insurance industry, property/casualty and life/annuities, together wrote approximately $1 trillion of premiums in 2015, up nearly 3 percent from the year prior.3Moreover, for the U.S. insurance industry as a whole, written and earned premium last year were the highest in five years.4 The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) gave the Federal Reserve regulatory responsibilities both for insurance holding companies that own a federally insured bank or thrift and for insurance companies designated as systemically important by the U.S. Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). The insurance holding companies for which the Federal Reserve is the consolidated supervisor hold about $2 trillion in total assets, representing about one-quarter of U.S. insurance industry assets. These firms are highly diverse: they range in size from firms with total assets of approximately $3 billion to firms with total assets of over $700 billion. They engage in a wide variety of insurance and non-insurance activities. Some are fully domestic, while others have material international operations. Some are organized as mutual companies, while others are owned by public shareholders. The approach of the Federal Reserve in regulating insurance holding companies is derived from its overall statutory responsibilities for financial regulation as those have evolved over the years, most recently through the changes made by the Dodd-Frank Act. First, as was the case prior to the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act, we are responsible for protecting the safety and soundness of federally insured depository institutions affiliated with any kind of holding company. With the Dodd-Frank Act's transfer of SLHC oversight to the Federal Reserve, that statutory responsibility now includes insurance holding companies. While the particulars are somewhat different than for bank holding companies, the aim and many of the tools to achieve this aim are the same. Second, the Dodd-Frank Act sharpened our statutory mandate to make clear that the Federal Reserve is to regulate and supervise holding companies with a view to the safety and soundness of not only the holding company itself, but also its functionally regulated subsidiaries, including affiliated insured depository institutions. Again, while the particulars differ, this mandate applies to SLHCs as well as to bank holding companies.5The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 had, at the least, rendered ambiguous the question of whether the Federal Reserve could take supervisory measures that involved a functionally regulated subsidiary of a holding company unless a specific threat to an affiliated depository institution could be established. The financial crisis underscored the importance for safety and soundness of not waiting until problems in the holding company were manifestly affecting the depository institution. Third, the Dodd-Frank Act also changed our statutory mandate to require that we regulate holding companies so as to promote the stability of the financial system as a whole. This means paying attention to interconnections among financial firms, correlations of asset holdings, and other characteristics that could endanger the nation's financial stability during periods of stress. One of the most notable differences between the Dodd-Frank Act and other financial legislation over the preceding half century is the frequency with which the phrases "financial stability" and "systemic risk" occur, either as the specific goal of certain new provisions or as a consideration to be taken into account in administering general regulatory authorities. As I have explained elsewhere,6this systemic or "macroprudential" regulatory aim does not apply equally to all holding companies or banks. Indeed, with respect to community banks, for example, it does not really apply at all. It is important that financial regulation be tiered so as to regulate for the kinds of risks various groups of financial institutions actually pose, rather than to regulate in a monolithic fashion. Fourth, for all the broadening of our statutory mandate, one feature of the financial regulatory system that the Dodd-Frank Act preserved was the functional regulation of holding company affiliates based on the kind of financial intermediation in which they are engaged. Thus, even though we do apply consolidated capital and liquidity requirements at the holding company level, we do not specifically apply them to broker-dealer, commodities merchant, or investment company affiliates. Nor do we have any role in the investor protection and market functioning mandates in the regulatory regimes administered by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Similarly, we have no role in regulating the types of insurance offered by affiliates of the holding companies we supervise or the manner in which the insurance is provided. These matters are the province of state insurance regulators. In fact, because of the overall structure of insurance regulation as specified by Congress in the McCarran-Ferguson Act and elsewhere, the line here is arguably brighter than in other areas. In pursuing what might be termed its dual regulatory mandate of protecting the safety and soundness of depository institutions and their holding companies and promoting financial stability, the Federal Reserve must develop regulatory and supervisory measures that are appropriate for a range of non-bank financial intermediaries. Consider, for example, the risks associated with bank holding companies containing large broker-dealer operations. Unlike traditional commercial banks whose activities are funded with retail deposits, these bank holding companies are typically heavily reliant on repurchase agreements (or repos) and other types of short-term wholesale funding. The events of 2007 to 2008 reminded us that, while this type of funding may be very stable during normal times, it can disappear overnight in periods of stress. Runs by providers of short-term wholesale funding may not only precipitate the failure of an individual firm by depleting that firm's capital and liquidity buffers, but also precipitate contagion that can imperil the rest of the financial system. As a result of this very dynamic during the financial crisis, the five large, formerly freestanding broker-dealers have mostly been absorbed by, or converted into, bank holding companies. In our post-crisis development of liquidity requirements and stress testing, and in reforming capital requirements, we needed to pay particular heed to these critical funding differences between traditional commercial banks and broker-dealers. Similarly, in building out our regulation and supervision of insurance companies, we are paying particular attention to how their funding patterns differ from other forms of financial intermediaries. Here, though, the major relevant difference is that the funding structures of traditional insurers are generally much morestablethan the funding structures of commercial banks, much less broker-dealers. A traditional insurance company's liabilities are largely composed of contingent claims based on the occurrence of specified events, such as the death of an insured person or the destruction of property. Because these claims generally cannot be accelerated, companies engaged in traditional insurance activities are less vulnerable to runs and, accordingly, to short-term pressures to sell assets into declining markets. This insulation from creditor runs in turn suggests that capital and liquidity requirements for insurance companies should be calibrated differently than capital and liquidity requirements for dealer banks. Because Congress modified the Collins Amendment in late 2014, we can now tailor capital requirements for insurance companies. However, it is important to add that the balance sheet of an insurance company can look quite different from the traditional picture I have just sketched. For example, a life insurer may offer investment and retirement products with account values that can be withdrawn at the discretion of policyholders, sometimes with little or no surrender penalty. The option to surrender creates the potential for increased claims that could strain the liquidity of the firm. Relatedly, the extensive involvement of an insurance firm in securities lending, repo, over-the-counter derivatives, and other capital markets activities can create a balance sheet with much tighter connections to the rest of the financial system and greater liquidity risk in times of financial market stress. As with other financial intermediaries, insurers then become subject to demands for posting additional collateral or closing out positions as unfavorable market conditions take hold. In addition, if the positions of the insurance company are large enough, it could become a potential vehicle for transmitting distress at the company to other parts of the financial system. The foregoing considerations suggest that we should distinguish between insurance companies that we oversee solely because they own an insured depository institution and those that have been designated as systemically important by the FSOC. This is precisely the path we are taking with regard to our supervision of these firms. For the former group, our supervisory efforts to date have focused on ensuring that the companies have strong internal controls and effective corporate governance, as well as satisfactory risk identification, measurement, and management. For firms designated as systemically important, our supervision has additionally emphasized capital and liquidity planning and positions, management of core business lines, and recovery and resolution planning. Board staff meets with the primary state insurance departments that supervise the insurance companies for which we have consolidated supervisory responsibility and, together with lead state supervisors, we co-host supervisory colleges and crisis management groups for AIG (American International Group, Inc.) and Prudential. We continue to discuss supervisory plans and findings for the insurance firms, extend invitations for joint inspection activities, and discuss common areas of supervisory focus. As you likely know, the Board is also working to develop a regulatory framework for its supervised insurance companies. The Dodd-Frank Act authorizes the Board to establish minimum capital requirements for both systemically important insurance companies and SLHCs and bank holding companies predominantly engaged in insurance activities. For systemically important insurance companies, the Dodd-Frank Act directs the Board to establish enhanced prudential standards in order to mitigate risks to U.S. financial stability that could arise from the material distress, failure, or ongoing activities of these companies. The enhanced prudential standards must include, among other things, enhanced capital requirements, liquidity requirements, corporate governance and risk-management standards, and resolution planning requirements. We have already established resolution planning requirements for the systemically important firms. At present, we have three major regulatory initiatives underway for our supervised insurance firms: first, reporting requirements for the systemically important firms; second, enhanced corporate governance, risk management, and liquidity standards for those same firms; and third, capital requirements for all supervised insurance firms. Let me say a few words about the first two and then spend the rest of my remarks on capital requirements, which I know are probably of the greatest interest. About a month ago, the Federal Reserve proposed new reporting requirements specifically for the systemically important insurance companies.7These reporting requirements are designed, among other things, to keep us informed as to the financial condition and risk profile of these firms, as well as the extent to which their activities and operations could pose a threat to the financial stability of the United States. The proposed reporting requirements differ substantially from reporting requirements for bank holding companies, and from available U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (U.S. GAAP) financial information filed with the SEC. They are highly tailored to the assets, liabilities, and risks of insurance companies. We look forward to receiving public comment on the proposal. Regarding enhanced prudential standards, the Federal Reserve's enhanced corporate governance and risk-management standards for systemically important insurance companies will likely build on the core provisions of our consolidated supervisory framework for large domestic and foreign banking organizations, with appropriate adjustments to reflect these firms' predominantly insurance business model.8The framework will mandate standards for the systemically important insurance companies to follow in managing risk and will identify the parties responsible for ensuring the integrity of a company's risk-management practices. Enhanced liquidity requirements will likely include internal control requirements, general comprehensive cash flow projections, contingency plans to manage liquidity stress events, and internal liquidity stress testing requirements. I expect that these proposed enhanced prudential standards for systemically important insurance companies will be considered by the Board in the coming weeks. Of course, we look forward to public comment on these standards, once proposed. Capital Requirements for Insurance Companies Supervised by the Federal ReserveIn formulating capital standards for the insurance companies we supervise, our goals should track our overall goals in financial regulation, as I described them a few moments ago. Thus we should aim, first, to protect depository institutions and, second, to promote financial stability in a manner that takes account of both the unique form of financial intermediation reflected in the traditional insurance business and the activities by a few firms that are much more closely connected to short-term financial markets and the rest of the financial system. As with some of the other measures I have mentioned, these factors argue for different approaches to capital requirements for the systemically important insurance companies, on the one hand, and for the rest of the insurance companies we supervise, on the other. That is, indeed, the direction in which I believe we are headed. There are, as all of you know, a lot of ideas out there as to how we should construct the capital requirements we will apply to insurance companies. Some, such as variations on the Solvency II approach used in the European Union, strike us as unpromising. The valuation frameworks for insurance liabilities adopted in Solvency II differ starkly from U.S. GAAP and may introduce excessive volatility. Such an approach would also be inconsistent with our strong preference for building a predominantly standardized risk-based capital rule that enables comparisons across firms without excessive reliance on internal models. Finally, it appears that Solvency II could be quite pro-cyclical. Other ideas have some conceptual appeal, but strike us as impractical for the foreseeable future. Most prominent among these is an approach based on internal cash flow stress testing. The appeal of this idea lies in its melding of capital and liquidity considerations. The relationship between a firm's capital levels and liquidity profile is something that needs to be kept in mind when formulating regulatory regimes for all forms of financial intermediaries. However, as I noted earlier, we are reluctant to rely on internal models for basic regulatory capital requirements, which makes this idea less appealing to us. The novelty and untested nature of this idea as a basis for regulation would, in any case, necessitate extensive development, likely over a period of years. While we have consciously taken a good bit of time in considering a capital regime for our supervised insurance firms in order to make sure we get it right, we cannot wait years more, especially because there is no guarantee that even this investment of effort would produce a feasible internal models-based capital rule. However, I think it is worth continuing to explore internal cash flow stress testing as we build the supervisory stress testing program for systemically important insurance companies. Another set of possibilities is raised by the work of the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). As part of its effort to create a common framework for the supervision of internationally active insurance groups, the IAIS began work on a comprehensive insurance capital standard (ICS) in 2013, issued an initial consultative proposal on the ICS in late 2014, and will continue work on the ICS for at least the next few years. The ICS would be the first international, group‑wide capital standard broadly applicable to internationally active insurance groups and would incorporate internationally compatible valuation principles, definitions of capital resources, and risk‑based capital requirements for assets and insurance liabilities. Progress in developing such a global capital standard for internationally active insurance firms has been slow. I will mention some of the difficulties that have been encountered. First, there is considerable heterogeneity among the insurance products offered in different jurisdictions. As one example, annuities and other savings and retirement products tend to be offered less frequently in countries with relatively expansive government pension programs. In the context of developing capital requirements, a second factor has been jurisdictional variations in accounting and valuation standards on which global capital requirements for insurance companies can be built. A third factor has been significant disagreement on the extent to which capital standards for internationally active insurance companies should be built on internal models. These challenges and the protracted process they have occasioned have, as a practical matter, rendered the ICS insufficiently developed to be an option as the Federal Reserve moves forward with capital requirements applicable to the insurance companies we supervise. A second relevant initiative of the IAIS involves the design of an enhanced regulatory and supervisory framework for global systemically important insurers (G-SIIs). In 2014, the IAIS released the Basic Capital Requirement (BCR) for G-SIIs. It is the first international consolidated capital standard developed for the insurance industry. The IAIS developed the BCR in an effort to ensure the soundness of global insurance firms with the largest systemic footprints. In 2015, the IAIS supplemented the BCR with a Higher Loss Absorbency (HLA) capital standard for G-SIIs. But the IAIS will need to revisit the BCR after the first version of ICS is complete and will also need to revisit HLA after further refinement is made on its G‑SII identification methodology. This somewhat provisional character of the BCR, along with its reliance on a method of valuation not in use by U.S. companies and regulators, mean it does not really fit our need for an approach that can--as a practical matter--be developed and implemented in the relatively near term. These are some of the paths we do not intend to take in formulating capital requirements for insurance firms. The approach wedointend to follow will be elaborated in what I anticipate will be an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) to be issued in the coming weeks. As I suggested earlier, the ANPR will likely put forward two different methodologies--one for the insurance firms that we supervise solely because they own a bank or thrift and the other for the firms designated as systemically important. A. Insurance Companies Owning a Bank or Thrift: The Building Block ApproachThe Federal Reserve has traditionally set capital requirements for holding companies on a consolidated basis. Among other things, a consolidated capital standard deters firms from moving assets around its affiliates in order to take advantage of lower requirements applied to different affiliates for particular assets. Insofar as publicly traded banking organizations are required by securities laws to file consolidated, U.S. GAAP-consistent financial statements, there is both a parallelism between accounting and capital regulation and a measure of economy in the compliance costs of a consolidated capital rule. In contrast, most insurance firms subject to our regulation only because they own depository institutions do not produce consolidated financial statements. Furthermore, Congress has prohibited the Federal Reserve from requiring insurance firms that file only Statutory Accounting Principles (SAP) financial statements to produce U.S. GAAP consolidated financial statements.9Given that these firms have not been designated systemically important and that the depository institutions they own tend to be relatively small parts of the total firm, the compliance costs of requiring a move to some non-U.S. GAAP form of consolidated approach may well not be worth the incremental safety and soundness benefits of doing so. Together, these considerations are leading us to what we refer to as the building block approach (BBA), which is likely the approach that we will put forth for comment in the ANPR for this group of firms. The BBA would aggregate capital resources and capital requirements across the different legal entities in the group to calculate combined, group-level capital resources and requirements. A firm's aggregate capital requirements generally would be the sum of the capital requirements at each subsidiary. The capital requirement for each regulated insurance or depository institution subsidiary generally would be based on the regulatory capital rules of that subsidiary's lead regulator--whether a state or foreign insurance regulator or a federal banking regulator for depository institutions. The regulatory capital requirement for any non-insurance, non-banking subsidiaries--which at present are relatively minor parts of these firms--would probably be determined under the standardized risk-based capital rules applicable to affiliates of bank holding companies. Should we adopt this approach, we will need to develop a formula or scalar to put the different regulatory regimes on a comparable basis. With an eye towards the kind of issues that are usually addressed by a consolidated capital approach, we will also need to fashion standards for adjustments to address inter-company transactions and possibly some other exposures. An example of the latter would be potential adjustments to harmonize permitted accounting practices that vary across states. The BBA would efficiently leverage existing legal-entity-level regulatory capital frameworks that already apply to the various units of the supervised insurance group. As such, it would involve relatively low regulatory burden for these entities, even as it produces regulatory capital requirements that are reasonably well tailored to the insurance-related risks for each distinct jurisdiction and business line of the group. B. Systemically Important Insurance Companies: The Consolidated ApproachBy definition, the insurance companies designated by the FSOC are systemically important. For these firms, application of an aggregated approach like that of the BBA could pose significant risks to the Federal Reserve's statutory aims of safety and soundness and financial stability. The BBA, recall, would simply aggregate capital requirements that may not be founded upon financial stability considerations. A consolidated form of capital requirements is key to ensuring that risks to the financial system as a whole (as compared, say, to investor or policyholder protection) are accounted for. For these firms, then, the ANPR is likely to seek comment on what we have internally been calling the consolidated approach (CA). Let me note at the outset that this is not the consolidated capital framework we apply to bank holding companies. As with our capital requirements for bank holding companies, the CA would categorize all of the consolidated insurance group's assets and insurance liabilities into risk segments, apply risk factors to the amounts in each segment, and then set a minimum ratio of required capital comparing the consolidated capital requirements to the group's consolidated capital resources. However, the CA would use risk weights or risk factors that are more appropriate for the longer-term nature of most insurance liabilities. Like the BCR of the IAIS, the CA would take a consolidated approach to capital requirements. However, unlike the BCR, the foundation of the CA would be consolidated financial information based on U.S. GAAP, with appropriate adjustments for regulatory purposes. Our current thought is that the CA would initially be relatively simple in design, with a relatively small number of risk categories. Thus there would be a broad risk segmentation of asset classes and insurance liabilities. However, as we gained experience with the CA, we would have the option of making it increasingly granular in order to achieve greater risk sensitivity. The CA, as a consolidated capital framework, would help prevent intra-group regulatory arbitrage opportunities and the potential for double leverage.10It would also be compatible with supervisory stress testing, which--as you all know--is now a central component of our supervisory program for making systemically important firms highly resilient, as well as for giving us a more complete picture of risks in the financial system as a whole. Obviously, the compliance costs associated with the CA will be higher than those of the BBA. But this enhanced regulation is justified by the increased risks to the financial system associated with these firms. Indeed, it is our obligation under the Dodd-Frank Act to impose stricter regulation on these firms. Even so, by constructing a separate consolidated approach to capital for systemically designated insurance firms, compliance costs for these firms should be considerably lower than if they had to conform to the bank holding company capital regime. Finally, I would note that adoption by the Federal Reserve of a fully consolidated capital requirement for systemically important insurance companies might also help advance the international development of appropriate and effective capital requirements for insurance firms of global systemic importance. ConclusionAs noted earlier, the Board's prudential regulatory objectives pertaining to supervised insurance companies are to protect the safety and soundness of the consolidated company, to protect any subsidiary depository institutions of the company, and to mitigate any threats to financial stability that might be posed by the activities, material financial distress, or failure of the company. Just as we have done with other non-bank financial intermediaries for which we have been given regulatory responsibilities, we will fashion a regime that takes account of the particular characteristics and risks of those intermediaries. We have taken a good bit of time in arriving at some potential insurance regulatory capital frameworks precisely because we wanted to consider these issues thoroughly. Our tentative conclusion is that a bifurcated approach to a capital regime for insurance companies makes sense in light of these considerations. But we anticipate using the vehicle of an ANPR in order to give all interested parties an opportunity to comment on this approach before we turn to developing and proposing its details. In this process, we of course especially welcome the views of those of you on the front lines of insurance supervision. Thank you very much. 1. NAIC Financial Regulatory Services, "P&C, Title, Life/A&H, Fraternal, and Health Industry Snapshots for the Period Ended December 31, 2015 (PDF)."Return to text 2. Ibid.; Bureau of Economic Analysis (2016), "Gross Domestic Product: First Quarter 2016 (Advance Estimate) (TXT)," April 28, Table 9; Federal Insurance Office (2015), "Annual Report on the Insurance Industry (PDF)," September, p. 12.Return to text 3. NAIC Financial Regulatory Services, "P&C, Title, Life/A&H, Fraternal, and Health Industry Snapshots for the Period Ended December 31, 2015 (PDF)," pp. 1, 4-5.Return to text 4. Ibid.Return to text 5. See 12 USC § 1467a(b)(4)(A).Return to text 6. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), "Rethinking the Aims of Prudential Regulation," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Bank Structure Conference, Chicago, Illinois, May 8.Return to text 7. See 81 Fed. Reg. 24097 (April 25, 2016).Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2012), "Consolidated Supervision Framework for Large Financial Institutions," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 12-17 (December 17).Return to text 9. The SAP are a set of accounting rules for insurance companies established by the NAIC and used to prepare those companies' financial statements.Return to text 10. "Double leverage" refers to a parent company's use of debt to fund an equity investment in a subsidiary.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from March 28 through April 25, 2016. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on April 26-27, 2016. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeApril 26-27, 2016:HTML|PDF
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. I will begin by reviewing recent economic developments and then turn to supply-side considerations, such as the level of potential output and the potential growth of our economy. I will conclude with a discussion of monetary policy. As always, the views I express here today are mine alone. Recent Developments and the State of the EconomyThe U.S. economy has improved steadily since the recovery began seven years ago. Our economy is now 10 percent larger than at its previous peak in 2007. Employment has surpassed its 2008 peak by 5 million workers, and the unemployment rate has fallen from 10 percent to 5 percent, close to the level that many observers associate with full employment. Labor market developments remain healthy, with employers adding roughly 200,000 jobs per month so far this year--a pace similar to that of the past several years (figure 1). Job growth continues to be substantially faster than the underlying growth of the labor force, so the labor market continues to tighten. Despite the strong job gains, the unemployment rate has flattened out at 5 percent over the past six months thanks to a welcome increase in the labor force participation rate. Meanwhile, there are tentative and encouraging signs of a firming in wages, seen most clearly in the data on average hourly earnings, which are rising faster than inflation and productivity. All told, labor market indicators show an economy on solid footing. Recent spending data have been less positive than the labor market data. Growth of personal consumption slowed noticeably in the first quarter. Business fixed investment has fallen for two consecutive quarters, mainly because of a steep decline in energy-related capital expenditures. As a result, gross domestic product (GDP) growth over the two quarters ending in March 2016 is estimated to have averaged only 1 percent on an annualized basis. This estimate may continue to move around as more data come in.1And there are good reasons to think that underlying growth is stronger than these recent readings suggest. Labor market data generally provide a better real-time signal of the underlying pace of economic activity.2In addition, retail sales surged in April, as did consumer confidence in May, suggesting that the pause in consumption may have been transitory. Moreover, stronger demand would be more consistent with an environment that remains quite supportive of growth, with low interest rates, low gasoline prices, solid real income gains, a high ratio of household wealth to income, healthy levels of business and household confidence, and continuing strong job creation. Indeed, current forecasts for second-quarter GDP growth are for a rebound to around 2-1/4 percent.3 Inflation remains below the 2 percent target of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), with total inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures at 3/4 percent over the 12 months ending in March and core inflation at 1-1/2 percent, both slightly higher than a year earlier. Core inflation has been held down by falling import prices, owing in large part to the rise in the dollar, as well as the indirect effects of lower oil prices on core prices. As the recent financial market tensions have eased, oil prices have increased and the dollar has weakened a bit on net. If oil prices and the dollar remain broadly stable, inflation should move up further over time to our 2 percent objective. Inflation expectations seem to be under some downward pressure. Some survey-based measures are at the low end of their recent historical ranges. Market-based measures of longer-term breakevens have declined significantly since mid-2014 and stand near all-time lows. While I see expectations as staying reasonably well anchored, it is essential that they remain so and that inflation return over time to the 2 percent objective. The easing in global financial conditions since mid-February and the associated waning in downside risks are welcome, and in part reflect expectations that the FOMC would move more slowly in removing monetary accommodation. However, underlying risks will likely remain until global growth is on a stronger footing. Growth and inflation remain stubbornly low for most of our major trading partners. In China, stimulus measures should support growth in the near term but may also slow China's necessary transition away from its export- and investment-led business model. Meanwhile, the ongoing buildup of debt there is notable. There is also some remaining uncertainty about China's exchange rate policy. Elsewhere, risks are posed by the upcoming "Brexit" vote, ongoing pressures from refugee flows into Europe, and challenging conditions for emerging economies such as Brazil, Russia, and Venezuela. Despite these downside risks, I see U.S. demand growing at a moderate pace, the labor market continuing to heal, and inflation returning over time to the FOMC's 2 percent objective. The economy is on track to attain the Committee's dual mandate of stable prices and maximum employment. Supply-Side ConsiderationsFor several years after the crisis, economic activity remained far below its potential, and the need for highly accommodative policy seemed clear. As the shortfall of output from potential has narrowed, supply-side considerations such as the level and growth rate of potential output naturally begin to matter more for policy. I will turn now to a discussion of these issues. The tension between labor market and spending data is not a recent phenomenon. Throughout the recovery period, forecasters have consistently overestimated both actual and potential GDP growth while underestimating the rate of job creation and the pace of decline of the unemployment rate (table 1). For example, in 2007, the average expectation for long-run GDP growth from the Blue Chip survey of 50 forecasters was 2.9 percent (table 2). After successive reductions, the estimate now stands at 2.1 percent. Blue Chip forecasters also underestimated the decline in the unemployment rate. Other well-known forecasts followed this same pattern, including those of the Congressional Budget Office, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and, yes, FOMC participants. The pattern suggests that forecasters have only gradually taken on board the decline in potential in the wake of the financial crisis. Output growth can be decomposed into increases in hours worked and changes in output per hour, or productivity growth. For the United States, much of the post-crisis decline in estimates of potential output growth appears to reflect weak labor productivity growth rather than damage to labor supply. Labor productivity has increased only 1/2 percent per year since 2010--the slowest five-year growth rate since World War II and about one-fourth of the average postwar rate (figure 2). For further perspective, productivity growth averaged 1-1/2 percent during the so-called slow productivity period from 1974 to 1995 and 3 percent during the tech-boom decade from 1995 to 2005. The slowdown has been worldwide and is evident even in countries that were little affected by the crisis (figure 3). Given the global nature of the phenomenon, changes in factors specific to the United States are probably not the main drivers. One factor holding back productivity in recent years has been the meager growth in the business sector's capital stock (figure 4). This weakness is consistent with the weak recovery in demand.4Another important factor is the marked decline in total factor productivity (TFP) growth (figure 5). TFP is that part of productivity that is not explained by capital investment or labor quality; it is thought to be mainly a function of technological innovation.5A broad decline in the dynamism in our economy may also be contributing to lower TFP.6There is strong evidence that the slowdown in TFP growth in the United States preceded the financial crisis, particularly in sectors that produce or use information technologies.7 The range of opinions on the future path of productivity growth is wide, and the historical record provides ample grounds for humility.8A middle-ground position that seems to underlie many current forecasts is that productivity is probably still being held down by cyclical factors and lingering effects of the crisis. As those factors dissipate, labor productivity growth should move up to 1-1/2 percent or so, the lower end of its longer-run range. In addition to productivity, the other principal factor in potential output is labor supply, which is determined by the working-age population, the natural rate of unemployment, and the trend labor force participation rate. Both the natural rate of unemployment and labor force participation initially appeared to suffer crisis-related damage. But more recent data are a bit more encouraging. The natural rate of unemployment reflects the matching of characteristics that employers are seeking with those of the unemployed. With the dramatic labor market dislocations of the crisis, it was not surprising to see measures of matching efficiency deteriorate, and many observers raised their estimates of the natural rate accordingly. But there are other factors, such as demographic change, that may have led to a decline in the natural rate of unemployment.9Blue Chip forecasters' estimate of the natural rate have now returned to around 5 percent, about the same as before the crisis, suggesting that these factors are roughly offsetting. Of course, estimates of the natural rate are highly uncertain.10 Trends in labor force participation add another element of uncertainty. Participation has been declining since about 2000 and is estimated to have a trend rate of decline of 20 to 30 basis points per year, driven by population aging and other longer-term trends such as the decline in participation by prime-age males. But the participation rate fell sharply after the crisis, faster than its apparent trend. It has been important to understand how much of the post-crisis decline is cyclical, and thus amenable to repair by supportive policies, and how much is secular, due either to longer-run trends or to irreversible crisis-related damage. It has been a relief to see the participation rate improve over the past two years relative to estimates of its trend; indeed, participation is now close to some such estimates.11Still, despite this relative improvement, the performance of the U.S. economy on this dimension has been poor relative to that of most OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) countries. For example, in the prime-age group of 25 to 54, the United States experienced a 2 percentage point decline in labor force participation from 2007 to 2014, while most OECD countries saw an increase (figure 6). The United States now stands at the low end of labor force participation for both men and women in this age group--above Italy, but well below Germany, France, and Spain.12 Lower potential growth would likely translate into lower estimates of the level of interest rates necessary to sustain stable prices and full employment. Estimates of the long-run "neutral" federal funds rate have declined about 100 basis points since the end of the crisis. The real yield on the 10-year Treasury is currently close to zero, compared with around 2 percent in the mid-2000s. Some of the decline in longer-term rates is explained by lower estimates of potential growth, and some by other factors such as very low term premiums. To sum up so far, estimates of long-run potential growth of the U.S. economy have dropped from about 3 percent to about 2 percent in the wake of the crisis, with much of the decline a function of slower productivity growth. The decline in realized productivity growth seems to be driven both by low capital investment that is well explained by weak demand and by lower TFP growth. Expectations of lower productivity growth going forward are more a function of slower gains in TFP. Lower potential output growth would mean that interest rates will remain below their pre-crisis levels even after the output gap is fully closed and inflation returns to 2 percent. Over time, our understanding of the relationship between recessions and supply-side factors has evolved.13There is a growing body of work suggesting that recessions can leave behind lasting damage--especially severe recessions associated with a financial crisis. One recent analysis suggests that about one-third of the time, there is no permanent supply-side damage; about one-third of the time, there is a reduction in the level of potential output but not its subsequent growth rate; and about one-third of the time, there is a reduction both in the level of output and in the growth rate.14Unfortunately, recent experience suggests that the United States is at risk of falling in the last category (figure 7). It goes without saying that economic policymakers should use all available tools to minimize supply-side damage from the crisis. We need policies that support labor force participation and the development of skills, business hiring and investment, and productivity growth--policies that are, for the most part, outside the remit of the Federal Reserve. Monetary policy can contribute by continuing to support the expansion as long as inflation remains consistent with our 2 percent objective and inflation expectations remain stable. Strong labor markets do seem to be averting some of the damage that might otherwise have become permanent. Improved matching is reducing the natural rate of unemployment. Potential workers are being pulled into the labor force by rising real wages and the recognition that jobs are becoming easier to find. Over a longer period, stronger demand should support increased investment, driving productivity higher. Moreover, as the economy tightens, firms will have rising incentives to get more out of every dollar of capital and hour of work. Real-time estimates of potential output are highly uncertain; forecasts of potential growth even more so. We can estimate growth of the working-age population reasonably well. Future levels of labor force participation are less certain. Least certain of all are forecasts of TFP. If the optimists are right, then there will eventually be another wave of high productivity growth driven by the truly remarkable evolution of technology. That would mean higher potential growth, faster increases in living standards, and also a return to higher interest rates over time. What if the pessimists are right and productivity growth remains low for another decade, or indefinitely? The consequences would include lower potential growth and relatively lower living standards. Our longer-term fiscal challenges would be significantly greater. Monetary PolicyThe implications for monetary policy of these supply-side issues have been limited, but they begin to matter more as we near full employment. For the near term, my baseline expectation is that our economy will continue on its path of growth at around 2 percent. To confirm that expectation, it will be important to see a significant strengthening in growth in the second quarter after the apparent softness of the past two quarters. To support this growth narrative, I also expect the ongoing healing process in labor markets to continue, with strong job growth, further reductions in headline unemployment and other measures of slack, and increases in wage inflation. As the economy tightens, I expect that inflation will continue to move over time to the Committee's 2 percent objective. If incoming data continue to support those expectations, I would see it as appropriate to continue to gradually raise the federal funds rate. Depending on the incoming data and the evolving risks, another rate increase may be appropriate fairly soon. Several factors suggest that the pace of rate increases should be gradual, including the asymmetry of risks at the zero lower bound, downside risks from weak global demand and geopolitical events, a lower long-run neutral federal funds rate, and the apparently elevated sensitivity of financial conditions to monetary policy. Uncertainty about the location of supply-side constraints provides another reason for gradualism. There are potential concerns with such a gradual approach. It is possible that monetary policy could push resource utilization too high, and that inflation would move temporarily above target. In an era of anchored inflation expectations, undershooting the natural rate of unemployment should result in only a small and temporary increase in the inflation rate.15But running the economy above its potential growth rate for an extended period could involve significant risks even if inflation does not move meaningfully above target. A long period of very low interest rates could lead to excessive risk-taking and, over time, to unsustainably high asset prices and credit growth. Macroprudential and other supervisory policies are designed to reduce both the likelihood of such an outcome and the severity of the consequences if it does occur. But it is not certain that these tools would prove adequate in a financial system in which much intermediation takes place outside the regulated banking sector. Thus, developments along these lines could ultimately present a difficult set of tradeoffs for monetary policy.16 ConclusionTo wrap up, with the support of monetary accommodation, our economy has made substantial progress. My view is that a continued gradual return to more normal monetary policy settings will give us the best chance to continue to make up lost ground. 1.For example, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, a 70 percent confidence band around the estimate of first-quarter GDP would extend from negative 0.7 percent to 1.7 percent, which implies that the spending data should be taken with a grain of salt.Return to text 2.Analysis by Board staff finds that lagged employment growth provides a better signal of current-quarter GDP or employment growth than does lagged GDP growth.Return to text 3.For example, the May Blue Chip forecast for second-quarter real GDP growth was 2.3 percent, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's GDPNow forecasting model predicted 2.5 percent, as of May 17.Return to text 4.See Eugenio Pinto and Stacey Tevlin (2014), "Perspectives on the Recent Weakness in Investment," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 21). Their analysis indicates that investment growth over the expansion has been consistent with a model using business output growth and the user cost of capital. In a second model, they show that the modest increases in the capital stock are consistent with the increase in labor supply and TFP.Return to text 5.Over long periods of time total factor productivity is primarily driven by innovation, knowledge and the efficiency with which inputs are put to use owing to the evolution of business practices as well as the influences of public capital stock, government regulations and other factors. Over shorter periods of time TFP will also capture the variations in the intensity of utilization of inputs, such as capacity utilization and hours per worker. Disentangling TFP from capital deepening and hours worked can be challenging.Return to text 6.See, for example, Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014), "The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3-24.Return to text 7.See John Fernald (2014), "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 29, no. 1 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research). Some have argued that part of the TFP slowdown may actually be a measurement problem, owing to the difficulty in measuring the productivity of health care, information technology, and other services. Others see the evidence for that claim as weak. For example, a recent paper finds little evidence that the slowdown arises from growing mismeasurement in information-technology-related goods and services. See David M. Byrne, John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf (2016), "Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,March 4.Return to text 8.On the pessimistic end of the spectrum are analysts such as Robert Gordon; among the optimists are Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee. See Robert J. Gordon (2016),The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press); and Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2014),The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies(New York: W.W. Norton).Return to text 9.For example, older labor force cohorts have lower participation but also lower unemployment rates.Return to text 10.Confidence intervals around statistical estimates of the natural rate are routinely estimated to be quite wide, reflecting both uncertainty about the correct model specification and uncertainty about the parameter estimates given the model. The canonical paper by Staiger, Stock, and Watson puts the 95 percent confidence interval at 1-1/2 percentage points on either side of the point estimate. See Douglas Staiger, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1997), "How Precise Are Estimates of the Natural Rate of Unemployment?" in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).Return to text 11.For example, a paper by Stephanie Aaronson and others estimates a trend below the current participation rate, while the Congressional Budget Office's estimate is above the current rate. See Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 197-275; and Congressional Budget Office (2016),The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2016 to 2026(Washington: CBO, January 25). For the argument that most of the decline is related to the severity of the recession and is likely reversible, see Christopher J. Erceg and Andrew T. Levin (2013), "Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/13/245 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, July).Return to text 12.Different countries use slightly different concepts for measuring labor force participation, and therefore cross-country comparisons may reflect some measurement issues. However, to the extent that these differences are constant over time, comparisons of the relative performances will be little affected. Accordingly, it is worth highlighting that the labor force participation rate in the 25-54 age group has declined somewhat in the U.S. since 2008, while it has been relatively steady or even increased some in other major advanced economies.Return to text 13.See, for example, Robert F. Martin, Teyanna Munyan, and Beth Anne Wilson (2014), "Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves?" IFDP Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 12); and Olivier Blanchard, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015), "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/230 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, November).Return to text 14.See Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers, "Inflation and Activity," in note 13. The authors argue that damage from recessions may be caused by hysteresis or by supply shocks such as oil price spikes or financial crises. In some cases, the link between recessions and future growth may reflect "reverse causation," whereby the recession is caused by the realization that future growth will be lower than had been expected.Return to text 15.See, for example, Laurence Ball and Sandeep Mazumder (2011), "The Evolution of Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (Spring), pp. 337–381; Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers, "Inflation and Activity", in note 13.Return to text 16.See for example, Jeremy C. Stein (2013), "Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses." Tobias Adrian and Adam B. Ashcraft (2012), "Shadow Banking Regulation" FRBNY Staff Report No. 559, and Samuel G. Hanson, Anil K. Kashyap, and Jeremy C. Stein (2011), "A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation,"Journal of Economic Perspectivesvol. 25, no. 1, both note that macroprudential tools may not be sufficient to fully address risks rising outside of the regulated banking sector.Return to text