The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday jointly announced determinations and provided firm-specific feedback on the 2015 resolution plans of eight systemically important, domestic banking institutions. The agencies have jointly determined that each of the 2015 resolution plans of Bank of America, Bank of New York Mellon, JP Morgan Chase, State Street, and Wells Fargo was not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, the statutory standard established in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The agencies have issued joint notices of deficiencies to these five firms detailing the deficiencies in their plans and the actions the firms must take to address them. Each firm must remediate its deficiencies by October 1, 2016. If a firm has not done so, it may be subject to more stringent prudential requirements. The agencies jointly identified weaknesses in the 2015 resolution plans of Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley that the firms must address, but did not make joint determinations regarding the plans and their deficiencies. The FDIC determined that the plan submitted by Goldman Sachs was not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, and identified deficiencies. The Federal Reserve Board identified a deficiency in Morgan Stanley's plan and found that the plan was not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Neither agency found that Citigroup's 2015 resolution plan was not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, although the agencies did identify shortcomings that the firm must address. The deadline for the next full plan submission for all eight domestic, systemically important financial institutions is July 1, 2017. The agencies will evaluate all eight of the full plans submitted in 2017 under the statutory standard. The agencies are issuingResolution Plan Assessment Framework and Firm Determinations (2016), which explains the resolution planning requirement, and provides further information on the determinations and the agencies' processes for reviewing the plans. Further, the Federal Reserve Board is releasing the feedback letters issued to each firm. Each letter details the deficiencies and shortcomings of each firm's plan, as well as the specific remediation required of each firm. Additionally, the agencies are releasing new guidance for the July 2017 submission of all firms. Section 165(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) for supervision by the Federal Reserve periodically submit resolution plans to the Federal Reserve and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Each plan, commonly known as a living will, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. Under the authority granted to the agencies in Section 165(d), if any of the five firms receiving a joint notice of deficiencies does not adequately remediate those deficiencies by October 1, the agencies, acting jointly, may impose more stringent prudential requirements on the firm until it remediates them. The prudential requirements may include more stringent capital, leverage, or liquidity requirements, as well as restrictions on growth, activities, or operations of the firm, or its subsidiaries. If, following a two-year period beginning on the date of the imposition of such requirements, a firm still has failed to adequately remediate any deficiencies, the agencies, in consultation with the FSOC, may jointly require the firm to divest certain assets or operations to facilitate an orderly resolution of the firm in bankruptcy. The agencies also announced that they are continuing to assess the plans for the four foreign banking organizations that filed resolution plans on July 1, 2015--Barclays PLC, Credit Suisse Group, Deutsche Bank AG, and UBS. The decisions announced on Wednesday received unanimous support, respectively, from the FDIC and Federal Reserve boards. Resolution Plan Assessment Framework and Firm Determinations (2016) (PDF)|HTML Guidance for 2017 165(d) Annual Resolution Plan Submissions by Domestic Covered Companies that Submitted Resolution Plans in July 2015 (PDF) Feedback letters: Bank of America Corporation (PDF)The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation (PDF)Citigroup Inc. (PDF)The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. (PDF)JPMorgan Chase & Co. (PDF)Morgan Stanley (PDF)*State Street Corporation (PDF)Wells Fargo & Company (PDF) Resolution Plans Search Board Votes * The feedback letter for Morgan Stanley has been re-issued due to a drafting error that labelled a weakness as a deficiency, rather than a shortcoming. The change has no impact on the firm or the required remediation. Resolution Plan Assessment Framework and Firm Determinations (2016) (PDF)|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that the public comment period has been extended through May 16, 2016, for the application by Huntington Bancshares Incorporated, Columbus, to acquire FirstMerit Corporation and thereby acquire FirstMerit Bank, N.A., both of Akron, all of Ohio, pursuant to section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended. The comment period is being extended to allow interested persons more time to review and provide comments concerning the proposal. Comments regarding these applications must be received at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (Attention: Mr. Allen M. Brown, Banking Supervisor, 1455 East Sixth Street, Cleveland, Ohio 44101;[email protected]) or the Office of the Secretary of the Board (20th Street and Constitution Avenue NW, Washington, D.C. 20551) on or before May 16, 2016. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: CBS Financial Corporation, Smyrna, GeorgiaWritten Agreement issued August 10, 2009Terminated April 8, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Jack Henry & Associates, Inc., Monett, MissouriWritten Agreement dated December 4, 2013Terminated March 29, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday implemented new procedures for examiners to conduct off-site loan reviews for community and small regional banks. The Board is offering this option as part of its ongoing efforts to improve efficiency and provide burden reduction while maintaining quality supervision. State member banks and U.S. branches and agencies for foreign banking organizations with less than $50 billion in total assets can opt to allow Federal Reserve examiners to review loan files off-site, during both full-scope or target examinations, so long as loan documents can be sent securely and with the required information. While some banks may prefer an off-site loan review, the program is optional so that any bank can still choose an on-site review. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. SR Letter 16-8: Off-site Review of Loan Files
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: CommerceWest Bank, Irvine, CaliforniaCease and Desist Order dated April 12, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Gentry Parker, a former institution-affiliated party ofSecurity Bank, Tulsa, OklahomaConsent Order to Cease and Desist requiring restitution of $6,600 dated April 13, 2016 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday proposed technical amendments to its rule requiring global systemically important bank holding companies (GSIBs) to hold additional amounts of risk-based capital. The proposal would not materially change the underlying rule finalized by the Board in July 2015. The final rule established the criteria for identifying a firm as a GSIB and the methodology a GSIB is required to use to determine its risk-based capital surcharge, which corresponds to the systemic risk of that firm. The proposed amendments clarify that GSIBs must continue to calculate their surcharges using year-end data, while their related surcharge data will be reported on a quarterly basis. The proposal also clarifies that these firms are required to compute their surcharge scores using billions of dollars. The amendments also provide additional information on how GSIBs should calculate their short-term wholesale funding scores, which help to determine their surcharges, during the rule's transition period. Comments will be accepted by May 13, 2016. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Board Votes Comments:View
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday finalized a rule to include certain U.S. general obligation state and municipal securities in the range of assets large banking organizations may use to satisfy regulatory requirements designed to ensure that these banking organizations have the capacity to meet their liquidity needs during a period of financial stress. The recent financial crisis highlighted the need for enhanced liquidity risk-management at the largest financial institutions, including having sufficient liquidity reserves to mitigate the risk of creditor and counterparty runs. The liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) requirement adopted by the federal banking agencies in September 2014 requires large banking organizations to hold a minimum amount of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) that can be readily converted into cash during a 30-day period of financial stress. While the LCR requirement did not initially include U.S. municipal securities as HQLA, subsequent analysis by the Federal Reserve suggested that certain U.S. municipal securities should qualify as HQLA because they have liquidity characteristics similar to other HQLA classes, such as corporate debt securities. The final rule allows investment-grade, U.S. general obligation state and municipal securities to be counted as HQLA up to certain levels if they meet the same liquidity criteria that currently apply to corporate debt securities. The limits on the amount of a state's or municipality's securities that could qualify are based on the liquidity characteristics of the securities. The final rule applies only to institutions supervised by the Federal Reserve and subject to the LCR requirement: Community banks are not subject to the LCR requirement. While generally similar to the proposal, in response to comments, the final rule does not include the restriction on insured municipal securities and the limit on the amount of a municipal securities issuance that may count as HQLA. The final rule will be effective on July 1, 2016. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML Board Votes
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that labor market conditions have improved further even as growth in economic activity appears to have slowed. Growth in household spending has moderated, although households' real income has risen at a solid rate and consumer sentiment remains high. Since the beginning of the year, the housing sector has improved further but business fixed investment and net exports have been soft. A range of recent indicators, including strong job gains, points to additional strengthening of the labor market. Inflation has continued to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and falling prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance, in recent months. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators will continue to strengthen. Inflation is expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of earlier declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. The Committee continues to closely monitor inflation indicators and global economic and financial developments. Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting further improvement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Stanley Fischer; Loretta J. Mester; Jerome H. Powell; Eric Rosengren; and Daniel K. Tarullo. Voting against the action was Esther L. George, who preferred at this meeting to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1/2 to 3/4 percent. Implementation Note issued April 27, 2016
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the appointment of Matthew J. Eichner as director of its Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, effective May 1, 2016. Eichner has served as deputy director of the division since January 2015 and succeeds Louise L. Roseman, who will serve as senior adviser until her retirement later this year. As division director, Mr. Eichner will be responsible for the division's oversight of: "The depth of knowledge and range of professional experience that Matt brings to this position make him well qualified to lead the Board's work in important areas that are broad and diverse," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Janet L. Yellen. Eichner joined the staff of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Research and Statistics in 2008. He began his career at the U.S. State Department and also served at the U.S. Treasury Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission. He has taught economics and finance at Columbia University and Johns Hopkins University. Eichner graduated from Harvard College, holds a Masters of Public Policy degree from the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, and a Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for February 8 and March 14, 2016. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on March 15-16, 2016. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 15-16, 2016:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Jerome H. Powell Before the Subcommittee on Securities, Insurance, and Investment, and Subcommittee on Economic Policy, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairmen Crapo and Heller, Ranking Members Warner and Warren, other subcommittee members, I would like to thank you for inviting me to testify today on trends in fixed-income markets. Because these markets perform important functions in our economy, it is imperative that we understand the significant changes they are currently undergoing. As I will discuss, a number of factors have been driving these changes. Some market participants have expressed concerns about low liquidity across fixed-income markets, although many recent studies have found it difficult to identify such a broad reduction. It may be that liquidity has deteriorated only in certain market segments. It may also be that, even if liquidity is adequate in normal conditions, it has become more fragile, or prone to disappearing under stress. The sharp swing in Treasury prices that took place on October 15, 2014, led the Federal Reserve Board, in conjunction with the Treasury Department, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Securities and Exchange Commission, to create a Joint Staff Report and to host a conference on the structure of Treasury markets at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) in October 2015.1The staff of the four agencies and the FRBNY compiled transactions data across both Treasury cash and futures markets and analyzed the factors that could have caused the rapid rise and subsequent reversal in Treasury prices in such a short span of time. This analysis did not find a single factor that caused the sharp swing in prices. As had already occurred in equity markets, advances in computing and communications technologies have allowed proprietary trading firms (PTFs, also often called high-frequency trading firms) to capture a majority of the interdealer market in Treasuries. As a consequence of these changes, trading in Treasury markets now moves at extreme speed. It may be that these changes have also led to greater liquidity risk, or sudden declines in liquidity. Researchers at the FRBNY have shown that spikes in volatility and sudden declines in liquidity have become more frequent in both Treasury and equity markets.2There is also evidence that liquidity shifts more rapidly and hence is less predictable in these markets.3In contrast, researchers have not found evidence of these behaviors in corporate bond markets, where traditional dealers still intermediate most trades and there is much less high-frequency trading.4 Apart from such episodes of sudden volatility, questions about whether liquidity in fixed-income markets has broadly deteriorated are difficult to answer definitively. In exploring these topics, it is important to distinguish between Treasury and corporate bond markets, which have different characteristics. In Treasury markets, traditional measures of liquidity, such as bid-ask spreads, have been fairly stable in recent years.5But the changing market structure has also meant smaller average trade sizes,6and participants now must break up their larger trades and employ complicated strategies in order to avoid moving prices. Accurately measuring the effect of trading on prices, perhaps the most fundamental gauge of market liquidity, can be quite difficult in such an environment.7There are also differences between on-the-run Treasury securities, the securities that were most recently issued and that are the most liquid, and off-the-run Treasury securities. However, observable measures such as the spread between on- and off-the-run Treasury securities do not show any trend change in liquidity between the two market segments since the financial crisis. In corporate bond markets, estimated bid-ask spreads have declined, indicating that, if anything, liquidity may have improved.8However, given the nature of the corporate bond market, these estimates are based on transactions rather than on direct observations of quotes to buy or sell these bonds. What we can directly observe is that trade sizes and turnover have declined in the most actively traded corporate bonds as they have in Treasury markets.9And although observable measures ofoverallliquidity in corporate bond markets appear good, there is some evidence that liquidity has deteriorated for the lowest-rated bonds.10Trading in these less liquid segments may rely heavily on intermediation by dealers, and dealers have scaled back their capital commitments and inventories in corporate bonds since the financial crisis.11 Immediately after the financial crisis, dealers began to move away from a principal model of market making, whereby they would facilitate trades using their own inventories and assume some risk, toward an agency model. Many point to post-crisis regulation as a key factor in this process. One area in particular where market participants point to the impact of regulation is Treasury repo markets. At the 2015 conference, participants noted that required spreads on Treasury repo trades have widened significantly since the crisis and attributed some of this increase to regulation.12 But post-crisis regulations have also greatly strengthened the major banks and made another financial crisis far less likely. Evidence also indicates that certain regulations haveincreasedliquidity; for example, the mandate that more standardized derivatives be traded on organized exchanges or platforms appears to have improved market functioning.13My view is that these regulations are new, and we should be willing to adjust them as we learn. That said, we should also recognize that some reduction in market liquidity is a cost worth paying in helping to make the overall financial system significantly safer. It is important, however, not to overemphasize any effects of regulation. Banks have independently recalibrated their own approaches to risk and scaled back their market-making activities. Dealers significantly reduced their fixed-income portfolios beginning in 2009, well ahead of most post-crisis changes in regulation.14 Corporate debt issuance has been at record levels in recent years. With dealer balance sheets shrinking, buy-side investors now bear greater liquidity risk. It is important that mutual funds and other investors in fixed-income securities continue to take measures to understand and manage these risks. In addition, we should distinguish betweensystemicrisk andmarketrisk. The risks to investors generally represent market risk and do not appear to pose risks to the financial system as a whole. The movement of these risks away from the nation's most systemically important financial institutions is one of many reasons that they are far stronger and more resilient than before the crisis. Markets are adapting to this new environment. Where there is an unmet demand for liquidity, new market makers are emerging to meet that demand. For example, some PTFs are seeking entry to dealer-to-customer platforms for Treasury trading. Seven new electronic trading venues entered the market for corporate and municipal bonds over the last two years, and several more are preparing to launch this year.15While there is no guarantee of success for these entrants, markets will continue to evolve. Thus, it is too early to judge the ultimate impact of factors affecting fixed-income liquidity. One thing that will help in this judgment is better data. At the 2015 conference, many market participants expressed a desire for more publicly available data on Treasury markets. It is striking that so little data is available--even to regulators--on trading in our nation's Treasury market. It took considerable effort to gather detailed trade data for just the single day of October 15, 2014, in writing the Joint Staff Report. The Board has been supportive of the Treasury Department's current Request for Information (RFI), which will be concluding on April 22. The RFI will provide information on this issue, as we reassess the adequacy of public information and of the data available to the official sector for its own monitoring of these markets. Thank you. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have. 1. SeeJoint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014(PDF), U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, July 13, 2015, andConference Summary: The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market (October 20-21, 2015)(PDF), Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October 20, 2015.Return to text2. See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt,Has Liquidity Risk in the Treasury and Equity Markets Increased?, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 6, 2015.Return to text3. See Dobrislav Dobrev and Ernst Schaumburg,The Liquidity Mirage, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 9, 2015.Return to text4. See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Or Shachar, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt,Has Liquidity Risk in the Corporate Bond Market Increased?, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 6, 2015.Return to text5. See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt,Has U.S. Treasury Market Liquidity Deteriorated?, Liberty Street Economics (blog), August 17, 2015.Return to text6. Ibid.Return to text7. See for example, Terrence Hendershott, Charles M. Jones, and Albert J. Menkveld, "Implementation Shortfall with Transitory Price Effects (PDF)," inHigh Frequency Trading; New Realities for Trades, Markets and Regulators,David Easley, Marcos López de Prado, and Maureen O'Hara (editors), Risk Books (London: 2013).Return to text8. See Bruce Mizrach, "Analysis of Corporate Bond Liquidity (PDF)," Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), Office of the Chief Economist Research Note, December 2015.Return to text9. Ibid.Return to text10. See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Erik Vogt, and Zachary Wojtowicz,Further Analysis of Corporate Bond Market Liquidity, Liberty Street Economics (blog), February 10, 2016.Return to text11. See Hendrik Bessembinder, Stacey E. Jacobsen, William F. Maxwell, and Kumar Venkataraman,Capital Commitment and Illiquidity in Corporate Bonds, Social Science Research Network (SSRN), March 21, 2016.Return to text12.Conference Summary: The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market (October 20-21, 2015)(PDF), Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2015.Return to text13. See Evangelos Benos, Richard Payne, and Michalis Vasios,Centralized trading, transparency and interest rate swap market liquidity: evidence from the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act(PDF),Bank of England, Staff Working Paper No. 580, January 15, 2016.Return to text14. See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt,What's Driving Dealer Balance Sheet Stagnation?, Liberty Street Economics (blog), August 21, 2015.Return to text15. SeeSIFMA Electronic Bond Trading Report: US Corporate and Municipal Securities(PDF),Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA), February 17, 2016.Return to text 1. SeeJoint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014(PDF), U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, July 13, 2015, andConference Summary: The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market (October 20-21, 2015)(PDF), Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October 20, 2015.Return to text 2. See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt,Has Liquidity Risk in the Treasury and Equity Markets Increased?, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 6, 2015.Return to text 3. See Dobrislav Dobrev and Ernst Schaumburg,The Liquidity Mirage, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 9, 2015.Return to text 4. See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Or Shachar, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt,Has Liquidity Risk in the Corporate Bond Market Increased?, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 6, 2015.Return to text 5. See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt,Has U.S. Treasury Market Liquidity Deteriorated?, Liberty Street Economics (blog), August 17, 2015.Return to text 6. Ibid.Return to text 7. See for example, Terrence Hendershott, Charles M. Jones, and Albert J. Menkveld, "Implementation Shortfall with Transitory Price Effects (PDF)," inHigh Frequency Trading; New Realities for Trades, Markets and Regulators,David Easley, Marcos López de Prado, and Maureen O'Hara (editors), Risk Books (London: 2013).Return to text 8. See Bruce Mizrach, "Analysis of Corporate Bond Liquidity (PDF)," Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), Office of the Chief Economist Research Note, December 2015.Return to text 9. Ibid.Return to text 10. See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Erik Vogt, and Zachary Wojtowicz,Further Analysis of Corporate Bond Market Liquidity, Liberty Street Economics (blog), February 10, 2016.Return to text 11. See Hendrik Bessembinder, Stacey E. Jacobsen, William F. Maxwell, and Kumar Venkataraman,Capital Commitment and Illiquidity in Corporate Bonds, Social Science Research Network (SSRN), March 21, 2016.Return to text 12.Conference Summary: The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market (October 20-21, 2015)(PDF), Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2015.Return to text 13. See Evangelos Benos, Richard Payne, and Michalis Vasios,Centralized trading, transparency and interest rate swap market liquidity: evidence from the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act(PDF),Bank of England, Staff Working Paper No. 580, January 15, 2016.Return to text 14. See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt,What's Driving Dealer Balance Sheet Stagnation?, Liberty Street Economics (blog), August 21, 2015.Return to text 15. SeeSIFMA Electronic Bond Trading Report: US Corporate and Municipal Securities(PDF),Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA), February 17, 2016.Return to text
Throughout American history, women have made important contributions to the free and democratic society we enjoy today. I welcome the decision by the Treasury Department to honor these achievements. The Federal Reserve will work with Treasury on a design that also incorporates strong security features to protect worldwide users of U.S. currency.
Governor Lael Brainard At the Institute of International Finance Blockchain Roundtable, Washington, D.C. Innovation in digital finance, loosely referred to as fintech, is capturing imaginations from Silicon Valley to Chicago to Wall Street. We're seeing a steady stream of announcements of new startups and partnerships, and consumers are downloading fintech apps at an even faster pace. Financial products, services, and transactions lend themselves to successive waves of technological disruption because they can readily be represented as streams of numerical information ripe for digitization. However, as technological tools used by the industry change over time, it is important to keep sight of their impact on the public, whether it be on families seeking to own their own home, seniors seeking financial security, young adults seeking to invest in education and training, or small businesses attempting to smooth through volatile revenues and expenses. Current developments in the digitization of finance are important and deserving of serious and sustained engagement on the part of policymakers and regulators. The Federal Reserve Board has established a multi-disciplinary working group that is engaged in a 360-degree analysis of fintech innovation. We are bringing together the best thinking across the Federal Reserve System, spanning key areas of responsibility, from supervision to community development, from financial stability to payments. As policymakers, we want to facilitate innovation where it has the potential to yield public benefit, while ensuring that risks are thoroughly understood and managed. That orientation may have different implications in the arena of consumer and small business finance, for instance, as compared with payment, clearing, and settlement in the wholesale financial markets. Technological and Organizational Changes in Payment, Clearing, and SettlementToday, I will focus on newly emerging distributed ledger technologies and related protocols, which were inspired originally by Bitcoin, and their potentially important applications to payment, clearing, and settlement in the wholesale markets. Successive waves of technological advance have swept through payment, clearing, and settlement over the past two centuries. In the 19th century, railroads and the telegraph helped improve speed and logistics. In the second half of the 20th century, computers were introduced to deal with the clearing of overwhelming volumes of paper checks and stock certificates stimulated by post-war growth. Starting at about the same time and continuing through today, new electronic networks have been established to allow high-speed computerized financial communication. As automation has evolved, payment, clearing, and settlement systems have been developed for conducting and processing transactions within and between firms. However, many of these systems have historically operated in silos, which can be hard to streamline or replace. In some areas, business processes may still rely heavily on manual or semi-automated procedures. Over time, banks and other firms have organized various types of clearinghouses to coordinate clearing and settlement activities in order to reduce costs and risks. The adoption of multilateral clearing in the United States was a key organizational innovation that began with the founding of the New York Clearing House in the 1850s. This led to notable efficiencies and risk reduction in the clearing of checks. Multilateral clearing was also used early on to improve clearing in the securities and derivatives markets. By the 1970s, the United States turned to technologies based on the centralized custody and clearing of book-entry securities in order to respond to the paperwork crisis in the equities markets. Following the recent financial crisis, the United States--along with many other countries--expanded the scope of central clearing to help address problems in the bilateral clearing of derivatives contracts. Today, the possible development and application of distributed ledger technology has raised questions about potentially far reaching changes to multilateral clearinghouses and the roles of financial institutions as intermediaries in trading, clearing, and settlement for their clients. In the extreme, distributed ledger technologies are seen as enabling a much larger universe of financial actors to transact directly with other financial actors and to exchange assets versus funds (that is, to "clear" and settle the underlying transactions) virtually instantaneously without the help of intermediaries both within and across borders. This dramatic reduction in frictions would be facilitated by distributed ledgers shared across various networks of financial actors that would keep a complete and accurate record of all transactions, and meet appropriate goals for transparency, privacy, and security. At this stage, such a sea-change may sound like a remote possibility, particularly for the high volume and highly regulated clearing and settlement functions of the wholesale financial markets. But profound disruptions are not unprecedented in this arena. In the early 1960s, the use of computerized book-entry securities systems to streamline custody, clearing, and settlement in the securities markets may have seemed like a technologist's pipe dream. But these technologies became an important part of industry-wide changes in the 1970s. Today we rely on these types of systems for the daily operation of the markets. Given this backdrop, it is important to give promising technologies the serious consideration they merit, seek to understand their opportunities and risks, and actively engage in dialogue about their potential uses and evolution. At the Federal Reserve, we approach these issues from the perspective of policymakers safeguarding the public interest in safe and sound core banking institutions, financial stability, particularly as it pertains to the wholesale financial markets, and the security and efficiency of the payment system. Distributed ledger technology was introduced for the transfer and record-keeping of Bitcoin and other digital currencies. The essential advantage of the technology is that it provides a credible way to transfer an asset without the need for trust in intermediaries or counterparties, much like a physical cash transaction. To do that, a transfer process must be able to credibly confirm that a sender of an asset is the owner and has enough of the asset to make the transfer to the receiver. This requires a secure system or protocol to transfer assets (the rails), protection against assets being transferred twice (the so-called double spend problem), and an immutable record of asset ownership that can be automatically and securely updated (the ledger). The tokenization of digital assets can facilitate the transfer process. The genuinely innovative aspect of the technology combines a number of different core elements that support the transfer process and recordkeeping: While Bitcoin was originally associated with the concept of a universally available, publicly shared digital ledger technology without any central authority, many of the use cases that are currently under development and discussion rely on "permissioned" ledgers in which only permitted, known participants can validate transactions. These in turn can be either public or private in terms of access to the ledger. The resulting Internet of Value holds out the promise of addressing important frictions and reducing intermediation steps in the clearing and settlement process. For example, in cross-border payments, faster processing and reduced costs relative to current correspondent banking are cited as specific potential benefits. Reducing intermediation steps in cross-border payments may help reduce costs and counterparty risks and may additionally improve financial transparency. In securities clearing and settlement, the potential shift to one master record shared among participants has some appeal. Having one immutable record may have the potential to reduce or even eliminate the need for reconciliation by avoiding duplicative records that have different details related to a transaction that is being cleared and settled. This also can lead to greater transparency, reduced costs, and faster securities settlement. Likewise, digital ledgers may improve collateral management by improving the tracking of ownership and transactions. For derivatives, there is interest in the potential for digital ledger protocols to enable self-execution and possibly self-enforcement of contractual clauses, in the context of "smart contracts." As we engage with industry and stakeholders to assess the potential applications of digital ledger and related technologies in the payment, clearing, and settlement arena, we will be guided by the principles of efficiency, safety and integrity, and financial stability. EfficiencyMany are excited about the potential for these new technologies to reduce costs and frictions, such as those associated with collateral management and custodial services, reduce settlement risk, enhance security, increase transparency, and offer new services. But there are also concerns about the costs and risks from the early adoption of rapidly evolving and uncertain technologies and technological hurdles in integrating new technologies into legacy systems and achieving interoperability across different ledgers and networks. There are questions about the need for substantial new investments to obtain capabilities like real-time processing where these capabilities already exist at some of the industry's core infrastructures. There are also cautions that realizing the full potential of distributed ledger technologies could take many years. Much of the case for adopting distributed ledger technologies revolves around achieving greater efficiency and reducing time and risks to post-trade clearing and settlement. But first, important technological challenges will need to be addressed to permit widespread adoption and migration away from legacy systems and networks. These include the need for standardization, the development of protocols that will permit interoperability between other ledgers and networks, and the reduction of computational intensity and costs. Moreover, distributed ledgers will have to compete with other options and priorities of financial firms and clearinghouses in a highly regulated financial ecosystem. Thus, a major threshold question for the adoption of distributed ledger technology within and between groups of firms engaging in particular types of transactions is whether the advantages outweigh the costs of replacing legacy systems. In some cases, where distributed ledger technology can be employed internally within a firm to automate and speed up business processes, traditional business case analysis would presumably lead to efficient technology choices. By contrast, where coordinated industry-level decisions would be needed to develop distributed ledgers shared by multiple firms, the case must be compelling for entire networks of market participants that will need to make the investments, as well as for the broader public interest. This set of competing considerations suggests there are likely to be a spectrum of cases. At one end are the high-volume, heavily regulated markets that have made large investments in central clearing to provide safe and efficient clearing and settlement for the industry and the public. These markets must always actively consider technological and other enhancements to strengthen efficiency and safety. But as a practical matter, the large-scale adoption of wholly new clearing technologies to replace existing legacy technologies for major markets may face a significant hurdle initially, such that incremental change or delayed adoption until the technology has achieved greater maturity and standardization may be more likely. At the other end of the spectrum, there appear to be some markets or segments where clearing practices are relatively cumbersome and outmoded, and the network hurdles to the adoption of new technologies are lower. Improvements in smaller markets would also provide an opportunity for market participants to gain operational and business experience with distributed ledger technologies that could help inform and strengthen the case for broader applications over time. A middle case would involve the application of distributed ledger technologies to bilateral clearing even where improvements have already been made since the financial crisis. A threshold issue will be the design and safety of new technologies and whether firms will want to share a distributed ledger to manage transactions with their different counterparties and customers. No doubt much will depend not only on cost but also on a host of business, technical, security, and other issues. Even so, change might hold promise for improving bilateral clearing, and might also help us think about the long-run trade-offs between bilateral and central clearing. An assessment of the longer-term potential for deployment of distributed ledger technology naturally raises questions about whether it might ultimately impact the organizational structure for clearing and settlement. As multilateral clearing organizations have strengthened and spread across many of the major asset classes traded in the markets, they have enabled coordinated action on governance, rules, technology, and risk management. It is possible that new technologies could substantially change the way these functions are pursued, but it would be surprising if they would obviate the need for multilateral clearing in the major markets. Governance, in particular, is a core function that is inescapably necessary if multilateral activity, even activity dealing with distributed ledgers, is to operate effectively. Indeed, if new technologies could lower the costs of multilateral clearing relative to bilateral clearing in new market segments, multilateral clearing could even grow. Today's clearing houses will likely continue to play a central role in highly regulated markets and be well positioned to evaluate and implement new clearing technologies, while continuing to provide core governance functions in the market. Nonetheless, it is also possible that if distributed ledgers ultimately cross asset classes and even industries, traditional clearinghouses serving specific market segments might have to evolve or new organizations might develop to provide an optimal approach to implementation. Moreover, in principle, the use of distributed ledgers in new market segments may call for new clearing arrangements more in tune with new technologies. Similarly, organizations that can provide governance or other coordinating functions in bilaterally cleared markets may also require organizational structures somewhat different from traditional clearinghouses. We will be following these issues with interest. Safety, Integrity, and Financial StabilitySafety and integrity in clearing and settlement is a critical, long-standing public policy objective of the Federal Reserve, and is critical for broader financial stability. Regardless of the technologies employed, if risks to clearing and settlement are not identified and addressed, then banks, dealers, and other firms will not be able to manage their obligations and market functioning may be impaired. This is a key reason why major clearing and settlement systems are highly regulated. Hence, the fundamental threshold test for new technologies will be whether they can be deployed and operated safely, with the requisite high degree of operational and financial integrity, security, and resilience across a wide range of adverse scenarios. Regulators and the public need to know that if adverse scenarios do occur, there will be robust management and governance to respond effectively. Digital ledger technologies will need to be able to address the range of issues revolving around the confidentiality and security of firm and client records and data on the one hand, as well as law enforcement requirements and issues on the other. New technologies must be robust in practice, not just in theory, to attacks on security, and must be able to maintain appropriate confidentiality for records and data. In addition, it will be important that digital ledger technologies can meet the requirements of law enforcement and other regulators to address money laundering, terrorist financing, and other key law enforcement concerns. Indeed, there is some potential that the new technologies could enable improved authorized access to certain data records in a much more efficient and comprehensive manner than has previously been possible, thereby potentially reducing costs associated with complying with the Bank Secrecy Act. Overall we should be optimistic that a range of new technologies hold the promise of providing more robust security, resilience, and information. We cannot afford to assume that change necessarily equals greater risk. Of course, much will depend on the technology itself, its scalability, its level of maturity, the controls and environment surrounding it, the standardization and accessibility of transactions data, the quality of management and governance, and the policy environment in which it is deployed. Key Challenges Going ForwardToday, many industry participants are experimenting with distributed ledger technology in controlled, permissioned environments. If some of these experiments bear fruit, it will be important to address the challenge of how they would scale and achieve diffusion. In addition, determining exactly how the different distributed ledger technologies interoperate with each other, and legacy systems, will be critical. New and highly fragmented "shared systems" may create unintended consequences even as they aim to address problems created by today's siloed operations. Since distributed ledgers often involve shared databases, it will also be important to effectively manage access rights as information flows back and forth through shared systems. There may well be a tradeoff between the privacy of trading partners and competitors on the one hand, and the ability to leverage shared transactions records for faster and cheaper settlement on the other hand. And of course, development of sound risk-management, resiliency, and recovery procedures will be necessary to address operational risks. The Federal Reserve will continue to engage actively with the industry, stakeholders, and our regulatory colleagues as the industry works through these challenges and the technology evolves. I want to close by remembering a simple point that central bankers and markets have learned through hard lessons over many years. The daily operation of markets and their clearing and settlement functions are built on trust and confidence. Market participants trust that clearing and settlement functions and institutions will work properly every day. Confidence has built over time that when market participants trade, accurate and timely clearing and settlement will follow. Any disruption to this confidence comes at great cost to market integrity and financial stability. This is a matter of fundamental public interest. In safeguarding the public interest, the first line of inquiry and protection will always rest with those closest to the technology innovations and to the organizations that consider adopting the technology. But regulators also should seek to analyze the implications of technology developments through constructive and timely engagement. We should be attentive to the potential benefits of these new technologies, and prepared to make the necessary regulatory adjustments if their safety and integrity is proven and their potential benefits found to be in the public interest. I am grateful to Andrew Figura, Jeff Marquardt, and David Mills for their assistance in preparing this text.