Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At "The Structural Foundations of Monetary Policy," a Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference, Stanford University, Stanford, California It is a pleasure to be at the Hoover Institution again. I was privileged to be a Visiting Scholar here from 1981 to 1982. In addition, many of the researchers and practitioners with whom I have discussed monetary policy over the years have had affiliations with the Hoover Institution--including several people here today. It is a pleasure also to have been invited to speak at this Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference, for the Hoover conference series provides a valuable forum for policymakers and researchers to engage in dialogue about important monetary policy issues facing the United States and other countries. Today I will offer some observations on monetary policy rules and their place in decisionmaking by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1I have two messages. First, policymakers should consult the prescriptions of policy rules, but--almost needless to say--they should avoid applying them mechanically. Second, policymaking committees have strengths that policy rules lack. In particular, committees are an efficient means of aggregating a wide variety of information and perspectives. Monetary Policy Rules in Research and PolicySince May 2014, I have considered monetary policy rules from the vantage point of a member of the FOMC. But my interest in them began many years ago and was reflected in some of my earliest publications.2At that time, the literature on monetary policy rules, especially in the United States, remained predominantly concerned with the money stock or total bank reserves rather than the short-term interest rate.3Seen with the benefit of hindsight, that emphasis probably derived from three sources: First, the quantity theory of money emphasized the link between the quantity of money and inflation; second, that research was carried out when monetarism was gaining credibility in the profession; and, third, there was a concern that interest rate rules might lead to price-level indeterminacy--an issue disposed of by Bennett McCallum and others.4 Subsequently, John Taylor's research, especially his celebrated 1993 paper, was a catalyst in changing the focus toward rules for the short-term interest rate.5Taylor's work thus helped shift the terms of the discussion in favor of rules for the instrument that central banks prefer to use. His 1993 study also highlighted the practical relevance of monetary policy rules, as he showed that a particular simple rule--the rule that now bears his name--provided a good approximation to the behavior of the federal funds rate during the early Greenspan years. The research literature on monetary policy rules has experienced a major revival since Taylor's seminal paper and has concentrated on rules for the short-term interest rate. Consideration of interest rate rules has also, as I will discuss, come to have a prominent role in FOMC discussions, with the Taylor rule being one benchmark that we regularly consult. But--building on recent remarks I made elsewhere--I will also indicate why policymakers might have good reasons for deviating from these rule benchmarks and why, in pursuing the objectives of monetary policy, they could appropriately behave in ways that are not very well characterized by simple monetary policy rules.6In particular, I will point to reasons why the FOMC's discussions might lead to decisions that depart--temporarily or permanently--from the prescriptions of baseline monetary policy rules. Rules as a Benchmark for Policy DiscussionsSome perspective on the status of policy rules in FOMC discussions is provided by considering what has changed over the past 20 years. Donald Kohn, at a landmark conference organized by John Taylor in January 1998, described the role played by monetary policy rules in the FOMC briefing process.7His account noted that Federal Reserve staff members presented FOMC participants with prescriptions from several policy rules, including the Taylor (1993) rule. This description remains true today. Publicly available Bluebooks and Tealbooks of successive years demonstrate that the coverage of policy rules in the briefing material provided by the Board staff expanded considerably in the years after Kohn spoke.8 Kohn noted that policy rule prescriptions served two functions: as a "benchmark for the stance of policy" and "to structure thinking about the implications of incoming information for the direction of policy action."9These two functions continue to be important: Policy rule prescriptions provide a useful starting point for FOMC deliberations and a convenient way of organizing alternative arguments about the appropriate policy decision. Policy rule prescriptions, particularly prescriptions that are obtained from a dynamic model simulation, also help policymakers take to heart a key message of the literature on policy rules--namely, that monetary policy decisions should concern the appropriatepathfor the policy instrument and not merely the current setting of that instrument. Kohn also observed, however, that "in truth, only a few members look at this or similar information regularly, and the number does not seem to be growing." That state of affairs has probably changed in the two decades since Kohn wrote. It is clear from transcripts in the public record that rule prescriptions have frequently been cited at FOMC meetings.10The prominence that interest rate rules have achieved in Federal Reserve policymakers' analysis of monetary policy was underscored by Chair Yellen in her speech at Stanford University earlier this year.11 Further, as is clear from Taylor's econometric derivation of his 1993 rule, actual monetary policy decisions may--and probably should--exhibit systematic patterns that can be described as a rule. In fact, as I have already noted, one attraction of the 1993 Taylor rule was that it described U.S. monetary policy patterns well over a certain period, one that was associated with a reasonable degree of economic stability. Nevertheless, central bankers who are aware of the merits of the arguments for policy rules have on occasion deviated substantially from the prescriptions of standard policy rules. Further, while the implications of different monetary rules are described in the Tealbook and typically referred to in the presentations by several FOMC participants, the overall discussion in FOMC meetings is not generally cast in terms of how it relates to one version or another of the Taylor or any other rule. The other set of rules mentioned frequently in FOMC discussions are Wicksellian, for there is often a discussion ofr*, which in some formulations of the Taylor rule is also the constant term. The period since 2008 bears testimony to central bankers' willingness to depart from the prescriptions of a pre-specified rule. In the wake of the financial crisis, policymakers found it necessary to follow a more accommodative monetary policy that was appropriate for the new economic conditions.12In addition, structural changes in the U.S. economy have apparently lowered the value of the interest rate--that is,r*--consistent with neutral policy.13 Such structural changes were not anticipated in advance.14Of course, once a structural change has occurred and been ascertained by policymakers, they will know what rules would likely have performed well in the face of that change. For this reason, policymakers might change their judgment about what monetary policy rules constitute reasonable benchmarks, or, over time, they might develop a procedure for revising the monetary rule. But a frequently revised rule does not really qualify as a rule in the sense that we currently use the term. Consequently, when considering the relationship between monetary policy decisions and monetary policy rules, we can expect two regularities to hold. First, actual monetary policy will sometimes appropriately depart from the prescriptions of benchmark rules even when those benchmarks describe past decisions well. Second, in their use of rules, policymakers will from time to time change their assessment of what rule they regard as the appropriate benchmark. Both regularities have been amply observed in recent years, but they were also present 20 years ago, as reflected in Kohn's remark that policymakers "do not see their past actions as a very firm guide to current or future policy." Or, as a teacher of mine at the London School of Economics, Richard Sayers, put it much earlier, "There is no code of eternal rules. . . . We have central banks for the very reason that there are no such rules."15 As I will now elaborate, I believe the fact that monetary policy is made by committees in most economies is important in understanding both of these regularities. The Role of Committees in Policy FormationMonetary policy decisions in the United States and elsewhere typically arise from a discussion and vote of a committee.16In principle, a monetary policy committee could decide to follow a rule. But a decision of this kind is unlikely to occur in practice. Committee discussions bring into policymaking features that a rule lacks. A committee-based decision process is, I suggest, likely to produce policy decisions that depart from the prescriptions of benchmark rules. A policy rule prescription is more consistent with a single perspective on the economy than with the pooling of multiple perspectives that is associated with a committee policymaking process. Roger Lowenstein's bookAmerica's Bankdetails how the founding of the Federal Reserve involved reconciling a large number of interests in the United States.17In a similar vein, the modern FOMC framework involves participation by 12 Reserve Bank presidents, each of whom represents a different district of the country. The FOMC framework also balances centralized and decentralized decisionmaking by having most of the permanent voting members--specifically, the Board of Governors--be based in Washington, D.C. All of the FOMC participants have common goals--maximum employment and price stability--that are given by the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate. They have also agreed, for pursuing that mandate, on the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.18But while they have this common ground, each FOMC participant brings to the table his or her own perspective or view of the world. Part of their role in meetings is to articulate that perspective and perhaps persuade their colleagues to revise their own perspectives--or vice versa. A member of a committee may well have valuable economic information not known by their colleagues until he or she relays it. This point has been brought home to me by Reserve Bank presidents' accounts of recent economic developments in their Districts. These narratives shed light on the real-world developments that lie behind the recorded economic data. They also help shape my interpretation of what part of incoming data may be an important signal and what part may reflect transitory factors or mismeasurement. The information underlying a policy decision is, therefore, crucially shaped by a committee system. Committees can aggregate a large volume of diverse information about current and expected future economic conditions. The information includes anecdotes and impressions gleaned from business and other contacts, which can provide insights that are not recorded in current data releases. In practice, it is likely that the information obtained and processed by the Committee will leave the FOMC less inclined to follow a benchmark rule. For example, the Committee's discussions might point up factors that have not yet affected real economic activity and inflation. Such factors would not lead to an immediate change in the prescription for the federal funds rate obtained from a rule like the Taylor rule, as this prescription is a function of current values of the output gap and inflation. The Committee might nevertheless wish to adjust the federal funds rate immediately because the newly unearthed factors are likely to affect output and inflation in coming months. In addition, and as I have suggested, policymakers might also encounter unexpected or unusual events, or both, or they might perceive changes in the structure of the economy. A committee process is conducive to assessing the appropriate policy response to these developments. A case in point is the decline, as I mentioned, in estimates of the neutral interest rate. The concept of the neutral interest rate is a way of summarizing the various forces, many of them unobservable, that shift the relationship between monetary policy and economic activity. Bringing to the table diverse perspectives is a pragmatic way of confronting such deep sources of uncertainty and deciding how to deal with them. A committee discussion can flesh out the factors behind changes in the neutral rate, and a committee would likely be able to identify such changes more promptly than would a statistical exercise, because of the wider set of information from around the country that the committee is able to process. The decisionmaking environment that I have described involves more flexibility for FOMC members than they would have if they simply followed a policy rule. But transparency and accountability must figure heavily in this more flexible environment. The FOMC's policy communications include its postmeeting statement, the minutes of its meetings, the Chair's quarterly press conference, the Chair's semiannual monetary policy testimony to the Congress, and other public remarks by individual FOMC members. In this framework, policymakers articulate the reasoning behind each decision and, in particular, explain how the policy decision contributes to the achievement of the Committee's statutory mandate. There remains a deeper question about committee decisionmaking: Why have almost all countries decided that monetary policy decisions should be made by a committee rather than by a rule? One answer is that laws in most countries are passed by institutions in which committee deliberation is the norm. Of course, we then have to ask why that has become a norm in almost all democracies. The answer is that opinions--even on monetary policy--differ among experts, while the economy is in a constant process of change. Because opinions differ among experts, democracies tend to prefer committees in which decisions are made by discussion among the experts--and, in many cases, other representatives of the public--who discuss, try to persuade each other, and must at the end of their deliberations reach a decision. But those decisions have to be explained to the public and to other parts of the government--and hence the appropriate emphasis on transparency and accountability. That is the democratic way of making decisions when opinions differ, as they often do in the monetary field. I have been a governor of two central banks and, even as the sole monetary policy decisionmaker in the Bank of Israel, would sometimes find that my initial view on the next decision changed as a result of discussions with the informal advisory committee with whom I consulted at that time. Those discussions, which recognize human frailty in analyzing a situation and the need to act despite considerable uncertainties, are the reason why committee decisionmaking is,on average,preferable to the use of a rule.19 Emphasis on a single rule asthebasis for monetary policy implies that the truth has been found, despite the record over time of major shifts in monetary policy--from the gold standard, to the Bretton Woods fixed but changeable exchange rate rule, to Keynesian approaches, to monetary targeting, to the modern frameworks of inflation targeting and the dual mandate of the Fed, and more. We should not make our monetary policy decisions based on that assumption. Rather, we need our policymakers to be continually on the lookout for structural changes in the economy and for disturbances to the economy that come from hitherto unexpected sources. Concluding RemarksLet me now sum up. The prescriptions of monetary policy rules play a prominent role in the FOMC's monetary policy deliberations. And this is as it should be, in view of the usefulness of rules as a starting point for policy discussion and the fact that comparison with a benchmark rule provides a useful means of articulating one's own preferred policy action. But, for the reasons I have outlined, adherence to a simple policy rule is not the most appropriate means of achieving macroeconomic goals--and there are very good reasons why monetary policy decisions are typically made in committees whose structure allows them to assess the varying conditions of different regions and economic sectors, as well as to reflect different beliefs about the working of the economy. ReferencesAndo, Albert (1981). "On a Theoretical and Empirical Basis of Macroeconometric Models," in J. Kmenta and J.B. Ramsey, eds.,Large-Scale Macro-Econometric Models: Theory and Practice.New York: North-Holland, pp. 329-68. Blinder, Alan S., and John Morgan (2005). "Are Two Heads Better Than One? Monetary Policy by Committee,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 37 (October), pp. 789-811. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 13-14, 2016," press release, January 4. Cooper, J. Phillip, and Stanley Fischer (1972). "Stochastic Simulation of Monetary Rules in Two Macroeconomic Models,"Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 67 (December), pp. 750-60. Currie, David, and Paul Levine (1987). "Does International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination Pay and Is It Sustainable? A Two-Country Analysis,"Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 39 (March), pp. 38-74. DeRosa, Paul, and Gary H. Stern (1977). "Monetary Control and the Federal Funds Rate,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 3 (April), pp. 217-30. Dewald, William G., and Harry G. Johnson (1963). "An Objective Analysis of the Objectives of American Monetary Policy, 1952-61," in Deane Carson, ed.,Banking and Monetary Studies. Homewood, Ill.: R.D. Irwin, pp. 171-89. Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer (1978).Macroeconomics. New York: McGraw-Hill. -------- (1979).The Determinants and Effects of Changes in Interest Rates: A Study Prepared for the Trustees of the Banking Research Fund. Chicago: Association of Reserve City Bankers. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Federal Open Market Committee (2017).Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF), amended effective January 31 (original version adopted effective January 24, 2012). Fischer, Stanley (1994). "Modern Central Banking," in Forrest Capie, Charles Goodhart, Stanley Fischer, and Norbert Schnadt, eds.,The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England.New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 262-308. -------- (2017a). "'I'd Rather Have Bob Solow Than an Econometric Model, But . . .,'" speech delivered at the Warwick Economics Summit, Coventry, United Kingdom, February 11. -------- (2017b). "Monetary Policy: By Rule, by Committee, or by Both?" speech delivered at the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, March 3. Flemming, John (1993). "Money, Interest and Consumption in theGeneral Theory," in Haim Barkai, Stanley Fischer, and Nissan Liviatan, eds.,Monetary Theory and Thought: Essays in Honour of Don Patinkin. London: Macmillan, pp. 74-83. Friedman, Milton (1972). "The Case for a Monetary Rule,"Newsweek, February 7, p. 67. Henderson, Dale W., and Warwick J. McKibbin (1993). "A Comparison of Some Basic Monetary Policy Regimes for Open Economies: Implications of Different Degrees of Instrument Adjustment and Wage Persistence,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 221-317. Keynes, John Maynard (1930).A Treatise on Money,2 vols. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company. Kohn, Donald L. (1999). "Comment," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 192-99. Levin, Andrew T., and John C. Williams (2003). "Robust Monetary Policy with Competing Reference Models,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 945-75. Lombardelli, Clare, James Proudman, and James Talbot (2005). "Committees versus Individuals: An Experimental Analysis of Monetary Policy Decision Making,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 1 (May), pp. 181-205. Lowenstein, Roger (2015).America's Bank: The Epic Struggle to Create the Federal Reserve. New York: Penguin Press. McCallum, Bennett T. (1981). "Price Level Determinacy with an Interest Rate Policy Rule and Rational Expectations,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 8 (November), pp. 319-29. -------- (1988). "Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 29 (Autumn), pp. 173-203. Meade, James E. (1951).TheTheory of International Economic Policy, vol.1:The Balance of Payments.New York: Oxford University Press. Mundell, Robert A. (1960). "The Monetary Dynamics of International Adjustment under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 74 (May), pp. 227-57. Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). "The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 633-63. Reifschneider, David (2016). "Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-068. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace (1975). "'Rational' Expectations, the Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 83 (April), pp. 241-54. Sayers, R.S. (1958).Central Banking after Bagehot,rev. ed. Oxford, United Kingdom: Clarendon Press. Taylor, John B. (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. --------, ed. (1999a).Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press. -------- (1999b). "The Robustness and Efficiency of Monetary Policy Rules as Guidelines for Interest Rate Setting by the European Central Bank,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 43 (June), pp. 655-79. Warsh, Kevin M. (2016). "Institutional Design: Deliberations, Decisions, and Committee Dynamics," in John H. Cochrane and John B. Taylor, eds.,Central Bank Governance and Oversight Reform.Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press, pp. 173-93. Wicksell, Knut (1936).Interest and Prices: A Study of the Causes Regulating the Value of Money,trans. R.F. Kahn. London: Macmillan. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Yellen, Janet L. (2017). "The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., January 19. 1.Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily the views of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Ed Nelson of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance.Return to text 2.See, for example, Cooper and Fischer (1972).Return to text 3.There was, however, a long tradition of monetary analysis in the United Kingdom and continental Europe that was centered on the authorities' use of the interest rate as an instrument. See especially Keynes (1930) and Wicksell (1936). In the post-World War II decades, this tradition continued in the U.K. research literature on monetary policy: Examples include Currie and Levine (1987) and Flemming (1993). In addition, an interest rate was the policy instrument in some key contributions to open-economy monetary theory, such as Meade (1951) and Mundell (1960). These traditions likely reflected the long-standing use of Bank Rate as a policy instrument in the United Kingdom and the fact that, for most of the period from the Treasury/Federal Reserve Accord of 1951 until the 1990s, central banks in countries other than the United States tended to be more explicit than the Federal Reserve chose to be about their use of short-term interest rates as their primary policy instrument. Even in the U.S. context, however, there was a certain amount of research on interest rate policies. For example, it was common practice among builders of large econometric models to consider different Federal Reserve interest rate strategies (see Ando, 1981). In addition, the empirical and simulation properties of the Federal Reserve's interest rate reaction function were the concern of such studies as Dewald and Johnson (1963), DeRosa and Stern (1977), Dornbusch and Fischer (1979), and Henderson and McKibbin (1993), while Sargent and Wallace (1975) and McCallum (1981) examined the analytical properties of interest rate rules. A later magisterial study of the analytics of interest rate rules was Woodford (2003).Return to text 4.See McCallum (1981). I should add that when we presented work based on Cooper and Fischer (1972), we were urged by several economists to focus on the interest rate as the monetary policy instrument. Among these economists were Albert Ando and Franco Modigliani, who were then working with others on building the MPS (MIT-Pennsylvania-Social Science Research Council) model.Return to text 5.See Taylor (1993).Return to text 6.For my earlier speeches in this area, see Fischer (2017a, 2017b).Return to text 7.See Kohn (1999). At the time, Donald Kohn was director of the Division of Monetary Affairs at the Federal Reserve Board. The conference proceedings were published as Taylor (1999a).Return to text 8.The Federal Reserve Board's website (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_historical_year.htm) provides downloadable copies of the briefing books (the Greenbook and Bluebook, which were replaced in 2010 by the Tealbook) distributed to FOMC members and other participants ahead of each FOMC meeting. At present, the most recent year for which these materials are available on the site is 2011. The "Monetary Policy Strategies" portion of the Bluebook (and, later, the Tealbook) contains prescriptions from interest rate rules.Return to text 9.See Kohn (1999, p. 195). The first of these functions of policy rule prescriptions was one I also had highlighted. In Fischer (1994, p. 289), when considering McCallum's (1988) proposed rule for monetary base growth, I described it as "a useful benchmark against which to judge policy."Return to text 10.Searchable transcripts of FOMC meetings up to 2011 are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_historical.htm.Return to text 11.See Yellen (2017).Return to text 12.See especially Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015). Because the federal funds rate was at its effective lower bound from late 2008 to late 2015, policy choices about that rate largely involved decisions concerning the forward guidance provided by the FOMC. These decisions in turn rested on judgments regarding the period over which the rate should remain at its lower bound, as well as about the pace and magnitude of the subsequent policy firming.Return to text 13.See, for example, Board of Governors (2017).Return to text 14.Indeed, Milton Friedman's advocacy of a policy rule consisting of constant monetary growth rested in part on the existence of uncertainty, as he suggested that economists lacked the knowledge about economic relationships required to improve on that simple rule. See Friedman (1972) for a concise version of his case for the rule and Dornbusch and Fischer (1978, pp. 278-80, 516) for a textbook account of Friedman's rule that emphasized the uncertainty aspect of his argument for the rule. Of course, the fact that a policy rule is simple far from guarantees that the rule will generate satisfactory economic outcomes in the face of uncertainty and economic change. For example, Friedman's rule would likely perform poorly in an environment in which the trend rate of growth of monetary velocity underwent a major shift, while the Taylor rule could perform unsatisfactorily if the assumption about potential-output behavior embedded in the rule proved to be badly mistaken. The latter possibility was stressed in Orphanides (2003).Return to text 15.See Sayers (1958, p. 7).Return to text 16.I discussed some of the literature on monetary policy committees in Fischer (2017b).Return to text 17.See Lowenstein (2015).Return to text 18.See Federal Open Market Committee (2017).Return to text 19.The existing literature on monetary policy committees has found that committee decisions tend to be better than decisions made by a sole policymaker. See, for example, Blinder and Morgan (2005); Lombardelli, Proudman, and Talbot (2005); and Warsh (2016).Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2018: January 30-31 (Tuesday-Wednesday) March 20-21 (Tuesday-Wednesday) May 1-2 (Tuesday-Wednesday) June 12-13 (Tuesday-Wednesday) July 31-August 1 (Tuesday-Wednesday) September 25-26 (Tuesday-Wednesday) November 7-8 (Wednesday-Thursday) December 18-19 (Tuesday-Wednesday) January 29-30, 2019 (Tuesday-Wednesday) The Chair's quarterly news conferences will take place following the March, June, September, and December meetings. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On May 18, 2017, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on May 18, 2017, and will mature on May 25, 2017. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced a $41 million penalty and consent cease and desist order against the U.S. operations of Deutsche Bank AG for anti-money laundering deficiencies. The actions were taken by the Board to address unsafe and unsound practices at the firm's domestic banking operations. The Board identified failures by Deutsche Bank's U.S. banking operations to maintain an effective program to comply with the Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering laws. The consent order requires Deutsche Bank to improve its senior management oversight and controls related to compliance by the U.S. banking operations with anti-money laundering laws. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced final amendments to the check collection and return provisions in Regulation CC (Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks) and also requested further public comment on an additional proposed amendment to Regulation CC's liability provisions. The final amendments update Regulation CC to reflect the evolution of the nation's check collection system from one that is largely paper-based to one that is virtually all electronic. The amendments create a framework for electronic check collection and return and create new warranties for electronic checks, which will result in a consistent warranty chain regardless of the check's form. As with existing rules for paper checks, the parties may, by mutual agreement, vary the effect of the amendments' provisions as they apply to electronic checks and electronic returned checks. The final amendments also modify the expeditious-return and notice of nonpayment requirements to create incentives for electronic presentment and return. The amendments become effective July 1, 2018. In response to comments received, the Board is also requesting comment on proposed language amending Regulation CC's existing liability provisions to include a presumption that a substitute or electronic check was altered instead of forged in certain cases of doubt. Comments on the proposed amendments are requested within 60 days of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First Carolina Bancshares, M.H.C., Walterboro, South CarolinaSupervisory Agreement issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated February 17, 2011Terminated May 9, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: North Georgia Community Financial Partners, Inc., Calhoun, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated October 3, 2013Terminated May 11, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Four Oaks Bank & Trust Company, Four Oaks, North CarolinaWritten Agreement dated July 30, 2015Terminated April 28, 2017 TransPecos Financial Corp, San Antonio, Texas, and TransPecos Banks, Pecos, TexasWritten Agreement dated April 13, 2011Terminated May 1, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: SunTrust Bank, Atlanta, GeorgiaOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated May 24, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Americans' overall financial well-being in 2016 continued on a modest upward path, although the improvement was less pronounced for those with less education, according to the Federal Reserve Board's latestReport on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households. The report, based on the Board's fourth annualSurvey of Household Economics and Decisionmakingconducted in October 2016, presents a picture of improving financial well-being among Americans. Overall, 70 percent of respondents said they were either "living comfortably" or "doing okay," up 1 percentage point from 2015 and up 8 percentage points from the first survey results in 2013. The improvements in well-being as reported by the survey respondents are concentrated among adults with at least some college education. "The survey findings remind us that many American households are struggling financially, including fully 40 percent of those with a high school diploma or less," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Lael Brainard. "More broadly, 44 percent of all respondents could not cover an unexpected $400 emergency expense or would rely on borrowing or selling something to do so. The survey also shows that many adults have no savings for retirement." The survey results also highlight differences in how those who went to college perceive the value of their education. Respondents who failed to complete at least an associate degree were less likely to report that the financial benefits exceeded the cost than were those who completed a degree. Although majorities of degree completers from a wide range of majors indicated that the financial benefits of their education exceed the costs, respondents with a degree in engineering were the most likely to report that their education was financially worthwhile. And perceived value also varied among those who attended public, non-profit, or for-profit institutions. The survey covers several aspects of financial instability. Twenty-three percent of adults did not expect to be able to pay all of their current month's bills in full; 25 percent reported skipping medical treatments due to cost in the prior year; and, if faced with an unexpected $400 emergency expense, 44 percent of adults either could not pay the expense or would borrow or sell something to do so. This share of adults who appeared ill-prepared for a $400 emergency has declined 6 percentage points since 2013, and the share who reported missing medical treatments due to an inability to pay has declined 7 percentage points since 2013. An additional concern among some workers was the scheduling requirements of their employer. Seventeen percent of workers, including 24 percent of those with a high-school education or less, report that their schedule varies from week to week based on employers' needs. Of those with variable schedules, two-thirds receive their schedule six days in advance or less, and 37 percent either have on-call scheduling or receive notice one day or less in advance. In addition to the short-run challenges that some adults experience, a continued challenge that is also highlighted in the findings is a difficulty planning for the long-term needs in retirement. This includes the 28 percent of non-retired adults who lack retirement savings, and--among those who are saving--a lack of comfort in managing these savings. Fifty-three percent of adults with self-directed retirement accounts were either "not comfortable" or only "slightly comfortable" in their ability to make the right investment decisions about those accounts. Forty percent of black retirees and 50 percent of Hispanic retirees indicate that poor health contributed to their decision about when to retire, compared to 26 percent of non-Hispanic white retirees for whom health was a deciding factor. Previous surveys have informed the Federal Reserve and other government agencies about consumer financial behavior and opinions. More than 6,600 respondents completed the survey. Topics covered in the survey and the report include individuals' overall financial well-being, employment experiences, income and savings behaviors, economic preparedness, access to banking and credit, housing and living arrangement decisions, education and human capital, student loans, and retirement planning. The report and a video summarizing the survey's findings may be found at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that it has imposed a $1.2 million fine and a permanent ban on employment in the banking industry against Christopher Ashton, the former Global Head of Foreign Exchange (FX) Spot Trading at Barclays Bank PLC, in connection with the manipulation of FX pricing benchmarks. Ashton failed to answer, appear, or request a hearing in administrative law proceedings after the Board charged him in June 2016 with unsafe and unsound practices related to his use of electronic chat rooms to coordinate FX trading, facilitate manipulation of FX pricing benchmarks, and disclose confidential customer information to traders at other organizations, as well as his failure to appropriately supervise other Barclays traders. The enforcement proceedings against Ashton follow the Board's May 2015 enforcement actions against Barclays for unsafe and unsound practices related to its compliance and control failures concerning its practices in the FX markets. The Board required Barclays to pay $342 million in penalties. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen even as growth in economic activity slowed. Job gains were solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate declined. Household spending rose only modestly, but the fundamentals underpinning the continued growth of consumption remained solid. Business fixed investment firmed. Inflation measured on a 12-month basis recently has been running close to the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective. Excluding energy and food, consumer prices declined in March and inflation continued to run somewhat below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee views the slowing in growth during the first quarter as likely to be transitory and continues to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further, and inflation will stabilize around 2 percent over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. The Committee continues to closely monitor inflation indicators and global economic and financial developments. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 3/4 to 1 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Charles L. Evans; Stanley Fischer; Patrick Harker; Robert S. Kaplan; Neel Kashkari; and Jerome H. Powell. Implementation Note issued May 3, 2017
The Federal Reserve plans to continue its previously announced periodic testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) with one operation in May. These operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve plans to conduct a similar routine TDF test operation each quarter in 2017. The schedule and terms for future test operations will be announced at later dates. On May 18, 2017, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its TDF. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $1,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. EDT to 12:30 p.m. EDT, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. EDT and 12:00 p.m. EDT. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttp://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--Responding to concerns over the limited availability of state-certified and -licensed appraisers, particularly in rural areas, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued an advisory that highlights two options to help insured depository institutions and bank holding companies facilitate the timely consideration of loan applications. Financial industry representatives, during theEconomic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) review process, raised concerns regarding the timeliness of appraisals, which they attributed to shortfalls in the availability of state-certified and -licensed appraisers, particularly in rural areas. Title XI of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA) requires appraisals for federally related transactions to be performed by individuals who meet certain state-certification or -licensing requirements. Today's advisory points to alternatives that may help in areas facing a shortage of appraisers:
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from March 27 through May 3, 2017. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on May 2-3, 2017. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 2-3, 2017:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Governor Lael Brainard At the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, New York For the first time in many years, we are seeing signs of synchronized economic expansions at home and abroad, and the balance of risks globally has become more positive. Recent data suggest that the underlying momentum of the domestic expansion remains solid. While U.S. consumption was weak in the first quarter of 2017, the data so far are consistent with a rebound in the current quarter. Moreover, financial conditions remain supportive of continued economic expansion despite some recent volatility.1 The ongoing progress in bringing Americans back into productive employment is especially heartening. With continued strength in the labor market, economic activity regaining momentum, and a brighter outlook abroad, it would be appropriate soon to see the federal funds rate moving closer to its neutral level. If the economy evolves in line with the March Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) median path, normalization of the federal funds rate is likely to be well underway before too long, setting the stage for a gradual and predictable running off of the balance sheet. Even so, I see some tension between signs that the economy is in the neighborhood of full employment and indications that the tentative progress we had seen on inflation may be slowing. If the tension between the progress on employment and the lack of progress on inflation persists, it may lead me to reassess the expected path of the federal funds rate in the future, although it is premature to make that call today. Different Signals from the Labor Market and InflationLet me start by reviewing the conflicting readings we are getting from the labor market and from inflation. The labor market has continued to strengthen. Payroll growth has averaged 175,000 over the past three months, more than sufficient to absorb new entrants into the labor market. Although earlier in the recovery, it appeared that the U-3 unemployment rate was running ahead of broader indicators of slack, more recently, it has been encouraging to see other margins of slack being drawn down. The labor force participation rate has held stable, against what many believe to be a downward trend based on demographics, and the employment-to-population ratio has reached a new post-recession high. Moreover, the share of employees who work part time for economic reasons has recently moved down close to its pre-crisis level, after a long period of remaining at elevated levels. The most commonly used U-3 measure of the unemployment rate moved down to 4.4 percent in April. This happens to be the cyclical low reached in 2006-07, although unemployment was at or below this level much of the time from the middle of 1998 to the middle of 2001. Relative to recent decades, the unemployment rate is now quite low. In fact, some have voiced concerns that the economy has proven unable to sustain its expansion when the unemployment rate has fallen below these levels. With that in mind, it is worth asking whether we should be worried that history will inevitably repeat itself. The truth is, we cannot know for sure. Although rising inflation often heralded the death knell of economic expansions in earlier decades, inflation expectations have been well anchored and rising inflation has presented less of a risk in the most recent business cycles.2From 1998 to 2001, for instance, core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation never exceeded 2 percent on a four-quarter basis. Core PCE inflation did reach as high as 2.4 percent in the period from 2006 to 2007, but, at the time, this higher inflation was viewed as reflecting the pass-through of a significant run-up in energy and non-energy import prices.3 Today, there is little indication of an outbreak of inflation--rather, the latest data on inflation have been lower than expected. If anything, the puzzle today is why inflation appears to be slowing at a time when most forecasters place the economy at or near full employment. Even wage inflation, which is most tightly connected to labor market slack, shows little sign of heating up by most measures. Overall, wages are increasing a bit more rapidly than they were a few years ago, but the latest data on wages do not show much progress over the past year. Average hourly earnings rose only 2-1/2 percent in the 12 months through April, the same as a year earlier. Similarly, the employment cost index was up only 2-1/4 percent in the 12 months through March. While that is up from a year earlier, it is lower than two years ago. The Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker tells a similar story: Upward movement in wage gains was observed until about a year or so ago, but there has been little acceleration recently. Turning to overall inflation, earlier this year, reports indicated that the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) preferred measure of inflation--the headline measure of consumer price inflation on a national accounts basis--had, on a 12-month change basis, risen close to the FOMC's objective, but the latest figures have edged down somewhat as the rebound in energy prices has abated. I tend to place greater weight on the core measure of inflation, which abstracts from the transitory movements in energy prices and is a better predictor of future inflation. In the April report, the core measure--that is, excluding food and energy prices--had increased only 1.5 percent on a 12-month change basis. That reading marks a considerable shortfall from the Committee's 2 percent objective. And there does not seem to have been any progress over the past year or so: Core PCE inflation is about the same over the past 12 months as over the preceding period. Although the past two monthly readings of core inflation have been held down in part by idiosyncratic factors, including upgrades to cell-phone plans, the apparent lack of progress in moving core inflation back to 2 percent is a source of concern. Traditionally, economists assessed that as labor market slack diminished and the economy approached full employment, upward pressure on inflation would result, in the statistical relationship known as the Phillips curve. But I am not confident we can count on the Phillips curve to restore inflation to target in today's economy. Since 2012, inflation has tended to change relatively little--both absolutely and relative to earlier decades--as the unemployment rate has fallen considerably.4At a time when the unemployment rate has fallen from 8.2 percent to 4.4 percent, core inflation has undershot our 2 percent target for 58 straight months.5In other words, the Phillips curve appears to be flatter today than it was previously. This is also true in a number of advanced foreign economies, where declines in unemployment rates to low levels have failed to generate significant upward pressures on inflation. With the Phillips curve appearing to be a less reliable guidepost than it has been in the past, the anchoring role of inflation expectations remains critically important. Here, recent developments are mixed. The May reading of the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers' measure of longer-term inflation expectations remained near its all-time low, while the New York Fed's measure of three-year inflation expectations edged up in its latest reading to the highest level in more than a year. And although market-based measures of inflation compensation have improved relative to their lows in the middle of last year, they are still below the average level in the period from 2010 to 2014. Attaining the Committee's symmetric target for inflation on a sustainable basis is especially important in the current environment, with the neutral real interest rate at historically lower levels, in order to ensure conventional policy has room to respond to unexpected adverse developments. Underlying fundamentals, such as import prices and diminishing slack, should lead inflation to resume moving closer to its goal. Nonetheless, currently I see more signs that progress on inflation is slowing than of a breakout of inflation to the upside, as might be the case with a nonlinearity in the relationship between inflation and unemployment when unemployment is very low.6 But as noted earlier, a breakout in inflation also was not a primary concern following the past two times the unemployment rate dropped as low as it is now, in 1998 and 2006, when recessions followed within two or three years. One notable feature of both episodes was that they were preceded by sharply elevated financial imbalances. In the late 1990s, equity prices had reached very high levels, according to common measures of stock market valuations. And the period from 2006 to 2007 coincided with a house price bubble, along with extreme leverage at a number of large financial institutions and widespread use of exotic financial products. Broadly speaking, financial conditions today appear to be more balanced: In most markets, house prices seem fairly well aligned with rents. Large banks are much better capitalized than before the crisis and appear to be managing their risk exposures and liquidity much more carefully. While today's equity market valuations appear somewhat elevated, they do not seem to be near the dizzying heights reached in 1999 and 2000. Moreover, for a variety of reasons, importantly including critical financial reforms as well as changes in risk appetite, leverage and maturity transformation are at much lower levels than they were before the crisis. One area that merits ongoing vigilance is corporate indebtedness, which remains at a high level and where investor appetite still seems strong. Another area of concern is auto lending--particularly in the subprime segment--where underwriting appears to have become quite lax last year and, consequently, delinquency rates indicate more borrowers struggling to keep up with their payments. Eight years into the recovery, it is important to recognize that financial conditions can change rapidly and bear special vigilance. Nonetheless, risks to the U.S. financial system do not appear to be flashing red in the way they did in the run-up to previous downturns. It is also possible that the natural rate of unemployment has moved lower or that the unemployment rate still may be overstating the strength of the labor market. While it is encouraging that the share of employees who work part time for economic reasons has continued to move down, there may well be slack remaining along this margin. And another key measure--the prime-age employment-to-population ratio--remains more than 1 percentage point below pre-crisis levels, and further improvement there would be welcome. The OutlookLooking at economic activity more broadly, although first-quarter gross domestic product (GDP) was soft, the data so far suggest a rebound in the second quarter. The weak Q1 reading follows a recurring pattern in recent years, with the first quarter of the year often weaker than subsequent quarters. Moreover, below the top-line number, there were some encouraging signs of strength: Residential construction posted a double-digit increase and contributed 1/2 percentage point to first-quarter GDP growth. Drilling for oil and natural gas is rebounding sharply, and nonresidential construction contributed 3/4 percentage point to first-quarter GDP growth. Business spending on equipment and intangibles, which fell slightly in 2016, rebounded to a 7 percent annualized increase in the first quarter and contributed another 3/4 percentage point to the overall increase. A key reason overall GDP was so weak last quarter was consumer spending, which rose only 0.6 percent at an annual rate. Nonetheless, there are good reasons to think that the first-quarter weakness in consumer spending will not persist. Household incomes should continue rising with the continued strengthening in employment and wages, home prices should be contributing through improved household balance sheets, and consumer sentiment remains upbeat. Recent changes in financial conditions have, overall, been supportive of further gains in the real economy. The S&P 500 index is up almost 8 percent since the start of the year. At the same time, a broad measure of the exchange value of the dollar is down about 4 percent so far this year, which should help boost net exports. After moving up sharply late last year, long-term interest rates have moved down somewhat so far this year. In addition, the balance of risks has shifted over the past two quarters, with a number of downside risks receding and some upside risks emerging. In particular, the latest international economic data have suggested waning downside risks from abroad, while continued labor market strength and the prospect for fiscal stimulus in the United States present a possible upside risk to domestic demand. Importantly, we are seeing synchronized global growth for the first time in many years. Growth forecasts for both advanced and emerging market economies are being marked up, breaking a pattern of repeated downward revisions from 2013 to 2016. Recent political developments significantly enhanced the prospects for policy continuity in the euro area, and there has been continued growth in euro-area employment and economic activity. While Italy continues to face political, economic, and financial risks, recent developments augur well for the resilience of the broader euro area. China's first-quarter growth came in above 7 percent at an annual rate, although there appears to have been some moderation since then, and capital outflows slowed notably. China's economy bears watching in the medium term, especially given financial-sector risks and elevated debt levels. Although Mexico's growth may moderate this year, both the Mexican equity market and the exchange rate have strengthened, along with confidence, following sharp falls late last year. Along with the favorable shift in foreign risks, recent announcements on fiscal policy suggest some upside risk to U.S. aggregate demand. The Administration has proposed deep tax cuts, which, if implemented, could amount to about 2 percentage points of GDP in the first few years according to independent estimates. Most estimates suggest that the supply-side effects of these policies would be fairly small, so, if enacted, the net effect could well be a boost to U.S. aggregate demand at a time when the economy could be at full employment. Nonetheless, there is considerable uncertainty about the magnitude and timing of any policy changes. There is also important uncertainty about the deliberations over the debt limit, which are likely to garner increasing attention in the early fall and will factor into my considerations of risks to the outlook. The Path of PolicyOn balance, when assessing economic activity and its likely evolution, it would be reasonable to conclude that further removal of accommodation will likely be appropriate soon. As I noted earlier, the unemployment rate is now at 4.4 percent, and we are seeing improvement in other measures of labor market slack, such as participation and the share of those working part time for economic reasons. There are good reasons to believe that the improvement in real economic activity will continue: Financial conditions remain supportive. Indicators of sentiment remain positive. The balance of risks at home has shifted favorably, downside risks from abroad are lower than they have been in several years, and we are seeing synchronous global growth. The time for a change in balance sheet policy is coming into clearer view as normalization of the federal funds rate approaches the range that can be considered "well under way." If the outlook and the expected federal funds rate path evolve in line with the median projection of FOMC participants reported in the March SEP, the federal funds rate will soon approach midway to its expected long-run equilibrium value. I shared my framework for thinking about the change in balance sheet policy in early March, and today I will elaborate on the approach that seems most appropriate to achievement of our goals.7Consideration that normalization of the federal funds rate is well underway was the criterion the Committee adopted in its December 2015 decision to continue to reinvest principal payments. In my view, that "well under way" standard has served an important purpose.8With asymmetry in the scope for conventional monetary policy to respond to shocks, maintaining reinvestments provided an important benefit by enabling the federal funds rate to rise more quickly than would have been possible with a shrinking balance sheet and sooner reach a level that allows for reductions if conditions deteriorate. This approach has ensured that our most proven tool, the federal funds rate, will have reached a level at which it can be cut if needed to buffer adverse shocks, thus helping to guard against the asymmetric risks associated with the effective lower bound. With the federal funds rate projected to be in the range that is midway to the Committee's projection of the long-run value of the federal funds rate later this year, I would consider it reasonable to assess that this threshold will have been attained before too long. As we shrink the size of our balance sheet, the public's holdings of Treasury securities will rise, and that will tend to boost longer-term interest rates. In particular, most studies conclude that increases in central bank holdings of longer-maturity assets chiefly affect interest rates by reducing the quantity of longer-term securities held by the public and putting downward pressure on the term premium--that is, the difference between the yields on longer-dated assets and the path of expected short-term interest rates over the holding period. By some estimates, the effect is modestly above 90 basis points currently.9Thus, balance sheet normalization should be associated with higher term premiums, which in turn, other things held equal, should be associated with higher long-term Treasury yields. Most studies find that higher Treasury yields also affect yields and prices of other securities: increasing interest rates faced by private-sector borrowers, making dollar-denominated assets more attractive, which tends to boost the exchange value of the dollar, and making fixed-income assets more attractive relative to stocks, tending to depress share prices. Together, these channels contribute to a tightening in financial conditions.10 These effects are, of course, in many respects, similar to the effects of increases in short-term interest rates.11Thus, away from the zero lower bound, the two tools are, to a large extent, substitutes for one another. As a result, the FOMC will be in the unfamiliar posture of having two tools available for adjusting monetary policy. It is, therefore, important to clarify how they will be used in relation to each other. While, under most circumstances, the two tools are largely substitutes for one another in terms of their effects on the economy the federal funds rate is the tool with which we have the most experience. And using two tools at once could easily foster confusion. Thus, in my view, predictability, precision, and clarity of communications all argue in favor of focusing policy on the federal funds rate as the single active tool. In this framework, the balance sheet essentially would remain subordinate to the federal funds rate. Under the subordinated balance sheet approach, once the change in reinvestment policy is triggered, the balance sheet would essentially be set on autopilot to shrink passively until it reaches a neutral level, expanding in line with the demand for currency thereafter. I favor an approach that would gradually and predictably increase the maximum amount of securities the market will be required to absorb each month, while avoiding spikes. Thus, in an abundance of caution, I prefer to cap monthly redemptions at a pace that gradually increases over a fixed period. In addition, I would be inclined to follow a similar approach in managing the reduction of the holdings of Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities (MBS), calibrated according to their particular characteristics. The Committee's policy normalization principles have made clear that the Federal Reserve "will, in the longer run, hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively."12Over time, the gradual reduction in our balance sheet should result in a gradual decline in reserves to a longer-run level that is well below today's level but likely somewhat higher than in the pre-crisis regime. It is difficult to know in advance with any precision how low reserves can be allowed to drop. That minimum level will depend on the structural demand for reserves and the short-term variability in the demand for and supply of reserves. During the process of balance sheet normalization, I favor an approach of monitoring money markets carefully to gauge the appropriate longer-run level of reserves consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation. Finally, while subordination of the balance sheet to the federal funds rate should be our baseline policy, in my view, there may be circumstances when we may need to rely on the balance sheet more actively. During the period when the balance sheet is running down, if the economy encounters significant adverse shocks, it may be appropriate to commence the reinvestment of principal payments again in order to preserve conventional policy space. ConclusionIn recent quarters, the balance of risks has become more favorable, the global outlook has brightened, and financial conditions have eased on net. With the labor market continuing to strengthen, and GDP growth expected to rebound in the second quarter, it likely will be appropriate soon to adjust the federal funds rate. And if the economy evolves in line with the SEP median path, the federal funds rate will likely approach the point at which normalization can be considered well under way before too long, when it will be appropriate to adjust balance sheet policy. I support an approach that retains the federal funds rate as the primary tool for adjusting monetary policy, sets the balance sheet to shrink in a gradual and predictable way for both Treasury securities and MBS, and avoids spikes in redemptions. While that remains my baseline expectation, I will be watching carefully for any signs that progress toward our inflation objective is slowing. With a low neutral real rate, achieving our symmetric inflation target is more important than ever in order to preserve some room for conventional policy to buffer adverse developments in the economy. If the soft inflation data persist, that would be concerning and, ultimately, could lead me to reassess the appropriate path of policy. ReferencesBlanchard, Olivier (2016). "The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief PB161. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, January. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 20-21," press release, April 11. Bonis, Brian, Jane Ihrig, and Min Wei (2017). "The Effect of the Federal Reserve's Securities Holdings on Longer-Term Interest Rates," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 20. Brainard, Lael (2015a). "Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "North America's Place in a Changing World Economy," 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, October 12. -------- (2015b). "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. -------- (2017). "Transitions in the Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., March 1. Ihrig, Jane, Elizabeth Klee, Canlin Li, Brett Schulte, and Min Wei (2012). "Expectations about the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and the Term Structure of Interest Rates (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-57. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Nalewaik, Jeremy (2016). "Non-Linear Phillips Curves with Inflation Regime-Switching (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016078. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Jim Clouse and John Roberts for their assistance in preparing this text. 1.These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.In the period from 1950 to 2000, inflation often rose late in the business cycle. In response, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates, which in turn led to a weaker economy.Return to text 3.For example, the FOMC minutes for March 2007 expressed "concern" about the rate of inflation but noted that increases in energy and non-energy imports could explain some of the upward pressure on core prices (see Board of Governors, 2007, paragraph 23). The outlook was for a gradual decline in core inflation.Return to text 4.See Blanchard (2016), Kiley (2015), and Brainard (2015a). Similarly, inflation did not fall very much as the unemployment rate climbed to 10 percent during the Great Recession.Return to text 5.The inflation information refers to core PCE inflation measured on a 12-month average basis.Return to text 6.See Nalewaik (2016).Return to text 7.See Brainard (2017).Return to text 8.This rationale is in Brainard (2015b).Return to text 9.Bonis, Ihrig, and Wei (2017) estimate that the cumulative effect of the Federal Reserve's asset purchases results in a reduction in the 10-year Treasury yield term premium moderately in excess of 90 basis points currently.Return to text 10.It seems likely that many investors have developed an expectation of the likely path of the Federal Reserves balance sheet once the process of normalization is well underway, and these expectations are already priced into asset prices. See, for instance,Federal Reserve Bank of New York May 2017 Responses to Survey of Primary Dealers (PDF), andResponses to Survey of Market Participants (PDF).Return to text 11.There may be differences in the specific ways changes in short-term rates and the balance sheet transmit to different asset prices and the exchange rate, although estimates are limited and lack precision.Return to text 12.See the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At "125 Years of Women at Brown Conference," sponsored by Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island Thank you, and let me say what an honor it is, as an alumna of this great university, to be here today and part of this important occasion. As we celebrate the 125th anniversary of women being admitted to Brown, it seems appropriate to reflect on the progress that women have achieved in the intervening years. Since 1891, women have made tremendous strides in their ability to pursue their dreams of education and meaningful work and to support themselves and their families. In pursuing these goals, women have helped improve working conditions forallworkers and have been a major factor in America's prosperity over the past century and a quarter. Despite this progress, evidence suggests that many women remain unable to achieve their goals. The gap in earnings between women and men, although smaller than it was years ago, is still significant; women continue to be underrepresented in certain industries and occupations; and too many women struggle to combine aspirations for work and family. Further advancement has been hampered by barriers to equal opportunity and workplace rules and norms that fail to support a reasonable work-life balance. If these obstacles persist, we will squander the potential of many of our citizens and incur a substantial loss to the productive capacity of our economy at a time when the aging of the population and weak productivity growth are already weighing on economic growth. To enliven the history I will present today, I will include the experiences of women graduates of this institution, in most cases in their own words, as related in oral histories preserved by Brown.1Among these alumnae, I am proud to say, is a member of my own family who was an early graduate of Pembroke, Elizabeth Stafford Hirschfelder of the Class of 1923. Her career and achievements as a mathematician embody both the opportunities that opened for Pembroke graduates in the decades after she left here and the limitations many women faced and the compromises she, like so many others, was forced to make. A Historical Perspective on Women in the Labor ForceFrom the time that Brown began to accept women and into the 1920s, most women in the United States did not work outside the home, and those who did were primarily young and unmarried. In that era, just 20 percent of all women were "gainful workers," as the Census Bureau then categorized labor force participation outside the home, and only 5 percent of those married were categorized as such.2Of course, these statistics somewhat understate the contributions of married women to the economy beyond housekeeping and childrearing, since women's work in the home often included work in family businesses and the home production of goods, such as agricultural products, for sale. Also, the aggregate statistics obscure the differential experience of women by race. African American women were about twice as likely to participate in the labor force as were white women at the time, largely because they were more likely to remain in the labor force after marriage.3 What was true for women in general was also true of the early graduates of what was then called the Women's College, the large majority of whom got married, raised families, and did not pursue careers. The fact that many women left work upon marriage reflected cultural norms, the nature of the work available to them, and legal strictures. The occupational choices of those young women who did work were severely circumscribed. Most women lacked significant educationonly 54 percent of girls aged 5 to 19 were enrolled in school in 1890.4And women with little education mostly toiled as piece workers in factories or as domestic workers, jobs that were dirty and often unsafe. Educated women, like those who attended Brown's Women's College, were scarce. Fewer than 2 percent of all 18- to 24-year-olds were enrolled in an institution of higher education, and just one-third of those were women.5Such women did not have to perform manual labor, but their choices were likewise constrained. Edna McDonald was a graduate of the Class of 1919, and in her oral history, she summed up the opportunities for her and her classmates: "Let's be frank," she said. "What choices did women have? Teaching. You could teach. You could be a lab technician. Or you could go into office work and be a secretary. Those were the only real choices." Margery Chittenden Leonard graduated from Pembroke in 1929 and went on to earn a J.D. as the only woman in her class at Boston University--after two others withdrew. And with that law degree, her first job was as a secretary, and she continued to struggle to find work as a lawyer. In her oral history, Doris Madeline Hopkins, a 1928 graduate, talked about the opportunity that she had to work, but also about being told she had to leave her job once she got married. Indeed, at the time, marriage bars were widespread.6 There were notable exceptions, such as, of course, Mary Emma Woolley, a Brown graduate who went on to serve as the president of Mount Holyoke College, and Ethel Robinson, the first black woman to graduate from Brown, who taught English at Howard University. Helen Butts, from the Class of 1928, taught natural sciences at Smith and later zoology at Wellesley, the beginning of a long and productive career as a biological researcher. Another exception was Betty Stafford, the aunt of my husband, George. She grew up in Providence, earned bachelor's and master's degrees at Brown in mathematics and then rather adventurously headed west, teaching at two universities in Texas in the 1920s before completing her Ph.D. and then teaching at the University of Wisconsin. Despite the widespread sentiment against women, particularly married women, working outside the home and with the limited opportunities available to them, women did enter the labor force in greater numbers over this period, with participation rates reaching nearly 50 percent for single women by 1930 and nearly 12 percent for married women. This rise suggests that while the incentive, and in many cases the imperative, remained for women to drop out of the labor market at marriage when they could rely on their husband's income, mores were changing. Indeed, these years overlapped with the so-called first wave of the women's movement, when women came together to agitate for change on a variety of social issues, including suffrage and temperance, and which culminated in the ratification of the 19th amendment in 1920 guaranteeing women the right to vote. Between the 1930s and mid-1970s, women's participation in the economy continued to rise, with the gains primarily owing to an increase in work among married women. By 1970, 50 percent of single women and 40 percent of married women were participating in the labor force.7Several factors contributed to this rise. First, with the advent of mass high school education, graduation rates rose substantially.8At the same time, new technologies contributed to an increased demand for clerical workers, and these jobs were increasingly taken on by women. Moreover, because these jobs tended to be cleaner and safer, the stigma attached to work for a married woman diminished. And while there were still marriage bars that forced women out of the labor force, these formal barriers were gradually removed over the period following World War II. Another innovation was the introduction in the late 1940s of part-time schedules, which combined with the proliferation of modern appliances to make it more feasible for married women to work outside the home.9 Over the decades from 1930 to 1970, increasing opportunities also arose for highly educated women, such as the graduates of what was by then called Pembroke College, to work in professions. That said, early in that period, most women still expected to have short careers, and women were still largely viewed as secondary earners whose husbands' careers came first. Thus, while it was becoming more common for women such as Betty Stafford to teach at colleges and universities, their career prospects were not the same as those for men. After earning her Ph.D. at Wisconsin, Betty married a fellow student and over the next decade coauthored five important papers with him and a well-regarded reference work. But, while her husband progressed from instructor to professor at Wisconsin, Betty worked as an instructor on an ad hoc basis. During World War II, while he worked for the government in Washington and New York, Betty stayed in Madison, teaching math to servicemen. When he took a job teaching in California after the war, they divorced, and it was only then that she was a given a position as assistant professor. As time progressed, attitudes about women working and their employment prospects did change. As women gained experience in the labor force, they increasingly saw that they could balance work and family. A new model of the two-income family emerged.10Some women began to attend college and graduate school with the expectation of working, whether or not they planned to marry and have families, as did Rita Schorr-Germain, an immigrant who survived Auschwitz, graduated from Pembroke in 1953, and went on to teach European history while her husband also had a successful academic career. In her oral history, Rita says she was encouraged by many Brown professors and never considered the possibility that her gender would stand in the way of an academic career, a shift in outlook that was becoming increasingly common in the 1950s. As did most women's colleges at the time, Pembroke continued to produce nurses, schoolteachers, and social workers, and many women who worked only until they married and had children. But, from the late 1950s on, it also increasingly graduated writers, doctors, lawyers, diplomats, physicians, psychotherapists, and archeologists, and, in 1959, the first female faculty member of Brown University. Among those women fortunate to attend Pembroke in this era of dramatic change was me. I enrolled at Brown fully planning to attend graduate school and have a career, as did many of my classmates in the Class of 1967. By the 1970s, a dramatic change in women's work lives was under way. In the period after World War II, many women had not expected that they would spend as much of their adult lives working as turned out to be the case. By contrast, in the 1970s young women more commonly expected that they would spend a substantial portion of their lives in the labor force, and they prepared for it, increasing their educational attainment and taking courses and college majors that better equipped them for careers as opposed to just jobs. In surveys of young people about their expectations of their futures, young women during this era increasingly placed an emphasis on career success.11Susan Graber Slusky of the Class of 1971 said in her oral history that she chose Pembroke for Brown's excellence in chemistry and physics, because she was already planning the career she went on to have as a researcher. Perhaps unsurprisingly, this is also the period in which many all-male colleges admitted women or combined their women's and men's undergraduate schools, as Brown did when it merged Pembroke and Brown College in 1971. These changes in attitudes and expectations were supported by other changes under way in society. Workplace protections were enhanced through the passage of the Pregnancy Discrimination Act in 1978 and the recognition of sexual harassment in the workplace. Access to birth control increased, which allowed married couples greater control over the size of their families and young women the ability to delay marriage and to plan children around their educational and work choices.12And in 1974, women gained, for the first time, the right to apply for credit in their own name without a male co-signer.13 By the early 1990s, the labor force participation rate of prime working-age women--those between the ages of 25 and 54--reached just over 74 percent, compared with roughly 93 percent for prime working-age men.iBy then, the share of women going into the traditional fields of teaching, nursing, social work, and clerical work declined, and more women were becoming doctors, lawyers, managers, and, yes, professors. As women increased their education and joined industries and occupations formerly dominated by men, the gap in earnings between women and men began to close significantly.14 Positive Spillovers from Women's Increased Participation in the WorkforceLooking back, the story of the past 125 years is one of slow but steady progress toward women's full participation in the economy and the fulfillment of their career goals. Unfortunately, the success of women has often been seen as coming at the expense of men. Indeed, regularly in the late 19th and 20th centuries there were calls to protect men from women's entry into the labor force. The early female graduates of Brown faced such attitudes from fellow students and even from faculty. Ruth Pederson, a member of the Class of 1919, said some professors did not want to teach women and prohibited women from taking their classes. Margery Leonard remembered one Boston University professor who urged her to drop out of law school. When she refused, this professor punished her by forcing her to recite the details of rape and seduction cases before her jeering, stomping classmates. And it wasn't only men who had this attitude. Among the women who were fighting for better labor standards early in the 20th century, many were heavily influenced by elite cultural standards that viewed a woman's place as in the home and argued that men should be paid a "family wage" that would allow them to support their family singlehandedly--a standard that many working-class families could not afford. Moreover, many of the labor protections promoted to protect women were often based on theories about women's weaker nature, and these protections served to circumscribe their work.15During the Great Depression, limiting women's role in the workforce was considered a way to address the high rates of unemployment, although the experience of those years showed the importance of women in supporting their families financially.16Similarly, women who had successfully worked during World War II, either as part of the war effort or to support their families while their husbands were fighting, often were pushed out of their jobs to make room for returning soldiers.17 After the war and then single, my relative, Betty Stafford, remained an assistant professor at the University of Wisconsin despite an enviable body of research. She married another Wisconsin professor, an eminent chemist, and collaborated with him on his research. But, in 1954, she gave up her assistant professorship, she said, to be able to accompany her husband on his frequent international travels. Betty later moved with her husband to California, and after his death, she endowed a graduate fellowship in the sciences and a prize in theoretical chemistry. Although Betty's accomplishments were considerable, against the backdrop of increasing opportunity for women over her lifetime I believe that Betty Stafford Hirschfelder was denied opportunities and greater success simply because she was a woman. Despite the fears of some that women entering into the workforce would crowd out men, the evidence shows that the rise in women's participation has contributed to widespread improvements in the safety and productivity of our workplaces, to the health of families, and to the macroeconomic success that our country has enjoyed over the past 125 years. In the first decades of the 20th century, the struggle to improve the working conditions of young women drawn into factories was a pillar of the overall movement toward improved labor standards. Women's demands for safer factories, humane workweeks, and higher pay, which were often pursued through organizing and striking, contributed substantially to the social upheaval and public debate of that period that eventually led to the passage of stronger labor standards. These efforts also produced generations of women who went on to be leaders in the broader labor movement and in the broader movements for equality. The rise in female labor force participation was an early focus of and helped establish the fields of statistics and labor economics in their modern incarnations. Carroll Wright, the first commissioner of what is now known as the Bureau of Labor Statistics and who established the high standards for data collection and analysis for which the bureau is known, devoted his agency's fourth annual report, for the year 1888, to the topic of Working Women in Large Cities.18Moreover, the issues surrounding women's work, such as the minimum wage, pay equity, and maximum workweeks, were topics of great interest to early practitioners of labor economics.19 It is often said that we should welcome women's presence in the workplace because it allows us to capitalize on the talents of our entire population, and this is certainly true. But it is also good business. A number of studies on how groups perform indicate that workforces that vary on dimensions such as gender, race, and ethnicity produce better decisionmaking processes and better outcomes.20 Evidence also suggests that women's work has positive spillovers to their family lives and to the success of their children, which in turn benefits all of society. It is a well-established finding in the literature on development that maternal education and work are positively associated with better health and educational outcomes for children.21A recent meta-study also suggests that children in the United States with working mothers do as well if not better in school, both academically and behaviorally, than children with mothers that stay home full time. This effect is particularly strong for families that have fewer social and economic resources, including single-parent families.22As time goes on, girls with working mothers are more likely to be employed and hold supervisory positions, and they earn somewhat more. In addition, sons raised in families with working mothers assume greater childcare responsibilities as adults than sons whose mothers did not work.23 This is not to say that children do not need attention from both parents to develop into academically successful and socially well-adjusted adults--they certainly do. Also, as I will discuss, women are making choices that reflect their desire to balance work and family. These findings bear on the question of how best to support women's work through public policies aimed at helping women and men better manage work and family. From a macroeconomic perspective, women's incorporation into the economy contributed importantly to the rapid rise in economic output and well-being over the 20th century. Between 1948 and 1990, the rise in female participation contributed about 1/2 percentage point per year to the potential growth rate of real gross domestic product.24And this estimate does not take into account the effect of the increases in women's education and work experience that also occurred over that period and boosted their productivity. In addition, since 1979, women have accounted for a majority of the rise in real household income. In dollar terms, the gains were greatest for households in the top third of the earnings distribution, but without the increase in women's earnings, families in the bottom and middle thirds of the distribution would have experienced declines.25 Remaining Challenges and Some Possible SolutionsI have argued thus far that we, as a country, have reaped great benefits from the increasing role that women have played in the economy. But evidence suggests that barriers to women's continued progress remain. The participation rate for prime working-age women peaked in the late 1990s and currently stands at about 75 percent.26Of course, women, particularly those with lower levels of education, have been affected by the same economic forces that have been pushing down participation among men, including technical change and globalization.27However, women's participation plateaued at a level well below that of prime working-age men, which stands at over 88 percent. While some married women choose not to work, the size of this disparity should lead us to examine the extent to which structural problems, such as a lack of equal opportunity and challenges to combining work and family, are holding back women's advancement. As I mentioned earlier, the gap in earnings between men and women has narrowed substantially, but progress has slowed lately, and women working full time still earn about 17 percent less than men, on average, each week.28Even when we compare men and women in the same or similar occupations who appear nearly identical in background and experience, a gap of about 10 percent typically remains.29As such, we cannot rule out that gender-related impediments hold back women, including outright discrimination, attitudes that reduce women's success in the workplace, and an absence of mentors. Recent research has shown that although women now enter professional schools in numbers nearly equal to men, they are still substantially less likely to reach the highest echelons of their professions.30For instance, 47 percent of students at top-50 law schools are female, and women obtain 40 percent of M.B.A.'s from top programs. Nonetheless, women are still poorly represented among corporate CEOs, as partners in top law firms, and as executives in finance.31Even in my own field of economics, women constitute only about one-third of Ph.D. recipients, a number that has barely budged in two decades.32This lack of success in climbing the professional ladder would seem to explain why the wage gap actually remains largest for those at the top of the earnings distribution.33 One of the primary factors contributing to the failure of these highly skilled women to reach the tops of their professions and earn equal pay is that top jobs in fields such as law and business require longer workweeks and penalize taking time off. This would have a disproportionately large effect on women, who continue to bear the lion's share of domestic and child-rearing responsibilities.34Within academia, the short timeframe in which assistant professors have to prove themselves good candidates for tenure by publishing typically overlaps with the period in which many women contemplate starting a family, forcing difficult trade-offs.35 Employers may require the long hours and short absences for good reasons--for instance, the work may involve relationships with clients or accumulating a significant amount of knowledge about a deal or case in a condensed period of time. If it is costly for employees to share information and split the work, then there would be a high premium, in the form of compensation, for those who can work the long hours.36Workplaces where the income of employees depends on the effort of co-workers, such as law partnerships, also have an incentive to require long workweeks.37 But however sensible such arrangements may be from a business perspective, it can be difficult for women to meet the demands in these fields once they have children. The very fact that these types of jobs require such long hours likely discourages some women--as well as men--from pursuing these career tracks. Advances in technology have facilitated greater work-sharing and flexibility in scheduling, and there are further opportunities in this direction.38Economic models also suggest that while it can be difficult for any one employer to move to a model with shorter hours, if many firms were to change their model, they and their workers could all be better off.39 Of course, most women are not employed in fields that require such long hours or that impose such severe penalties for taking time off. But the difficulty of balancing work and family is a widespread problem. In fact, the recent trend in many occupations is to demand complete scheduling flexibility, which can result in too few hours of work for those with family demands and can make it difficult to schedule childcare.40Reforms that encourage companies to provide some predictability in schedules, cross-train workers to perform different tasks, or require a minimum guaranteed number of hours in exchange for flexibility could improve the lives of workers holding such jobs. Another problem is that in most states, childcare is affordable for fewer than half of all families.41And just 5 percent of workers with wages in the bottom quarter of the wage distribution have jobs that provide them with paid family leave.42This circumstance puts many women in the position of having to choose between caring for a sick family member and keeping their jobs. In this context, it is useful to compare the workforce experiences of American women to those in other advanced economies. In 1990, the labor force participation rate in the United States of prime working-age women, 74 percent, was higher than in all but a few industrialized nations. But in the intervening years, while the participation rate of U.S. women was roughly stable, elsewhere it increased steadily, and by 2010 the United States fell to 17th place out of 22 advanced economies with respect to female labor force participation.43A number of studies have examined the role of various public policies in explaining patterns in female labor force participation across countries. These studies find that policy differences--in particular, the expansion of paid leave following childbirth, steps to improve the availability and affordability of childcare, and increased availability of part-time work--go a long way toward explaining the divergence between advanced economies.44Evidence suggests that if the United States had policies in place such as those employed in many European countries, female labor force participation could be as high as 82 percent.45 However, these policies entail tradeoffs. Women in other advanced economies are more likely than women in the United States to be employed part time, which could reflect a greater ease in arranging flexible schedules and more time with family, but it also comes with costs, including a wage penalty and fewer opportunities for training and advancement. Such findings raise the question of whether the policies enacted overseas in recent years have had the unintended consequence of making it more expensive for employers there to hire women into full-time jobs with opportunities for advancement, as women are more likely to be eligible for and to make use of such benefits.46 This possibility should inform our own thinking about policies to make it easier for women and men to combine their family and career aspirations. For instance, improving access to affordable and good quality childcare would appear to fit the bill, as it has been shown to support full-time employment.47Recently, there also seems to be some momentum for providing families with paid leave at the time of childbirth. The experience in Europe suggests picking policies that do not narrowly target childbirth, but instead can be used to meet a variety of the health and caregiving responsibilities.48 ConclusionThe United States faces a number of longer-term economic challenges, including the aging of the population and the low growth rate of productivity. One recent study estimates that increasing the female participation rate to that of men would raise our gross domestic product by 5 percent.49And, as I have argued, our workplaces and families, as well as women themselves, would benefit from continued progress. However, a number of factors, which I have only had a chance to touch upon, appear to be holding women back, including the difficulty women currently have in trying to combine their careers with other aspects of their lives, including caregiving. In looking to solutions, we should consider improvements to work environments and policies that benefit not only women, but all workers. Pursuing such a strategy would be in keeping with the story of the rise in women's involvement in the workforce, which, as I have described here, has contributed not only to their own well-being but more broadly to the welfare and prosperity of our country. The title for my remarks today, "So We All Can Succeed," was inspired by Malala Yousafzai, the advocate for girls' and women's education, who said, "We cannot all succeed when half of us are held back."50Brown University has played its own role by admitting women 125 years ago, by educating many thousands of women over the decades, and by continuing to be a place that equips men and women with the means to make our nation and the world a better place. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 197-275. Aguirre, DeAnne, Leila Hoteit, Christine Rupp, and Karim Sabbagh (2012).Empowering the Third Billion: Women and the World of Work in 2012.New York: Strategy&. Akerlof, George (1976). "The Economics of Caste and of the Rat Race and Other Woeful Tales,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 90 (November), pp. 599617. Antecol, Heather, Kelly Bedard, and Jenna Stearns (2016). "Equal but Inequitable: Who Benefits from Gender-Neutral Tenure Clock Stopping Policies?" IZA Discussion Paper 9904. Bailey, Martha J. (2010). "Momma's Got the Pill: How Anthony Comstock andGriswold v. ConnecticutShaped U.S. Childbearing,"American Economic Review,vol. 100 (March), pp. 98-129. Bayer, Amanda, and Cecilia Elena Rouse (2016). "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 30 (Fall), pp. 221-42. Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence Katz (2010). "Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors,"American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,vol. 2 (July), pp. 228-55. Bivens, Josh, Emma Garcia, Elise Gould, Elaine Weiss, and Valerie Wilson (2016).It's Time for an Ambitious National Investment in America's Children(PDF). Washington: Economic Policy Institute, April 6. Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn (2013), "Female Labor Supply: Why Is the U.S. Falling Behind? (PDF)" IZA Discussion Paper Series No. 7140. Bonn, Germany: Institute for the Study of Labor, January. ------ (2016). "The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explanations," NBER Working Paper Series 21913. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. Boushey, Heather, and Kavya Vaghul (2016).Women Have Made the Difference for Family Economic Security.Washington: Washington Center for Equitable Growth, April 4. Boustan, Leah Platt, and William J. Collins (2013). "The Origins and Persistence of Black-White Differences in Women's Labor Force Participation," NBER Working Paper Series 19040. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Bureau of Labor (1889).Fourth Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor, 1888: Working Women in Large Cities.Washington: Government Printing Office. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016).National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in the United States(PDF), Table 32: Leave Benefits: Access, Private Industry Workers, March 2016. Washington: BLS, September. Cajner, Tomaz, Dennis Mawhirter, Christopher Nekarda, and David Ratner (2014). "Why Is Involuntary Part-Time Work Elevated?" FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 14. Council of Economic Advisers (2016).The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation.(PDF)Washington: Executive Office of the President of the United States, June. Fernndez, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti (2004). "Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 119 (November), pp. 1249-99. Goldin, Claudia (1977). "Female Labor Force Participation: The Origin of Black and White Differences, 1870 and 1880."Journal of Economic History,vol. 37 (March), pp. 87-108. ------ (1990).Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women.New York: Oxford University Press. ------ (2006). "The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and Family,"American Economic Review,vol. 96 (May), pp. 1-21. ------ (2014). "A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter,"American Economic Review,vol. 104 (April), pp. 1091-119. Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz (2002). "The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women's Career and Marriage Decisions,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 110 (August), pp. 730-70. ------ (2008).The Race between Education and Technology.Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press. Kessler-Harris, Alice (1982).Out to Work: A History of Wage-Earning Women in the United States.New York: Oxford University Press. Lambert, Susan J., Anna Haley-Lock, and Julia R. Henly (2012). "Schedule Flexibility in Hourly Jobs: Unanticipated Consequences and Promising Directions,"Community, Work, and Family,vol. 15 (3), pp. 293-315. Landers, Rene M., James B. Rebitzer, and Lowell J. Taylor (1996). "Rat Race Redux: Adverse Selection in the Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms,"American Economic Review,vol. 86 (June), pp. 329-48. Lovell, Vicky (2008). "Health and Family Care Leave for Federal Workers: Using a Short-Term Disability Insurance Model to Support Worker and Family Well-Being, Ensure Competitive Employee Compensation, and Increase Productivity (PDF)," testimony presented to the Joint Economic Committee and the House Subcommittee on the Federal Workforce, Postal Service, and the District of Columbia at the hearing "Investment in the Future of the Federal Workforce: Paid Parental Leave Improves Recruitment and Retention," Washington, March 6. Lucas-Thompson, Rachel G., Wendy A. Goldberg, and JoAnn Prause (2010). "Maternal Work Early in the Lives of Children and Its Distal Associations with Achievement and Behavior Problems: A Meta-Analysis,"Psychological Bulletin,vol. 136 (November), pp. 915-42. Manning, Alan, and Joanna Swaffield (2008). "The Gender Gap in Early-Career Wage Growth,"Economic Journal,vol. 118 (July), pp. 983-1024. McGinn, Kathleen L., Mayra Ruiz Castro, and Elizabeth Long Lingo (2015). "Mums the Word! Cross-National Effects of Maternal Employment on Gender Inequalities at Work and at Home," Harvard Business School Working Paper 15-094. Boston: HBS, June (revised July 2015). Moran, Gwen (2015). "Women Now Make Up 40% of Students at Top MBA Programs,"Fortune,November 9. New York City Bar Association (2016).2015 Diversity Benchmarking Report.(PDF)New York: NYC Bar Association. Noonan, Mary C., Mary E. Corcoran, and Paul N. Courant (2005). "Pay Differences among the Highly Trained: Cohort Differences in the Sex Gap in Lawyers' Earnings,"Social Forces,vol. 84 (December), pp. 851-70. Olson, Elizabeth (2016). "More Law Degrees for Women, but Fewer Good Jobs,"New York Times,November 30. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2016). "PF2.2: Use of Childbirth-Related Leave by Mothers and Fathers (PDF)," OECD Family Database, last updated January 3. Thvenon, Olivier (2013). "Drivers of Female Labour Force Participation in the OECD," OECD Social, Employment, and Migration Working Papers No. 145. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, May 23. U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement, National Center for Education Statistics (1993).120 Years of American Education: A Statistical Portrait.(PDF)Washington: NCES, January. World Bank (2012).World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development.Washington: World Bank. Yousafzai, Malala (2013). Speech delivered at the Youth Takeover of the United Nations, organized by the president of the U.N. General Assembly, U.N. Special Envoy for Global Education Gordon Brown, and A World at School, an initiative from Theirworld, July 12,http://theirworld.org/explainers/malala-yousafzais-speech-at-the-youth-takeover-of-the-united-nations. 1.I am grateful for the assistance of Brown University staff in facilitating access toBrown Women Speak,the University's oral history project, and particularly the help of archivist Mary Murphy.Return to text 2.My discussion of the history of female labor force participation draws heavily on the pioneering work of Claudia Goldin, including her 2006 Ely Lecture "The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and Family" to the American Economic Association and her 1990 workUnderstanding the Gender Gap:An Economic History of American Women,from which the statistics on female labor force participation from the late 19th century until the mid-20th century are drawn. A thorough discussion of the quality of these data and their usefulness in making comparisons over time is included in that work.Return to text 3.The higher participation rates of African American women have been attributed to different cultural norms that developed during slavery and the legacy of slavery, which left blacks impoverished and with low levels of education, making women's wages an important source of family income (Boustan and Collins, 2013; Goldin, 1977).Return to text 4.U.S. Department of Education (1993).Return to text 5.U.S. Department of Education (1993), p. 76.Return to text 6.Goldin (1990), pp. 160-66.Return to text 7.Note that for the 1970s and beyond, the participation rate is calculated as a share of those aged 16 and older, whereas for earlier years it is calculated as a share of those aged 15 and older.Return to text 8.Goldin and Katz (2008).Return to text 9.Goldin (2006), pp. 5-6.Return to text 10.For instance, although many women who had joined the war effort in the 1940s were fired at the end of the war, as the Korean War effort picked up and the demand for the labor of women rose, women, who had learned that they could combine work and family were ready to reenter the labor force, so that by the early 1950s female labor force participation resumed its war-time high (Kessler-Harris, 1982, pp. 302-03). Moreover, evidence suggests that sons whose mothers increased their labor force participation in the wake of World War II had wives who were more likely to work (Fernndez, Fogli, and Olivette, 2004).Return to text 11.Interestingly, over this time young men put increasing weight on family. Goldin (2006), pp. 9 and 11.Return to text 12.See, for example, Bailey (2010) and Goldin and Katz (2002).Return to text 13.The Equal Credit Opportunity Act, passed in 1974, prohibited discrimination in the provision of credit on the basis of gender, race, religion, marital status and national origin. It also disallowed credit providers from asking women about their plans for future children.Return to text 14.Blau and Kahn (2016).Return to text 15.Kessler-Harris (1982), pp. 184-85.Return to text 16.Kessler-Harris (1982), pp. 250-58.Return to text 17.Kessler-Harris (1982), pp. 286-87.Return to text 18.Bureau of Labor (1889).Return to text 19.Goldin (2006), p. 4.Return to text 20.See the discussion of this literature on pp. 232-33 of Bayer and Rouse (2016) and the studies cited therein.Return to text 21.See, for example, World Bank (2012).Return to text 22.Lucas-Thompson, Goldberg, and Prause (2010).Return to text 23.McGinn, Ruiz Castro, and Lingo (2015).Return to text 24.Board staff calculation using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 25.Boushey and Vaghul (2016).Return to text 26.The labor force participation rate for all women declined from a peak of 60 percent in 1999 and 2000 and now stands a bit below 57 percent. However, as has been documented elsewhere, much of the decline for all women can be explained by the aging of the baby boomers into their retirement years and lower participation among teens and young adults. It is also possible that the labor force participation rate is still being held down a bit by the waning effects of the Great Recession. Aaronson and others (2014).Return to text 27.Aaronson and others (2014). Also see Council of Economic Advisers (2016) and the studies cited therein.Return to text 28.Blau and Kahn (2016).Return to text 29.Manning and Swaffield (2008) find that although men and women enter the British labor force earning the same amount, among those who worked continuously and full time for 10 years, women would still earn 8 percent less than men, even if they have the same personality traits, were childless, and profess no interest in having children. Also see Blau and Kahn (2016) and Noonan, Corcoran, and Courant (2005).Return to text 30.Moran (2015); Olson (2016).Return to text 31.On the status of women in finance and corporations see Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz (2010) and the studies cited therein. For law partnerships, see New York City Bar Association (2016).Return to text 32.Bayer and Rouse (2016), p. 223.Return to text 33.Blau and Kahn (2016).Return to text 34.Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz (2010); Goldin (2014).Return to text 35.Unfortunately, in contrast to some of the successful gender neutral policies I discuss below, efforts to address the tenure problem by giving all new parents extra time before the tenure decision has actually had the effect of reducing female tenure rates and raising those of men. Antecol, Bedrard and Stearns, (2016).Return to text 36.Goldin (2014).Return to text 37.See, for example, Akerlof (1976) and Landers, Rebitzer, and Taylor (1996).Return to text 38.See the discussion in Goldin (2014), p. 117.Return to text 39.Landers, Rebitzer, and Taylor (1996), p. 334.Return to text 40.Cajner and others (2014); Lambert, Haley-Lock, and Henly (2012).Return to text 41.Bivens and others (2016).Return to text 42.Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016).Return to text 43.Blau and Kahn (2013).Return to text 44.Note that Blau and Kahn (2013) do not find thatimprovementin the provision of childcare in other advanced economies relative to the United States explain the divergence in participation since the 1990s; however, Thvenon (2013) finds that the greater provision of childcare has a positive effect on full-time employment.Return to text 45.Blau and Kahn (2013), p. 7.Return to text 46.In most European countries, men are significantly less likely than women to use paid parental leave, although in a few countries, including Sweden and Iceland, over 40 percent of users of parental leave are men (OECD, 2016).Return to text 47.Thvenon (2013), p. 26.Return to text 48.In testimony before the Joint Economic Committee and the House Subcommittee on the Federal Workforce, Postal Service, and the District of Columbia, a breakdown of claims on New Jersey's short-term disability program in 2000 showed that pregnancy and childbirth constituted just 15 percent of all claims (Lovell, 2008).Return to text 49.Aguirre and others (2012).Return to text 50.Yousafzai (2013), paragraph 22.Return to text i.Note: On May 5, 2017, a typo was corrected to change 83 to 93 in the following sentence on page 8: "By the early 1990s, the labor force participation rate of prime working-age women--those between the ages of 25 and 54--reached just over 74 percent, compared with roughly 83 percent for prime working-age men."Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis I want to thank Neel Kashkari for launching the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute and for inviting me to join the deliberations of this distinguished group today. This new Institute is another great example of how individual Reserve Banks are taking the initiative in illuminating key dimensions of our work and shaping the agenda of the Federal Reserve System.1 While it has long been understood that opportunity is central to the strength of America's social fabric, it is now increasingly clear that opportunity and inclusion are central to the strength of America's economy. I will touch on the key ways that opportunity and inclusion matter for policymaking at the Federal Reserve, ranging from our dual-mandate goal of maximum employment to our monitoring of household financial health to our engagement in low- and moderate-income communities all over the country. I will focus on how our work intersects with the groundbreaking work of the accomplished group of researchers assembled here. In the original design of the Federal Reserve, it was recognized that the American economy is not monolithic; that is why the Congress created our system of 12 Federal Reserve Districts. We are present in communities all across America through our Reserve Banks and Branches and their boards and advisory councils. This local presence, by design, gives us valuable perspectives on how Americans are experiencing the economy in different communities around the country and critical insights about the varied challenges that lie beneath the aggregate numbers. In turn, our local engagement helps stakeholders in these communities partner to improve opportunity and inclusive growth. Inclusion and Maximum EmploymentInclusion is an enduring goal of public policy that is embodied in our maximum-employment mandate. The Employment Act of 1946 charges the federal government with creating "conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment for those able, willing, and seeking to work, and to promote maximum employment, production, and purchasing power."2Maximum employment is inherently an inclusive goal. In 1977, the Congress amended the Federal Reserve Act to make achieving maximum employment an explicit objective of monetary policy, along with stable prices. In fulfilling its dual mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has set a target of 2 percent for inflation but does not have a similarly fixed numerical goal for maximum employment. That is because the level of maximum employment depends on "nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market," which can change in important ways over time.3 The recognition that maximum employment evolves over time to reflect changes in the economic landscape serves us well. It puts the onus on members of the FOMC to analyze the changing features of the labor market and develop a nuanced understanding of the different margins of slack. This approach to maximum employment has allowed the FOMC to navigate the current recovery in a way that has likely brought more people back into productive employment than might have been the case with a fixed, aggregate unemployment-rate target based on pre-crisis norms, in effect, achieving more inclusive growth. This is especially true at a time when the traditional Phillips curve relationship between unemployment and inflation is extremely flat for reasons we do not fully understand. When we disaggregate the economy-wide labor market statistics, we often find significant and persistent racial disparities.4For many decades, the unemployment rate of African Americans has been nearly double the national unemployment rate, with little indication that the relative difference is narrowing or that it can be fully accounted for by education or sectoral mix; the unemployment rate for Hispanics also has consistently been higher than the national unemployment rate.5Similarly, during the Great Recession, the unemployment rates of African Americans and Hispanics rose more sharply and rapidly than for workers as a whole.6Even though the unemployment rates of these groups are back around their pre-recession levels, they remain higher than the national average. We can also see persistent disparities by gender, such as the well-known wage premium earned by men relative to women with similar experience and expertise.7With its focus on inclusive growth, this Institute could give us important insights on how far the overall economy is from full employment, as well as the barriers that could be limiting the economy's potential, by studying labor market outcomes of men and women of different racial and ethnic backgrounds in more depth.8 Research on the drivers of disparities in labor market outcomes can also help the Federal Reserve better assess potential tradeoffs in monetary policy. In meetings with community groups, we often hear from advocates who point to the stark discrepancy they see between the economy's aggregate U-3 unemployment rate, which many forecasters estimate to be at or approaching full employment, and the much higher rates of unemployment among the people in their neighborhoods. For instance, Rod Adams, a neighborhood advocate here in Minneapolis, noted the unemployment rate for African Americans locally was still almost 9 percent late last summer and observed that "if the labor market were truly healthy, people in my community would all be able to find full-time jobs at decent wages."9While the policy tools available to the Federal Reserve are not well suited to addressing the barriers that contribute to persistent disparities in the labor market outcomes of different groups, understanding these barriers and efforts to address them is vital in assessing maximum employment as well as potential growth. The Federal Reserve's community development work is invaluable in supporting our efforts to understand and improve the labor market experiences of different groups.10For instance, during the Great Recession, workforce development organizations in Atlanta found themselves overwhelmed by the sharp rise in unemployment, which highlighted the need for a better connected and stronger network of job training and placement services. I recently spent time with these organizations, along with community members and some of our Atlanta staff, who have been working on the creation of the Metro Atlanta eXchange (or MAX) for Workforce Solutions, the region's only comprehensive directory for workforce development services. Just as there is a connection between maximum employment and inclusive growth, so, too, there is an important connection between potential output and opportunity. If there are large disparities in opportunity based on geography or race or gender, such that households' enterprise, exertion, and investments are not rewarded commensurately, then families and small businesses will invest less in the future and potential growth will fall short.11Indeed, one worrisome trend is the decline in the labor force participation of prime-age workers with less education, a trend that has been going on for decades among men and that has more recently begun to be mirrored in the participation rate of women.12Understanding this growing detachment from work is important to improving both opportunity and potential growth. In visits to Detroit, Milwaukee, North St. Louis, and Baltimore, I have heard from residents and community organizations about the challenging barriers standing between the many workers seeking jobs and the many jobs seeking workers. The local barriers separating jobs from job seekers can be as concrete as the physical isolation created by major traffic arteries or poorly designed transit systems.13I have visited Los Angeles, where our staff have been actively engaged with businesses, transit authorities, and community groups in efforts around "equitable transit-oriented development" so that public transit systems are designed to enhance access for low- and moderate-income residents.14 Household Financial HealthInclusion and opportunity also figure prominently in our work on financial resilience. While the resilience of the financial system has long been central to Federal Reserve policy, in recent years we have come to more fully appreciate that a resilient financial system rests on the foundations of financially resilient households and businesses. The ability to manage the ups and downs in family income and expenses without hardship and the ability to make sound investments for the future are both crucial to financial health. Yet we see from the latest edition of the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) that a strikingly high 40 percent of American households with high school degrees or less report that they are struggling financially.15And the in-depth research in the U.S. Financial Diaries Project provides insights into the large amount of time and effort these families with thin financial buffers must devote to managing their volatile cash flows.16 A seemingly modest mismatch between income and expenses can threaten to send the finances of some families into a downward spiral from which it can be expensive and difficult to recover. The results of the 2016 SHED show that nearly one-fourth of all households are unable to pay their current month's bills in full, nearly one-third would rely on borrowing or selling something to cover a $400 emergency expense, and one in eight would not be able to cover a $400 emergency expense by any means. Over half of households lack savings to cover three months' expenses if they lost their main source of income.17This finding corroborates the evidence found in the financial diaries of low- to moderate-income families that show it is all too common for households to have no short-term savings to cover emergencies. According to the Survey of Consumer Finances, on average from 1989 to 2013, about 80 percent of households in the bottom quintile of the income distribution had less than $3,000 adjusted for inflation in liquid assets (cash, checking, or savings accounts). Even among households in the middle quintile of income, about half do not meet this threshold for liquid assets. In addition, the financial crisis demonstrated that household financial imbalances can have important consequences for overall financial stability in extreme circumstances. The rapid and widespread rise in poorly underwritten mortgage debt prior to the Great Recession is widely viewed as a key contributor to the financial crisis.18This suggests the potential value of better understanding the specific patterns in household finances that would give an early warning of a crisis. In carrying out our responsibilities to monitor and safeguard the stability of the financial system, although much of the work has focused on marketwide risks, core financial institutions, and macro-level shocks, we are also developing a more granular understanding of the distribution and strength of household balance sheets.19Progress on this frontier is being aided by greater access to timely, account-level, and geographically specific data on consumer credit, mortgages, and spending, although more research in this area would be valuable. Slower income growth, as well as substantial volatility in income, has raised the financial stress faced by low- and moderate-income families and may be limiting absolute mobility across generations. Over time, the "American Dream" that each generation can expect to be better off than their parents' generation has gone from being widespread to increasingly out of reach for much of the population.20Researchers have found that the reduction in economic mobility has been driven primarily by a more unequal distribution of economic growth, with slower overall gross domestic product (GDP) growth a secondary factor.21 Many households had been contending with volatile incomes even before the large negative shocks of the Great Recession and the increase in contingent work arrangements (and the "gig" economy).2223Unpredictable income and dangerously low emergency savings raise the strain on households and, over time, have pushed them to rely on other means, such as borrowing and government transfers, to try to meet their spending needs.24 Education and homeownership have long been key paths to opportunity, but the Great Recession has raised some important questions about asset building strategies. The sharp decline in house prices and the substantial rise in student loan debt have made it clear that investments in homeownership and education are not without risk, and the payoff can vary depending on the circumstances.25 Homeownership for many has been a way to turn a regular expense into an asset-building investment in the future, which is especially important given the wide and persistent disparities in wealth by race and ethnicity. But the experience of the past decade suggests that owning a home can, in some circumstances, exacerbate financial difficulties for vulnerable families in a downturn. The lesson that even a moderate decline in house prices can erase home equity applies broadly, along with the importance of sound underwriting and servicing, but the painful consequences in the recession were greater among minority and low-income homeowners.26The fact, discussed earlier, that African American and Hispanic homeowners households are more likely to lose their jobs in a recession and are also more likely to live in neighborhoods with concentrated job loss led to even larger house price declines and more foreclosures among these households.27Indeed, there are many low-income neighborhoods in which many homeowners remain "underwater" on their mortgages even today. Community development organizations are putting this more nuanced view of asset building into practice and thereby increasing opportunities for individuals to make smart investments in their future. Better Family Life, a community group I visited in North St. Louis, provides would-be homebuyers with education and counseling on how to manage the costs of homeownership, tools to navigate real estate markets, and information on lending.28There is ample research demonstrating that housing counseling makes a notable improvement in the likelihood that asset building through homeownership will pay off for first-time buyers in low- to moderate-income communities.29 Similarly, under the right circumstances, education can be a critical investment in the future and a path to opportunity, leading to higher wages and improved financial outcomes. Over the past several decades, the earnings premium for those with a college degree relative to those with a high school education has risen substantially, making higher education, on average, even more valuable.30 Nonetheless, even though education is a sound investment for most students, the benefits can vary with the quality and type of education received.31The SHED finds that fewer than 40 percent of nongraduates or graduates from for-profit institutions say their education was "worth the cost," compared with two-thirds of graduates from public or nonprofit institutions.32The downsides from such low-return education are compounded for those who took out student loans, in some cases leaving them worse off than before. As an indication of this problem, nearly three-fourths of recent borrowers who attended for-profit schools failed to make progress on paying off their student loans in the first few years, and almost half were in default within five years.33Investments in education that do not pay off can set these individuals back on asset building as well as on other life goals they may have. To advance more inclusive growth and opportunity, it is essential to help people, especially first-time and nontraditional college students, access smarter educational investments with more reliable and better returns.34 Communities of OpportunityThe connection between the conditions in a community and individual opportunity has been demonstrated in powerful research that many of you have pioneered, and we see this connection every day in our work in communities around the country. The neighborhood where a family lives can have profound implications for their economic opportunities and their children's prospects. Families living in neighborhoods with high concentrations of poverty and low economic or demographic diversity are more likely to experience a range of negative outcomes, including exposure to crime and violence, physical and mental health problems, and weak academic performance.35Low-skilled workers who live far from potential employers or accessible transportation networks have more difficulty finding and keeping jobs.36 These effects of geography on opportunity can stretch from one generation to the next. Raj Chetty and his collaborators have shown that upward mobility varies immensely across the country and even within a single metro area.37Taken together, this research underscores the urgency of understanding how we can make communities work better for all their members. Since communities play a central role in determining opportunity, policy to promote inclusion often focuses on improving local conditions. With our presence in communities around the country and our efforts under the Community Reinvestment Act, the Federal Reserve is a source of high-quality research and region-specific expertise as well as a trusted convener and catalyst on community development approaches for lenders, community groups, and local and regional governments. One important area of focus is housing, which connects families concretely to place and can be a source of strength or fragility. Last year, I met with Milwaukee community development groups and residents in one of the more racially segregated residential markets in the country. They highlighted the challenges facing the highly insecure rental population in Milwaukee, which were brought alive by Matthew Desmond's careful research.38Other communities across the nation face similar challenges. In the recently released SHED, we found that among renters who had recently moved, 12 percent of African Americans, 16 percent of Hispanics, and 8 percent of whites had moved because of eviction or the threat of eviction.39 The barriers to safe and affordable housing often take on a different form in rural areas, where ownership of manufactured housing is often coupled with insecure land ownership. The geographic footprint of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts gives us a valuable presence in rural America as well as in towns and cities of all sizes and economic fortunes. Near El Paso, our team has developed important analysis of housing challenges in the colonias neighborhoods, where the lack of basic infrastructure and costly financing of warranty deeds pose special hurdles for local families.40We have also seen successful models of providing affordable and safe housing when community development organizations and financial institutions, along with banks and local residents, work together collaboratively. On a recent visit in El Paso, I saw the value of these approaches, as a single mother with significant health challenges received the keys to a new home in a stable community, after many long years. While the densely wooded hills and hollers of Eastern Kentucky are a sharp contrast to the desert and floodplain expanses of the southwest, the keys to affordable housing in a healthy community can bring just as great an improvement in opportunity. These successes would not be possible without the ingenuity and collaboration of community development financial institutions, local officials, banks, and community members. As I have witnessed, whether it be for a retiree in Helena, Arkansas; a single mom in El Paso, Texas; or a dad on disability in Emlyn, Kentucky, the keys to affordable housing in a stable community can unlock opportunity for future generations.41 In some parts of the country, rural residents and small businesses also face increasing challenges in accessing financial services as small community banks close and larger banks close branches in low-population areas. Consequently, as I learned from the Mayors of Itta Bena and Moorhead, Mississippi, some rural residents, small businesses, and even municipalities have to drive long distances to reach a bank.42In the Mississippi Delta, Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) such as HOPE Credit Union and Southern Bancorp are acquiring bank branches earmarked for closing in order to maintain financial services for some rural communities.43 Although both pockets of opportunity and of persistent poverty are found in large metro and rural areas alike,44a greater share of the new jobs and business establishments created in the recovery following the Great Recession have been in larger metro areas than was the case in previous recoveries.45In countless communities, especially in rural towns and small to midsize cities, we have seen how a deep setback can leave a profound and long-lasting mark. These experiences challenge common assumptions about the ability of the economy to recover from an economic setback. This could be the legacy of concentrated reliance on an industry that experiences decline due to trade or technology or the byproduct of lack of connectivity-whether by highways or broadband. Technological change, globalization, and other shifts in demand and costs are not new to the U.S. economy, but there are troubling signs that less diversified or more isolated localities have diminished ability to recover. And there is increasing evidence that such concentrated economic shocks can also lead to severe labor market stress, as well as broader consequences for health and mortality.46Over the past 30 years, the convergence in income across regions of the country has slowed dramatically.47 Even so, some localities fare better than others in establishing new paths to opportunity and inclusive growth, and their successes provide actionable lessons. The Boston Fed's Working Cities Challenge undertook an in depth study of 25 medium-sized cities nationwide that had experienced a post-industrial decline and identified 10 that experienced an economic resurgence. The critical determinant of success was the ability of leaders in those cities to collaborate across sectors around a long-term vision for revitalization. To encourage such collaboration in other cities, the Boston Fed facilitated competitions that reward effective public-private collaboration in developing plans to reach community-wide goals. For example, Holyoke, Massachusetts, proposed a plan to simplify the city's permitting and licensing systems in order to raise the presence of Latino-owned businesses. On economic revitalization, as in other areas of community development, effective solutions start with the community setting its own goals, are powered by broad collaboration, and rely on evidence to drive results. ConclusionWe all have our work cut out for us in helping to understand the state of opportunity and inclusion for different groups and communities across our country, and ensuring that policy is informed by those important insights. At the Federal Reserve, we will continue to navigate the recovery to ensure we reach and sustain our long-term goals of maximum employment and price stability. We will remain attentive to the financial health of vulnerable households. And we will remain committed to helping illuminate the specific challenges faced by low- and moderate-income communities around the country and to supporting banks and other financial institutions as they partner in strengthening these communities. In all of these efforts, our work will be greatly strengthened by the cutting-edge research and policy insights of the outstanding group gathered here tonight. ReferencesAaronson, Daniel, Luojia Hu, Arian Seifoddini, and Daniel G. Sullivan (2014). "Declining Labor Force Participation and Its Implications for Unemployment and Employment Growth," Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,Economic Perspectives, vol. 38 (Fourth Quarter), pp. 100-38. Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino (2016). "Loan Originations and Defaults in the Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle Class,"Review of Financial Studies,vol. 29 (July), pp. 1635-70. Altonji, Joseph G., and Rebecca M. Blank (1999). "Race and Gender in the Labor Market," in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds.,Handbook of Labor Economics,vol. 3. New York: North-Holland. Autor, David H. (2014). "Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality among the 'Other 99 Percent,'"Science,May 23. Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013). "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,"American Economic Review,vol. 103 (October), pp. 2121-68. Barnichon, Regis, and Geert Mesters (2017). "How Tight Is the U.S. Labor Market?" FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-07. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March. Bhutta, Neil and Daniel Ringo (2015). "Assessing the Community Reinvestment Act's Role in the Financial Crisis." FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 26. Bhutta, Neil (2015). "The Ins and Outs of Mortgage Debt during the Housing Boom and Bust,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 76 (November), pp. 284-298 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, June. -------- (2017).Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2016. Washington: Board of Governors, May. Boshara, Ray (2017). "Black College Graduates Are Losing Wealth. Here's What Can Help,"Washington Post,April 12. Brainard, Lael (2015). "Coming of Age in the Great Recession," speech delivered at "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy" conference, Washington, April 2. -------- (2016). "The "Gig" Economy: Implications of the Growth of Contingent Work," speech delivered at "Evolution of Work" conference, New York, November 17. Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (forthcoming). "Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle," Finance and Economics Discussion Series. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Celik, Sule, Chinhui Juhn, Kristin McCue, and Jesse Thompson (2012). "Recent Trends in Earnings Volatility: Evidence from Survey and Administrative Data,"B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy,vol. 12 (June), pp. 1-24. Chetty, Raj, David Grusky, Maximilian Hell, Nathaniel Hendren, Robert Manduca, and Jimmy Narang (2017). "The Fading American Dream: Trends in Absolute Income Mobility since 1940,"Science,April 24. Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014). "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 129 (December), pp. 1553-1624. Chou, Tiffany, Adam Looney, and Tara Watson (2017). "Measuring Loan Outcomes at Postsecondary Institutions: Cohort Repayment Rates as an Indicator of Student Success and Institutional Accountability," NBER Working Paper Series 23118. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Collins, J. Michael and Maximilian D. Schmeiser (2013). "The Effects of Foreclosure Counseling for Distressed Homeowners,"Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, vol. 32 (January), pp. 83-106. Council of Economic Advisers (2016).The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation(PDF). Washington: Executive Office of the President of the United States, June. Desmond, Matthew (2016).Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City.New York, N.Y.: Crown Publishers. Dynan, Karen (2012). "Is a Household Debt Overhang Holding Back Consumption? (PDF)"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 299-362. Dynan, Karen, Douglas Elmendorf and Daniel Sichel (2012). "The Evolution of Household Income Volatility."The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, vol. 12 (December). Economic Innovation Group (2016).The New Map of Economic Growth and Recovery.(PDF)Washington: EIG, May. Emmons, William R., and Bryan J. Noeth (2015). "Why Didn't Higher Education Protect Hispanic and Black Wealth? (PDF)" In the Balance: Perspectives on Household Balance Sheets, no. 12. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, August. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Community Development Department (2015).Las Colonias in the 21st Century: Progress along the Texas-Mexico Border. (PDF)Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, April. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and Center for Popular Democracy (2016). "Federal Reserve and the Center for Popular Democracy Listening Session," August 25. Ganong, Peter, and Daniel Shoag (2015). "Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S. Declined? (PDF)" working paper. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Web Publishing, January. Goetz, Stephen, Mark Partridge, and Heather Stephens (2017). "The Economic Status of Rural America in the Trump Era," MPRA Paper 77830. Munich: Munich Personal RePEc Archive, March. Gorbachev, Olga (2011). "Did Household Consumption Become More Volatile?"American Economic Review,vol. 101 (August), pp. 2248-70. Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark, and Melissa McInerney (2008). "Spatial Mismatch or Racial Mismatch?"Journal of Urban Economics,vol. 64 (September), pp. 464-79. Kain, John F. (1968). "Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan Decentralization,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 82 (May), pp. 175-97. Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman (2001). "Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 116 (May), pp. 607-54. Katz, Lawrence F., and Alan B. Krueger (2017). "Documenting Decline in U.S. Economic Mobility,"Science,April 24. Koo, Kyong Hyun (2016). "The Evolution of Earnings Volatility during and after the Great Recession,"Industrial Relations,vol. 55 (October), pp. 705-32. Looney, Adam, and Constantine Yannelis (2015). "A Crisis in Student Loans? How Changes in the Characteristics of Borrowers and in the Institutions They Attended Contributed to Rising Loan Defaults (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Marrero, Gustavo A., and Juan G. Rodrguez (2013). "Inequality of Opportunity and Growth,"Journal of Development Economics,vol. 104 (September), pp. 107-22. Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence, and Shane M. Sherlund (2009). "The Rise in Mortgage Defaults,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 23 (Winter), pp. 27-50. Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi (2013). "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 128 (November), pp. 1687-1726. Palumbo, Michael G. (forthcoming). "Assessing the Contribution of Household Leverage to Systemic Risk in the U.S.," Finance and Economics Discussion Series. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Parker, Jonathan A. (2014). "LEADS on Macroeconomic Risks to and from the Household Sector," in Markus Brunnermeier and Arvind Krishnamurthy, eds.,Risk Topography: Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 183-203. Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott (2016). "Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from U.S. Counties," NBER Working Paper Series 22849. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. Rajan, Raghuram G. (2010).Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World Economy.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Sampson, Robert J. (2016). "Individual and Community Economic Mobility in the Great Recession Era: The Spatial Foundations of Persistent Inequality," in Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, eds.,Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy.St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, pp. 259-87. Smith, Marvin M., Daniel Hochberg, and William H. Greene (2014). "The Effectiveness of Pre-Purchase Homeownership Counseling and Financial Management Skills. (PDF)" Philadelphia, PA: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Steelman, Aaron (2011). "The Federal Reserve's 'Dual Mandate': The Evolution of an Idea (PDF)," Economic Brief EB11-12. Richmond, Va.: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, December. Sufi, Amir (2014). "Detecting 'Bad' Leverage," in Markus Brunnermeier and Arvind Krishnamurthy, eds.,Risk Topography: Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 205-212. Thornton, Daniel L. (2012). "The Dual Mandate: Has the Fed Changed Its Objective? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review,vol. 94 (March/April), pp. 117-33. Winship, Scott (2017).Economic Mobility in America.Washington: Archbridge Institute, March. Yellen, Janet L. (2017a). "So We All Can Succeed: 125 Years of Women's Participation in the Economy," speech delivered at "125 Years of Women at Brown Conference," sponsored by Brown University, Providence, R.I., May 5. -------- (2017b). "Addressing Workforce Development Challenges in Low-Income Communities," speech delivered at "Creating a Just Economy," the 2017 annual conference of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, March 28. I am grateful to David Buchholz, Jeff Larrimore, Amanda Roberts, Claudia Sahm, and Jenny Schuetz for their assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See the Employment Act of 1946, Pub. L. No. 79-304,  2, 60 Stat. 23, 23 (1946).Return to text 3. The FOMC's inflation target was adopted in January 2012 in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. It was amended in January 2017 to clarify that the target is symmetric around 2 percent; the most recent Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (in which the quoted text appears in paragraph 3) is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals.pdf. For the interim period, Thornton (2012) and Steelman (2011) document the evolution of views among FOMC members on the dual mandate.Return to text 4. Board of Governors (2016) discusses some recent trends. See also Altonji and Blank (1999) and references therein for research on racial and gender differences in the labor market.Return to text 5. Cajner and others (2017) find that the higher, more cyclical unemployment of African Americans than whites cannot be fully accounted for by differences in education, age, marital status, and state of residence.Return to text 6. See the box "Have the Gains of the Economic Expansion Been Widely Shared?" in Board of Governors (2016).Return to text 7. See Yellen (2017a) and the studies referenced therein.Return to text 8. Aaronson and others (2014) and Barnichon and Mesters (2016) are examples of using details from demographic groups to assess overall labor market trends. In September, the Board of Governors is hosting a conference, "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?'Return to text 9. On August 25, 2016, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City hosted a listening session with the Center for Popular Democracy for members of the Federal Reserve; a video of the session is available athttps://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/symposiums/escp-event.Return to text 10. See Yellen (2017b) for an overview. In October, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas will host a conference, "Investing in America's Workforce: Improving Outcomes for Workers and Employers."Return to text 11. See Marrero and Rodriquez (2013).Return to text 12. See Council of Economic Advisers (2016) and the studies cited therein.Return to text 13. The information is from community development visits in 2015 (Baltimore and North St. Louis) and 2016 (Detroit and Milwaukee).Return to text 14. The information is from community development visits in 2014.Return to text 15. The SHED is an annual survey, representative of the U.S. population, conducted at the Board of Governors since 2013. It is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm.Return to text 16. The U.S. Financial Diaries project, led by Jonathan Morduch and Rachel Schneider, is a detailed, ethnographic study of financial conditions among low- and moderate-income households. More information is available on the project's website atwww.usfinancialdiaries.org.Return to text 17. See Board of Governors (2017).Return to text 18. See, for example, Rajan (2010); Dynan (2012); and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) on how high levels of mortgage debt may have made the Great Recession more severe and slowed the recovery. While low-income households were particularly vulnerable to the consequences of the collapse in house prices, rise in unemployment, and tightening of credit in the Great Recession, the preceding rise in mortgage debt was widespread, also including higher-income households, as documented by Bhutta (2015) and Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2016).Return to text 19. See, for example, Parker (2014) and Sufi (2014) for useful, research-founded ideas for assessing and monitoring the potential for financial fragility among households in the context of the financial system; see also Palumbo (forthcoming) for a particular application. TheQuarterly Report on Household Debt and Creditfrom the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which draws on its Consumer Credit Panel, is another example of new monitoring efforts on household finances in the Federal Reserve System. More information is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/hhdc.html.Return to text 20. Chetty and others (2017) estimate that rates of absolute mobility fell from about 90 percent for children born in 1940 to 50 percent for children born in the 1980s. Some research, such as Winship (2017), reaches different conclusions on the magnitude of the change, although not on the direction.Return to text 21. Chetty and others (2017) estimate that the slower overall GDP growth experienced by the 1980 birth cohort relative to the 1940 birth cohort can account for about 10 percentage points of the decline in absolute mobility, while the less equal distribution of income can account for about 30 percentage points of the decline. Commenting on this work, Katz and Krueger (2017) underscore that stagnant growth of median household income since the 1970s has been central to the decline in absolute mobility.Return to text 22. See Brainard (2016) on the gig economy and the growth of contingent work.Return to text 23. Dynan, Elmendorf, and Sichel (2012) documented a rise in household income volatility from the early 1970s to late 2008. In contrast, studies such as Celik and others (2012) do not find a rise in household income volatility in the 2000s. Koo (2016) shows a rise in earnings volatility in the Great Recession. Studies of annual income may even understate the volatility, as the financial diaries showed considerable month-to-month fluctuations in income among low- and middle-income households.Return to text 24. See Gorbachev (2011).Return to text 25. See Brainard (2015).Return to text 26. Bhutta and Ringo (2015) and the studies discussed therein argue that the Community Reinvestment Act, and its encouragement of lending in low- and moderate-income communities, was not a significant contributor to the financial crisis. Well-serviced and correctly-structured mortgages performed well for low-income borrowers even during a decline in house prices.Return to text 27. See research by Emmons and Noeth (2015) and the related symposium; more information is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's website athttps://www.stlouisfed.org/household-financial-stability/events/past-events/does-college-level-the-playing-field. Boshara (2017) provides an overview of the conference findings.Return to text 28. The information is from community development visits in 2015.Return to text 29. See, for example, Collins and Schmeiser (2013) and Smith, Hochberg, and Greene (2014).Return to text 30. See Autor (2014).Return to text 31. See Brainard (2015).Return to text 32. See Board of Governors (2017).Return to text 33. See Looney and Yannelis (2015).Return to text 34. See Chou, Looney, and Watson (2017) as an example of research on policy tools that could improve educational choices.Return to text 35. In an early evaluation of the Moving to Opportunity program, Katz, Kling, and Liebman (2001) find improvements of better neighborhoods on children's health and safety. Sampson (2016) summarizes much of the recent evidence.Return to text 36. Kain (1968) first advanced the "spatial mismatch" hypothesis. More recently, Hellerstein, Neumark, and McInerney (2008) find evidence for a "spatial-racial mismatch"--namely, that employment among low-skilled black men depends on proximity to employers who hire black workers.Return to text 37. In one of many studies on opportunity, Chetty and others (2014) use Internal Revenue Service tax return data from 40 million adult children to estimate the relative upward mobility across the 741 commuting zones (both metro and rural) in the United States.Return to text 38. See Desmond (2016).Return to text 39. See Board of Governors (2017).Return to text 40. See Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Community Development Department (2015).Return to text 41. Community visits in El Paso (2016), Mississippi Delta (2016), and Eastern Kentucky (2017),Return to text 42. Discussions with Mayor Collins of Itta Bena, Mississippi and Mayor Holland of Moorhead, Mississippi (2016).Return to text 43. Community Development visit in Mississippi Delta (2016).Return to text 44. See Goetz, Partridge, and Stephens (2017).Return to text 45. See Economic Innovation Group (2016).Return to text 46. See Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2016).Return to text 47. See Ganong and Shoag (2015) and references therein.Return to text