The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) today extended the resolution plan filing deadline for 19 foreign banking organizations and two large domestic bank holding companies to December 31, 2018, to give the firms an additional year to address any supervisory guidance in their next plan submissions. Resolution plans, required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. For foreign banking organizations, resolution plans are focused on their U.S. operations. The foreign banks are: Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, S.A., Banco Santander, S.A., Bank of China Limited, Bank of Montreal, BNP Paribas, BPCE, Coöperatieve Rabobank U.A., Crédit Agricole S.A., HSBC Holdings plc, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Ltd., Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, Inc., Mizuho Financial Group, Inc., Royal Bank of Canada, Société Générale, Standard Chartered PLC, Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group, Inc., The Bank of Nova Scotia, The Norinchukin Bank, and The Toronto-Dominion Bank. The two domestic firms are: CIT Group, Inc. and Citizens Financial Group, Inc. Also, the agencies announced that they would allow two smaller foreign firms, Canara Bank and Mercantil Servicios Financieros, C.A., to file reduced-content resolution plans moving forward. The firms have submitted prior plans that provide the agencies with an understanding of their limited U.S. operations. Reduced-content plans focus on material changes the firms have made to their prior resolution plans, alterations or actions to improve the effectiveness of their plans, and, where applicable, actions to ensure any subsidiary insured depository institution is adequately protected from the risks arising from the activities of nonbank subsidiaries of the firm.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and state bank regulators recognize the serious impact of Hurricane Harvey on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and will provide regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found atwww.fema.gov. Lending:Bankers should work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by Hurricane Harvey. The agencies realize that the effects of natural disasters on local businesses and individuals are often transitory, and prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas should not be subject to examiner criticism. In supervising institutions affected by the hurricane, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances they face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound banking practices as well as in the public interest. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, institutions should review the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:Bankers should monitor municipal securities and loans affected by the hurricane. The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected. Appropriate monitoring and prudent efforts to stabilize such investments are encouraged. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by Hurricane Harvey that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal regulatory agency to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of the effects of Hurricane Harvey. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by the hurricane may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal regulatory agency. Temporary Banking Facilities:The agencies understand that many banks face power, telecommunications, staffing and other challenges in re-opening facilities after the hurricane. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the appropriate primary federal regulator will expedite any request to operate temporary banking facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by the hurricane. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal regulator will suffice initially. Necessary written notification can be submitted later.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of Comptroller of the Currency In preparation for a forthcoming proposal that would simplify regulatory capital requirements, federal banking regulators on Tuesday proposed a rule that would extend the existing transitional capital treatment for certain regulatory capital deductions and risk weights. The extension would apply to banking organizations that are not subject to the agencies' advanced approaches capital rules. As part of the recent review of regulations under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act, the agencies announced that they are developing a proposal that would simplify the capital rules to reduce regulatory burden, particularly for community banks. That proposal would simplify the capital rules' treatment of mortgage servicing assets and other items. However, under the current capital rules, the transitional treatment for those items is scheduled to be replaced with a different treatment on January 1, 2018. As a result, the agencies are proposing to extend the existing transition provisions for a targeted set of items: mortgage servicing assets, certain deferred tax assets, investments in the capital instruments of unconsolidated financial institutions, and minority interests. This proposal would prevent the implementation of the fully phased-in requirements for these items by banking organizations that are not subject to the advanced approaches capital rules prior to the agencies' consideration of simplification to the capital rules. Banking organizations that are not subject to the advanced approaches capital rules are generally those with less than $250 billion in total consolidated assets and less than $10 billion in total foreign exposure. Firms that are subject to the advanced approaches rules would not be affected by this proposal and would remain subject to the fully phased-in requirements for these exposures beginning on January 1, 2018. Comments on this proposal will be accepted for 30 days after publication in theFederal Register. The agencies anticipate proposing the simplified regulatory capital requirements in the coming months. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
On August 10, 2017, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on August 10, 2017, and will mature on August 17, 2017. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the proposal under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Sterling Bancorp, Montebello, New York, to acquire Astoria Financial Corporation, Lake Success, New York, and thereby indirectly acquire Astoria's subsidiary savings association, Astoria Bank, Long Island City, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) and the president and vice president of the council for 2018. CDIAC advises the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues of interest to community depository institutions. Members are selected from representatives of commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils serves on CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. Further information on the CDIAC can be found here:http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htm. Gilda M. Nogueira, president and chief executive officer of East Cambridge Savings Bank, Cambridge, Mass., will serve as CDIAC president in 2018. Christopher D. Maher, president and chief executive officer of OceanFirst Financial Corporation and OceanFirst Bank, Toms River, New Jersey, will serve as vice president. The other members of CDIAC in 2018 are: Lora BenrudChief Executive OfficerWESTconsin Credit UnionMenomonie, Wis. Alvin J. CowansPresident and Chief Executive OfficerMcCoy Federal Credit UnionOrlando, Fla. Robert A. DeAlmeidaPresident and Chief Executive OfficerHamilton BankBaltimore, Md. Thomas J. FraserPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFirst Federal LakewoodLakewood, Ohio Kyle HeckmanPresident and Chairman of the BoardFlatirons BankBoulder, Colo. Elizabeth G. McCoyPresident and Chief Executive OfficerPlanters BankHopkinsville, Ky. Christopher J. Murphy IIIChairman and Chief Executive Officer1stSource Corporation and 1stSource BankSouth Bend, Ind. Tyrone E. MusePresident and Chief Executive OfficerVisions Federal Credit UnionEndicott, N.Y. Joe QuirogaPresident and Chief Executive OfficerTexas National BankMercedes, Texas Richard M. SanbornPresident and Chief Executive OfficerSeacoast Commerce Bank and Seacoast Commerce Banc HoldingsSan Diego, Calif. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Santander Holdings, USA, Inc.Written Agreement dated September 15, 2014Terminated August 17, 2017 The enforcement action from September 15, 2014 can be foundhere, and other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: The State Bank of GenevaWritten Agreement dated September 10, 2012Terminated August 29, 2017 The enforcement action from September 10, 2012 can be foundhere, and other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested public comment on a corporate governance proposal to enhance the effectiveness of boards of directors. The proposal would refocus the Federal Reserve's supervisory expectations for the largest firms' boards of directors on their core responsibilities, which will promote the safety and soundness of the firms. Boards' core responsibilities include oversight of the types and levels of risk a firm may take and aligning the firm's business strategy with those risk decisions. Additionally, the proposal would reduce unnecessary burden for the boards of smaller institutions. The corporate governance proposal is made up of three parts. First, it identifies the attributes of effective boards of directors, such as setting a clear and consistent strategic direction for the firm as a whole, supporting independent risk management, and holding the management of the firm accountable. For the largest institutions, Federal Reserve supervisors would use these attributes to inform their evaluation of a firm's governance and controls. Second, it clarifies that for all supervised firms, most supervisory findings should be communicated to the firm's senior management for corrective action, rather than to its board of directors. And third, the proposal identifies existing supervisory expectations for boards of directors that could be eliminated or revised. The Board also requested public comment on a proposal to better align the Board's rating system for large financial institutions with the post-crisis supervisory program for these firms. The current supervisory program for the largest firms was introduced in 2012 and sets higher standards to lower the probability of a firm's failure or material distress, and also reduce risks to U.S. financial stability. The proposed changes to the rating system will incorporate the regulatory and supervisory changes made by the Federal Reserve since 2012, which focus on capital, liquidity, and the effectiveness of governance and controls, including firms' compliance with laws and regulations. Supervisors would assess and assign confidential ratings in each of these categories. The proposed rating system would only apply to large financial institutions, such as domestic bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets, as well as the intermediate holding companies of foreign banking organizations operating in the United States. Consistent with existing practice, the new rating system would not apply to insurance companies supervised by the Board. Firms with less than $50 billion in total consolidated assets, including community banks, would continue to use the current rating system, which reflects long-standing supervisory practices for those firms. The Board'sFederal Registernotices are attached. Comments will be accepted for 60 days. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDFFederal Registernotice:HTML|PDFBoard Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Heartland Bank, Little Rock, ArkansasPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated August 15, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: The Bank & Trust, S.S.B., Del Rio, TexasCease and Desist Order dated August 18, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Mesquite Financial Services, Inc., Alice, TexasWritten Agreement dated July 6, 2017 Federal One Holdings, LLC, Milton, Massachusetts andAdmirals Bancorp, Inc., Boston, MassachusettsWritten Agreement dated July 28, 2017 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First St. Charles Bancshares, Inc., Boutte, LouisianaWritten Agreement issued December 21, 2011Terminated July 24, 2017 The enforcement action from December 2011 can be foundhereand other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday released final guidelines that will be used to evaluate requests from depository institutions for joint accounts at Federal Reserve Banks effective upon publication in theFederal Register. These joint accounts are intended to facilitate settlement between depository institutions participating in private-sector payment systems. The Reserve Banks have, in limited cases in the past, opened joint accounts where the rights and liabilities are shared among multiple depository institution account-holders. The final guidelines will provide consistency and transparency with respect to evaluation of future joint account requests from depository institutions, given continued innovation in the U.S. payment system and the likelihood that there may be broader interest in such joint account arrangements going forward. The final guidelines broadly outline considerations for evaluating joint account requests from depository institutions. Requests will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and more specific considerations and information necessary to evaluate a particular request will likely be required based on the complexity of the arrangement and other factors. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. Depository institutions may contact the Reserve Bank in their respective districts for more information about requesting a joint account. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Note: This press release was revised on August 14, 2017, for purposes of enhanced clarity.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced it is prohibiting James M. Riley, a former City Executive at the Four Oaks Bank and Trust Company branch in Fuquay-Varina, North Carolina, from participating in the banking industry after determining he improperly approved loans for his own benefit. The Board found Riley engaged in unsafe and unsound practices and potential violations of law by approving loans for two individuals who immediately transferred the loan proceeds to Riley. Riley agreed he would not object to the enforcement action with the Federal Reserve. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested public comment on a proposal for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in cooperation with the Office of Financial Research, to produce three new reference rates based on overnight repurchase agreement (repo) transactions secured by Treasuries. The most comprehensive of the rates, to be called the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), would be a broad measure of overnight Treasury financing transactions and wasselected by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee as its recommended alternativeto U.S. dollar LIBOR. SOFR would include tri-party repo data from Bank of New York Mellon (BNYM) and cleared bilateral and GCF Repo data from the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation (DTCC). "SOFR will be derived from the deepest, most resilient funding market in the United States. As such, it represents a robust rate that will support U.S. financial stability," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Jerome H. Powell. Another proposed rate, to be called the Tri-party General Collateral Rate (TGCR) would be based solely on triparty repo data from BNYM. The final rate, to be called the Broad General Collateral Rate (BGCR) would be based on the triparty repo data from BNYM and cleared GCF Repo data from DTCC. The three interest rates will be constructed to reflect the cost of short-term secured borrowing in highly liquid and robust markets. Because these rates are based on transactions secured by U.S. Treasury securities, they are essentially risk-free, providing a valuable benchmark for market participants to use in financial transactions. Comments on the proposal to produce the three rates are requested within 60 days of publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve has named Dave Sapenaro as payments strategy director with responsibility for leading payment system improvement initiatives described in its "Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System" paper published in January 2015. Sapenaro, first vice president and chief operating officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, will succeed Gordon Werkema, whose retirement was recently announced. Sapenaro will assume this new responsibility and continue to serve as first vice president and chief operating officer of the St. Louis Fed. "Three years ago, Dave led the development of the strategies paper and our initial plans for pursuing the desired outcomes for payment system improvement," said Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City President and Chief Executive Officer Esther George, who sponsors the payments improvement initiative. "Dave's leadership experience in many facets of our payments responsibilities and his commitment to the work are exceptional, and I am delighted to have him lead the next phase of our improvement efforts." As payments strategy director, Sapenaro will lead the Federal Reserve's strategies related to faster payments, payments security, and stakeholder engagement. He will collaborate with the Federal Reserve's current financial services business leaders to execute the full complement of strategies outlined in the 2015 paper. During his 32-year career with the Federal Reserve, Sapenaro spent 10 years at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, holding a variety of leadership positions in payment operations, including the bank's automated clearing house and funds transfer operations. Sapenaro subsequently joined the St. Louis Fed, where he spent eight years leading various initiatives in support of U.S. Treasury operations prior to assuming his current role as first vice president in January 2006. Sapenaro holds a bachelor's degree in business administration from the University of Missouri-Kansas City. "I'm honored to carry these efforts forward and excited to work closely with the many Federal Reserve and industry leaders who have generated very significant momentum toward achieving the desired outcomes," Sapenaro said. "The Federal Reserve remains committed to collaborating with stakeholders on improvements that deliver safe, ubiquitous, faster payments to American consumers and businesses." Dan WassmannFederal Reserve Bank of Chicago(312) 322-2374[email protected] Doug TillettFederal Reserve Bank of Chicago(312) 322-5201(office)(312) 493-8088 (mobile)[email protected] Susan StawickBoard of Governors(202) 452-2955[email protected]
The Federal Reserve plans to continue its previously announced periodic testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) with one operation in August. These operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve plans to conduct a similar routine TDF test operation each quarter in 2017. The schedule and terms for future test operations will be announced at later dates. On August 10, 2017, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its TDF. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $1,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. EDT to 12:30 p.m. EDT, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. EDT and 12:00 p.m. EDT. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttp://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Chair Janet L. Yellen At "Fostering a Dynamic Global Recovery," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming A decade has passed since the beginnings of a global financial crisis that resulted in the most severe financial panic and largest contraction in economic activity in the United States since the Great Depression. Already, for some, memories of this experience may be fading--memories of just how costly the financial crisis was and of why certain steps were taken in response. Today I will look back at the crisis and discuss the reforms policymakers in the United States and around the world have made to improve financial regulation to limit both the probability and the adverse consequences of future financial crises. A resilient financial system is critical to a dynamic global economy--the subject of this conference. A well-functioning financial system facilitates productive investment and new business formation and helps new and existing businesses weather the ups and downs of the business cycle. Prudent borrowing enables households to improve their standard of living by purchasing a home, investing in education, or starting a business. Because of the reforms that strengthened our financial system, and with support from monetary and other policies, credit is available on good terms, and lending has advanced broadly in line with economic activity in recent years, contributing to today's strong economy.1 At the same time, reforms have boosted the resilience of the financial system. Banks are safer. The risk of runs owing to maturity transformation is reduced. Efforts to enhance the resolvability of systemic firms have promoted market discipline and reduced the problem of too-big-to-fail. And a system is in place to more effectively monitor and address risks that arise outside the regulatory perimeter. Nonetheless, the scope and complexity of financial regulatory reforms demand that policymakers and researchers remain alert to both areas for improvement and unexpected side effects. The Federal Reserve is committed to continuing to evaluate the effects of regulation on financial stability and on the broader economy and to making appropriate adjustments. I will start by reviewing where we were 10 years ago. I will then walk through some key reforms our country has put in place to diminish the chances of another severe crisis and limit damage during times of financial instability. After reviewing these steps, I will summarize indicators and research that show the improved resilience of the U.S. financial system--resilience that is due importantly to regulatory reform as well as actions taken by the private sector. I will then turn to the evidence regarding how financial regulatory reform has affected economic growth, credit availability, and market liquidity. Developments 10 Years AgoThe U.S. and global financial system was in a dangerous place 10 years ago. U.S. house prices had peaked in 2006, and strains in the subprime mortgage market grew acute over the first half of 2007.2By August, liquidity in money markets had deteriorated enough to require the Federal Reserve to take steps to support it.3And yet the discussion here at Jackson Hole in August 2007, with a few notable exceptions, was fairly optimistic about the possible economic fallout from the stresses apparent in the financial system.4 As we now know, the deterioration of liquidity and solvency within the financial sector continued over the next 13 months. Accumulating strains across the financial system, including the collapse of Bear Stearns in March 2008, made it clear that vulnerabilities had risen across the system. As a result, policymakers took extraordinary measures: The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) sharply cut the federal funds rate, and the Federal Reserve, in coordination with the Treasury Department and other agencies, extended liquidity facilities beyond the traditional banking sector, applying to the modern structure of U.S. money markets the dictum of Walter Bagehot, conceived in the 19th century, to lend freely against good collateral at a penalty rate.5Still, the deterioration in the financial sector continued, with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac failing in early September.6 But the deterioration from early 2007 until early September 2008‑‑already the worst financial disruption in the United States in many decades‑‑was a slow trickle compared with the tidal wave that nearly wiped out the financial sector that September and led to a plunge in economic activity in the following months­. Not long after Fannie and Freddie were placed in government conservatorship, Lehman Brothers collapsed, setting off a week in which American International Group, Inc. (AIG), came to the brink of failure and required large loans from the Federal Reserve to mitigate the systemic fallout; a large money market fund "broke the buck" (that is, was unable to maintain a net asset value of $1 per share) and runs on other money funds accelerated, requiring the Treasury to provide a guarantee of money fund liabilities; global dollar funding markets nearly collapsed, necessitating coordinated action by central banks around the world; the two remaining large investment banks became bank holding companies, thereby ending the era of large independent investment banks in the United States; and the Treasury proposed a rescue of the financial sector. Within several weeks, the Congress passed--and President Bush signed into law--the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, which established the $700 billion Troubled Asset Relief Program; the Federal Reserve initiated further emergency lending programs; and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) guaranteed a broad range of bank debt.7Facing similar challenges in their own jurisdictions, many foreign governments also undertook aggressive measures to support the functioning of credit markets, including large-scale capital injections into banks, expansions of deposit insurance programs, and guarantees of some forms of bank debt. Despite the forceful policy responses by the Treasury, the Congress, the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve as well as authorities abroad, the crisis continued to intensify: The vulnerabilities in the U.S. and global economies had grown too large, and the subsequent damage was enormous. From the beginning of 2008 to early 2010, nearly 9 million jobs, on net, were lost in the United States. Millions of Americans lost their homes. And distress was not limited to the U.S. economy: Global trade and economic activity contracted to a degree that had not been seen since the 1930s. The economic recovery that followed, despite extraordinary policy actions, was painfully slow. What the Crisis Revealed and How Policymakers Have RespondedThese painful events renewed efforts to guard against financial instability. The Congress, the Administration, and regulatory agencies implemented new laws, regulations, and supervisory practices to limit the risk of another crisis, in coordination with policymakers around the world. The vulnerabilities within the financial system in the mid-2000s were numerous and, in hindsight, familiar from past financial panics. Financial institutions had assumed too much risk, especially related to the housing market, through mortgage lending standards that were far too lax and contributed to substantial overborrowing. Repeating a familiar pattern, the "madness of crowds" had contributed to a bubble, in which investors and households expected rapid appreciation in house prices. The long period of economic stability beginning in the 1980s had led to complacency about potential risks, and the buildup of risk was not widely recognized.8As a result, market and supervisory discipline was lacking, and financial institutions were allowed to take on high levels of leverage. This leverage was facilitated by short-term wholesale borrowing, owing in part to market-based vehicles, such as money market mutual funds and asset-backed commercial paper programs that allowed the rapid expansion of liquidity transformation outside of the regulated depository sector. Finally, a self-reinforcing loop developed, in which all of the factors I have just cited intensified as investors sought ways to gain exposure to the rising prices of assets linked to housing and the financial sector. As a result, securitization and the development of complex derivatives products distributed risk across institutions in ways that were opaque and ultimately destabilizing. In response, policymakers around the world have put in place measures to limit a future buildup of similar vulnerabilities. The United States, through coordinated regulatory action and legislation, moved very rapidly to begin reforming our financial system, and the speed with which our banking system returned to health provides evidence of the effectiveness of that strategy. Moreover, U.S. leadership of global efforts through bodies such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Financial Stability Board (FSB), and the Group of Twenty has contributed to the development of standards that promote financial stability around the world, thereby supporting global growth while protecting the U.S. financial system from adverse developments abroad. Preeminent among these domestic and global efforts have been steps to increase the loss-absorbing capacity of banks, regulations to limit both maturity transformation in short-term funding markets and liquidity mismatches within banks, and new authorities to facilitate the resolution of large financial institutions and to subject systemically important firms to more stringent prudential regulation. Several important reforms have increased the loss-absorbing capacity of global banks. First, the quantity and quality of capital required relative to risk-weighted assets have been increased substantially.9In addition, a simple leverage ratio provides a backstop, reflecting the lesson imparted by past crises that risk weights are imperfect and a minimum amount of equity capital should fund a firm's total assets. Moreover, both the risk-weighted and simple leverage requirements are higher for the largest, most systemic firms, which lowers the risk of distress at such firms and encourages them to limit activities that could threaten financial stability.10Finally, the largest U.S. banks participate in the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)‑‑the stress tests. In addition to contributing to greater loss-absorbing capacity, the CCAR improves public understanding of risks at large banking firms, provides a forward-looking examination of firms' potential losses during severely adverse economic conditions, and has contributed to significant improvements in risk management. Reforms have also addressed the risks associated with maturity transformation. The fragility created by deposit-like liabilities outside the traditional banking sector has been mitigated by regulations promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission affecting prime institutional money market funds. These rules require these prime funds to use a floating net asset value, among other changes, a shift that has made these funds less attractive as cash-management vehicles. The changes at money funds have also helped reduce banks' reliance on unsecured short-term wholesale funding, since prime institutional funds were significant investors in those bank liabilities. Liquidity risk at large banks has been further mitigated by a new liquidity coverage ratio and a capital surcharge for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs). The liquidity coverage ratio requires that banks hold liquid assets to cover potential net cash outflows over a 30-day stress period. The capital surcharge for U.S. G-SIBs links the required level of capital for the largest banks to their reliance on short-term wholesale funding.11 While improvements in capital and liquidity regulation will limit the reemergence of the risks that grew substantially in the mid-2000s, the failure of Lehman Brothers demonstrated how the absence of an adequate resolution process for dealing with a failing systemic firm left policymakers with only the terrible choices of a bailout or allowing a destabilizing collapse. In recognition of this shortcoming, the Congress adopted the orderly liquidation authority in Title II of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) to provide an alternative resolution mechanism for systemically important firms to be used instead of bankruptcy proceedings when necessary to preserve financial stability. The orderly liquidation authority contains a number of tools, including liquidity resources and temporary stays on the termination of financial contracts, that would help protect the financial system and economy from the severe adverse spillovers that could occur if a systemic firm failed. Importantly, any losses incurred by the government in an Orderly Liquidation Authority resolution would not be at the expense of taxpayers, since the statute provides that all such losses must be borne by other large financial firms through subsequent assessments. In addition, the Congress required that the largest banks submit living wills that describe how they could be resolved under bankruptcy.12And the Federal Reserve has mandated that systemically important banks meet total loss-absorbing capacity requirements, which require these firms to maintain long-term debt adequate to absorb losses and recapitalize the firm in resolution. These enhancements in resolvability protect financial stability and help ensure that the shareholders and creditors of failing firms bear losses. Moreover, these steps promote market discipline, as creditors--knowing full well that they will bear losses in the event of distress--demand prudent risk-taking, thereby limiting the problem of too-big-to-fail. Financial stability risks can also grow large outside the regulated banking sector, as amply demonstrated by the events of 2007 and 2008. In response, a number of regulatory changes affecting what is commonly referred to as the shadow banking sector have been instituted. A specific example of such risks, illustrative of broader developments, was the buildup of large counterparty exposures through derivatives between market participants and AIG that were both inappropriately risk-managed and opaque. To mitigate the potential for such risks to arise again, new standards require central clearing of standardized over-the-counter derivatives, enhanced reporting requirements for all derivatives, and higher capital as well as margin requirements for noncentrally cleared derivatives transactions.13 Another important step was the Congress's creation of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). The council is responsible for identifying risks to financial stability and for designating those financial institutions that are systemically important and thus subject to prudential regulation by the Federal Reserve. Both of these responsibilities are important to help guard against the risk that vulnerabilities outside the existing regulatory perimeter grow to levels that jeopardize financial stability.14 The Financial System Is SaferThe evidence shows that reforms since the crisis have made the financial system substantially safer. Loss-absorbing capacity among the largest banks is significantly higher, with Tier 1 common equity capital more than doubling from early 2009 to now.15The annual stress-testing exercises in recent years have led to improvements in the capital positions and risk-management processes among participating banks. Large banks have cut their reliance on short-term wholesale funding essentially in half and hold significantly more high-quality, liquid assets. Assets under management at prime institutional money market funds that proved susceptible to runs in the crisis have decreased substantially. And the ability of regulators to resolve a large institution has improved, reflecting both new authorities and tangible steps taken by institutions to adjust their organizational and capital structure in a manner that enhances their resolvability and significantly reduces the problem of too-big-to-fail. The progress evident in regulatory and supervisory metrics has been accompanied by shifts in private-sector assessments that also suggest enhanced financial stability. Investors have recognized the progress achieved toward ending too-big-to-fail, and several rating agencies have removed the government support rating uplift that they once accorded to the largest banks. Credit default swaps for the large banks also suggest that market participants assign a low probability to the distress of a large U.S. banking firm. Market-based assessments of the loss-absorbing capacity of large U.S. banks have moved up in recent years, and market-based measures of equity now lie in the range of book estimates of equity. To be sure, market-based measures may not reflect true risks--they certainly did not in the mid-2000s--and hence the observed improvements should not be overemphasized.16But supervisory metrics are not perfect, either, and policymakers and investors should continue to monitor a range of supervisory and market-based indicators of financial system resilience. Economic research provides further support for the notion that reforms have made the system safer. Studies have demonstrated that higher levels of bank capital mitigate the risk and adverse effects of financial crises.17Moreover, researchers have highlighted how liquidity regulation supports financial stability by complementing capital regulation.18Economic models of the resilience of the financial sector--so called top-down stress-testing models--reinforce the message from supervisory stress tests that the riskiness of large banks has diminished over the past decade.19Similarly, model-based analyses indicate that the risk of adverse fire sale spillovers across banks or broker-dealers have been substantially mitigated.20 Is This Safer System Supporting Growth?I suspect many in this audience would agree with the narrative of my remarks so far: The events of the crisis demanded action, needed reforms were implemented, and these reforms have made the system safer. Now--a decade from the onset of the crisis and nearly seven years since the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act and international agreement on the key banking reforms--a new question is being asked: Have reforms gone too far, resulting in a financial system that is too burdened to support prudent risk-taking and economic growth? The Federal Reserve is committed individually, and in coordination with other U.S. government agencies through forums such as the FSOC and internationally through bodies such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the FSB, to evaluating the effects of financial market regulations and considering appropriate adjustments. Furthermore, the Federal Reserve has independently taken steps to evaluate potential adjustments to its regulatory and supervisory practices. For example, the Federal Reserve initiated a review of its stress tests following the 2015 cycle, and this review suggested changes to reduce the burden on participating institutions, especially smaller institutions, and to better align the supervisory stress tests with regulatory capital requirements.21In addition, a broader set of changes to the new financial regulatory framework may deserve consideration. Such changes include adjustments that may simplify regulations applying to small and medium-sized banks and enhance resolution planning.22 More broadly, we continue to monitor economic conditions, and to review and conduct research, to better understand the effect of regulatory reforms and possible implications for regulation. I will briefly summarize the current state of play in two areas: the effect of regulation on credit availability and on changes in market liquidity. The effects of capital regulation on credit availability have been investigated extensively. Some studies suggest that higher capital weighs on banks' lending, while others suggest that higher capital supports lending.23Such conflicting results in academic research are not altogether surprising. It is difficult to identify the effects of regulatory capital requirements on lending because material changes to capital requirements are rare and are often precipitated, as in the recent case, by financial crises that also have large effects on lending. Given the uncertainty regarding the effect of capital regulation on lending, rulemakings of the Federal Reserve and other agencies were informed by analyses that balanced the possible stability gains from greater loss-absorbing capacity against the possible adverse effects on lending and economic growth.24This ex ante assessment pointed to sizable net benefits to economic growth from higher capital standards--and subsequent research supports this assessment.25The steps to improve the capital positions of banks promptly and significantly following the crisis, beginning with the 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, have resulted in a return of lending growth and profitability among U.S. banks more quickly than among their global peers. While material adverse effects of capital regulation on broad measures of lending are not readily apparent, credit may be less available to some borrowers, especially homebuyers with less-than-perfect credit histories and, perhaps, small businesses. In retrospect, mortgage borrowing was clearly too easy for some households in the mid-2000s, resulting in debt burdens that were unsustainable and ultimately damaging to the financial system. Currently, many factors are likely affecting mortgage lending, including changes in market perceptions of the risk associated with mortgage lending; changes in practices at the government-sponsored enterprises and the Federal Housing Administration; changes in technology that may be contributing to entry by nonbank lenders; changes in consumer protection regulations; and, perhaps to a limited degree, changes in capital and liquidity regulations within the banking sector. These issues are complex and interact with a broader set of challenges related to the domestic housing finance system. Credit appears broadly available to small businesses with solid credit histories, although indicators point to some difficulties facing firms with weak credit scores and insufficient credit histories.26Small business formation is critical to economic dynamism and growth. Smaller firms rely disproportionately on lending from smaller banks, and the Federal Reserve has been taking steps and examining additional steps to reduce unnecessary complexity in regulations affecting smaller banks.27 Finally, many financial market participants have expressed concerns about the ability to transact in volume at low cost--that is, about market liquidity, particularly in certain fixed-income markets such as that for corporate bonds. Market liquidity for corporate bonds remains robust overall, and the healthy condition of the market is apparent in low bid-ask spreads and the large volume of corporate bond issuance in recent years. That said, liquidity conditions are clearly evolving. Large dealers appear to devote less of their balance sheets to holding inventories of securities to facilitate trades and instead increasingly facilitate trades by directly matching buyers and sellers. In addition, algorithmic traders and institutional investors are a larger presence in various markets than previously, and the willingness of these institutions to support liquidity in stressful conditions is uncertain. While no single factor appears to be the predominant cause of the evolution of market liquidity, some regulations may be affecting market liquidity somewhat. There may be benefits to simplifying aspects of the Volcker rule, which limits proprietary trading by banking firms, and to reviewing the interaction of the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio with risk-based capital requirements. At the same time, the new regulatory framework overall has made dealers more resilient to shocks, and, in the past, distress at dealers following adverse shocks has been an important factor driving market illiquidity. As a result, any adjustments to the regulatory framework should be modest and preserve the increase in resilience at large dealers and banks associated with the reforms put in place in recent years. Remaining ChallengesSo where do we stand a decade after the onset of the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression? Substantial progress has been made toward the Federal Reserve's economic objectives of maximum employment and price stability, in putting in place a regulatory and supervisory structure that is well designed to lower the risks to financial stability, and in actually achieving a stronger financial system. Our more resilient financial system is better prepared to absorb, rather than amplify, adverse shocks, as has been illustrated during periods of market turbulence in recent years. Enhanced resilience supports the ability of banks and other financial institutions to lend, thereby supporting economic growth through good times and bad. Nonetheless, there is more work to do. The balance of research suggests that the core reforms we have put in place have substantially boosted resilience without unduly limiting credit availability or economic growth. But many reforms have been implemented only fairly recently, markets continue to adjust, and research remains limited. The Federal Reserve is committed to evaluating where reforms are working and where improvements are needed to most efficiently maintain a resilient financial system. Moreover, I expect that the evolution of the financial system in response to global economic forces, technology, and, yes, regulation will result sooner or later in the all-too-familiar risks of excessive optimism, leverage, and maturity transformation reemerging in new ways that require policy responses. We relearned this lesson through the pain inflicted by the crisis. We can never be sure that new crises will not occur, but if we keep this lesson fresh in our memories--along with the painful cost that was exacted by the recent crisis--and act accordingly, we have reason to hope that the financial system and economy will experience fewer crises and recover from any future crisis more quickly, sparing households and businesses some of the pain they endured during the crisis that struck a decade ago. 1. Over the 12 quarters ending in the first quarter of this year, borrowing by the nonfinancial business sector increased at an annual rate just above 6 percent, on average, and borrowing by households and nonprofit institutions rose at an annual rate of 3-1/4 percent, on average; the corresponding average pace of increase in nominal gross domestic product was 3-3/4 percent. Over the same period, lending by private depository institutions advanced at an annual rate of nearly 6-1/2 percent.Return to text 2. A contemporaneous perspective on subprime mortgage market developments at this time is provided in Ben S. Bernanke (2007), "The Subprime Mortgage Market," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's 43rd Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, May 17.Return to text 3. On August 17, 2007, the Federal Reserve Board reduced the primary credit rate at the discount window by 50 basis points and announced a change to the Reserve Banks' usual practices to allow the provision of term financing for as long as 30 days, renewable by the borrower. The changes were announced to remain in place until the Federal Reserve determined that market liquidity had improved materially. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007), "Federal Reserve Board Discount Rate Action," press release, August 17.Return to text 4. The proceedings from the 2007 conference are instructive about the range of views regarding housing-related developments preceding the acute phase of the financial crisis. See Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (2007),Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy,proceedings of an economic policy symposium (Kansas City: FRBKC).Return to text 5. For a discussion of the correspondence between the steps taken by the Federal Reserve and those suggested by Walter Bagehot in the 19th century, see Brian F. Madigan (2009), "Bagehot's Dictum in Practice: Formulating and Implementing Policies to Combat the Financial Crisis," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's annual economic symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 21.Return to text 6. A timeline of developments in the United States over the financial crisis is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's website athttps://www.stlouisfed.org/financial-crisis/full-timeline. The failure of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac is marked by the decision of the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) to place Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in government conservatorship on September 7, 2008. Links to documents outlining the actions taken around this time are available on the FHFA's website athttps://www.fhfa.gov/Media/PublicAffairs/Pages/Conservatorship-of-Fannie-Mae-and-Freddie-Mac.aspx.Return to text 7. In the fall of 2008, the three largest investment banks were (in alphabetical order) Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, and Morgan Stanley. Merrill Lynch agreed to be acquired by Bank of America, and the remaining two firms became bank holding companies.Return to text 8. The notion that popular sentiment may contribute to mispricing of assets--for example, the power of the madness of crowds--is attributed to Charles Mackay (1841),Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds(London: Richard Bentley). A more modern perspective, and one using a phrase as memorable as the madness of crowds, is provided by Robert J. Shiller (2016),Irrational Exuberance,3rd ed. (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press). The notion that economic stability can generate a buildup of imbalances that subsequently contributes to instability is presented in Hyman P. Minsky (1974), "The Modeling of Financial Instability: An Introduction," inModeling and Simulation, Vol. 5, Part 1,proceedings of the Fifth Annual Pittsburgh Conference (Pittsburgh: Instrument Society of America), pp. 267-72. A related discussion of how financial excesses often precede downturns (and even panics) is provided in Charles P. Kindleberger and Robert Z. Aliber (2005),Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises,5th ed. (Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons).Return to text 9. These improvements encompass a number of changes. The regulatory requirements for capital have been increased and focus on Tier 1 common equity, which proved more capable of absorbing losses than lower-quality forms of capital. The role of bank internal models in determining risk-weighted assets also has been significantly constrained in the United States. In addition, exposures previously considered off balance sheet have been incorporated into risk-weighted assets.Return to text 10. The Federal Reserve Board, the FDIC, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency adopted a final rule to strengthen the leverage ratio standards for the largest, most interconnected U.S. banking organizations on April 8, 2014. Under the final rule, covered bank holding companies must maintain a leverage buffer of 2 percentage points above the minimum supplementary leverage ratio requirement of 3 percent, for a total of 5 percent, to avoid restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments (see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2014), "Agencies Adopt Enhanced Supplementary Leverage Ratio Final Rule and Issue Supplementary Leverage Ratio Notice of Proposed Rulemaking," joint press release, April 8). The Federal Reserve approved a final rule imposing risk-based capital surcharges on the largest, most systemically important U.S. bank holding companies on July 20, 2015; in connection with the final rule, the Board issued a white paper describing the calibration of the risk-based capital surcharges (see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Board Approves Final Rule Requiring the Largest, Most Systemically Important U.S. Bank Holding Companies to Further Strengthen Their Capital Positions," press release, July 20).Return to text 11. Moreover, the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review, in which supervisors analyze the liquidity risks and practices at large banks, has promoted improvements in liquidity-risk management. The U.S. banking agencies also have proposed a net stable funding ratio (NSFR) to help ensure that large banks have a stable funding profile over a one-year horizon, and we are working toward finalization of the NSFR.Return to text 12. In addition to these steps, the Board issued another proposal to make G-SIBs more resolvable in May of last year (see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Board Proposes Rule to Support U.S. Financial Stability by Enhancing the Resolvability of Very Large and Complex Financial Firms," press release, May 3). This proposed rule would impose restrictions on G-SIBs' qualified financial contracts--including derivatives and repurchase agreements (or repos)--to guard against the rapid, mass unwinding of those contracts during the resolution of a G-SIB. The proposed restrictions are a key step toward G-SIB resolvability because rapidly unwinding these contracts could destabilize the financial system by causing asset fire sales and toppling other firms.Return to text 13. One area in which regulations have shifted to a lesser degree in the United States is that of time-varying macroprudential tools, in which regulatory requirements are adjusted to address changes in vulnerabilities that may affect the financial system. For example, U.S. regulatory authorities have adopted rules that allow use of the countercyclical capital buffer, but other time-varying tools are limited in the United States. This issue is discussed in, for example, Stanley Fischer (2015), "Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 2.Return to text 14. For example, the FSOC contributed, through its identification process, to the development of the Securities and Exchange Commission reforms affecting money market funds. The FSOC has also designated four firms as systemically important--AIG, GE Capital, Prudential, and MetLife. GE Capital chose to shrink, adjust its business model, and reduce its footprint in short-term wholesale funding markets--and hence reduce a source of systemic risk. These actions caused the FSOC to subsequently remove its designation as systemically important last year--illustrating how the designation process allows both identifying systemic firms and removing such designations when appropriate.Return to text 15. The increase in Tier 1 common equity among bank holding companies has been sizable, especially for the largest banks. If the largest banks are defined as either the eight U.S. global systemically important banks or the U.S. bank holding companies that participated in the CCAR in 2017 (and for which data are available for 2009:Q1), Tier 1 common equity has more than doubled in dollar terms and relative to risk-weighted assets from the first quarter of 2009 to the most recent observations.Return to text 16. For example, Natasha Sarin and Lawrence Summers have reviewed market-based measures of bank equity and related measures of bank risks and concluded that such measures have not improved since the mid-2000s. This assessment may understate the improvement in fundamental risk within the banking sector, as it takes the elevated valuations and low assessment of default risk implied by market prices during the earlier period as indicative of fundamentals. Despite these shortcomings, their analysis is a useful reminder of the importance of considering both regulatory metrics and assessments implied by market prices. See Natasha Sarin and Lawrence H. Summers (2016), "Understanding Bank Risk through Market Measures (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 57-109.Return to text 17. For example, see the review of evidence in Simon Firestone, Amy Lorenc, and Ben Ranish (2017), "An Empirical Economic Assessment of the Costs and Benefits of Bank Capital in the US (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-034 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April). Some research is less supportive of the role of bank capital in limiting the risk of financial crises but suggests that higher levels of bank capital limit the economic costs of a financial crisis (for example, Òscar Jordà, Björn Richter, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2017), "Bank Capital Redux: Solvency, Liquidity, and Crisis," NBER Working Paper Series 23287 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March)). Some of the differences in findings across studies may be due to the degree to which the studies incorporate data from different countries and over different periods, as researchers disagree over the extent to which comparisons across countries or periods appropriately account for other factors that differ across such dimensions.Return to text 18. For example, Charles A.E. Goodhart, Anil K. Kashyap, Dimitrios P. Tsomocos, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis (2013), "An Integrated Framework for Analyzing Multiple Financial Regulations,"International Journal of Central Banking,supp. 1, vol. 9 (January), pp. 109-43; and Gazi I. Kara and S. Mehmet Ozsoy (2016), "Bank Regulation under Fire Sale Externalities (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-026 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April).Return to text 19. For example, researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York have developed a top-down stress-testing model, and simulation results from the model suggest that the resilience of the U.S. banking system has improved since the crisis; see Beverly Hirtle, Anna Kovner, James Vickery, and Meru Bhanot (2014), "Assessing Financial Stability: The Capital and Loss Assessment under Stress Scenarios (CLASS) Model (PDF)," Staff Report 663 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February; revised July 2015).Return to text 20. For example, see Fernando Duarte and Thomas Eisenbach (2013), "Fire-Sale Spillovers and Systemic Risk (PDF)," Staff Report 645 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October; revised February 2015).Return to text 21. In response to the Federal Reserve's review and other information, the Board finalized a rule adjusting its capital plan and stress-testing rules, effective for the 2017 cycle, on January 30, 2017. The final rule removes large and noncomplex firms from the qualitative assessment of the Federal Reserve's CCAR, reducing significant burden on these firms and focusing the qualitative review in CCAR on the largest, most complex financial institutions. More generally, changes to improve regulatory and supervisory practices related to stress testing by reducing unnecessary burden while preserving resilience are under consideration. Possible changes have been discussed in Daniel K. Tarullo (2016), "Next Steps in the Evolution of Stress Testing," speech delivered at the Yale University School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, Conn., September 26.Return to text 22. An overview of a set of principles that may guide such adjustments is discussed by Jerome H. Powell (2017), "Relationship between Regulation and Economic Growth," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, June 22. In addition, the Federal Reserve Board has continued to engage in international efforts to assess the effects of reforms and possible adjustments; in this context, the FSB has developed a framework for the post-implementation evaluation of the effects of the Group of Twenty financial regulatory reforms; see Financial Stability Board (2017),Framework for Post-Implementation Evaluation of the Effects of the G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, July).Return to text 23. The related literature is sizable. An early contribution is Ben S. Bernanke and Cara S. Lown (1991), "The Credit Crunch,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2, pp. 205-47. Research finding a sizable negative relationship between capital requirements and lending includes Shekhar Aiyar, Charles W. Calomiris, and Tomasz Wieladek (2014), "Does Macro-Prudential Regulation Leak? Evidence from a UK Policy Experiment,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 46 (s1; February), pp. 181-214. Research finding little relationship between lending and capital ratios (outside financial crises) includes Mark Carlson, Hui Shan, and Missaka Warusawitharana (2013), "Capital Ratios and Bank Lending: A Matched Bank Approach,"Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 22 (October), pp. 663-87. Research suggesting that higher capital levels may increase lending includes Leonardo Gambacorta and Hyun Song Shin (2016), "Why Bank Capital Matters for Monetary Policy (PDF)," BIS Working Papers 558 (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, April).Return to text 24. For example, see Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010),An Assessment of the Long-Term Economic Impact of Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: BCBS, August); and Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010),Interim Report: Assessing the Macroeconomic Impact of the Transition to Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: MAG, August).Return to text 25. The ex ante studies from the Basel Committee and the Macroeconomic Assessment Group referenced in note 24 pointed to sizable net benefits from higher capital requirements. More academic research pointing to similar conclusions using macroeconomic models (and typically focused on model-specific measures of economic welfare) includes Michael T. Kiley and Jae W. Sim (2014), "Bank Capital and the Macroeconomy: Policy Considerations,"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,vol. 43 (June), pp. 175-98; Laurent Clerc, Alexis Derviz, Caterina Mendicino, Stephane Moyen, Kalin Nikolov, Livio Stracca, Javier Suarez, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis (2015), "Capital Regulation in a Macroeconomic Model with Three Layers of Default,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 11 (June), pages 9-63; and Juliane Begenau (2016), "Capital Requirements, Risk Choice, and Liquidity Provision in a Business Cycle Model," unpublished paper, Harvard Business School, September. Subsequent analyses, albeit ones that follow similar approaches, also suggest that there are net benefits to higher capital standards. One example is the analysis by Firestone, Lorenc, and Ranish, "An Empirical Economic Assessment," in note 17. Another is Ingo Fender and Ulf Lewrick (2016), "Adding It All Up: The Macroeconomic Impact of Basel III and Outstanding Reform Issues (PDF)," BIS Working Papers 591 (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, November). Indeed, this research points to benefits from capital requirements in excess of those adopted, a conclusion also reached in Wayne Passmore and Alexander H. von Hafften (2017), "Are Basel's Capital Surcharges for Global Systemically Important Banks Too Small? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-021 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).Return to text 26. This conclusion is consistent with, for example, the findings in Federal Reserve Banks (2017),2016 Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms(PDF)(New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April).Return to text 27. As I have discussed previously, the Federal Reserve has been considering improvements through a number of work streams. For example, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies have recently completed the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) review. Under EGRPRA, the federal banking agencies are required to conduct a joint review of their regulations every 10 years to identify provisions that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome. The Federal Reserve viewed this review as a timely opportunity to step back and identify ways to reduce regulatory burden, particularly for smaller or less complex banks that pose less risk to the U.S. financial system. I discussed preliminary emerging themes from this review in Janet L. Yellen (2016), "Supervision and Regulation," statement before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, September 28. ‎For the final EGRPRA report to the Congress, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and National Credit Union Administration (2017),Joint Report to Congress: Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act(PDF)(Washington: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, March).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings for July 17 and July 26, 2017. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 25-26, 2017. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 25-26, 2017:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Risk in the portfolio of large syndicated bank loans declined slightly but remains elevated, according to the Shared National Credit (SNC) Program Review released today by the Federal Reserve Board (Federal Reserve), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). The high level of credit risk in the SNC portfolio stems primarily from distressed borrowers in the oil and gas (O&G) sector and other industry sector borrowers exhibiting excessive leverage. The review also found that credit risk management practices at most large agent banks continued to improve, consistent with the2013 Interagency Guidance on Leveraged Lending. The 2017 SNC portfolio included 11,350 credit facilities to 6,902 borrowers, totaling $4.3 trillion, up from $4.1 trillion in 2016. U.S. banks held the greatest volume of SNC commitments at 45.3 percent of the portfolio, followed by foreign banking organizations and non-bank entities. The review relied on the results of examinations conducted in the third quarter of 2016 and the first quarter of 2017. Loans were reviewed and stratified by the severity of their risk--special mention, substandard, doubtful, or loss--in order of increasing severity. Classified commitments include commitments rated substandard, doubtful and loss. Other findings include: The agencies conduct SNC reviews in the first and third calendar quarters with some banks receiving two examinations and others participating in a single review each year. The agencies provide results from the semiannual examinations in a combined report in order to present a complete view of the entire SNC portfolio comparable to prior years' reports. The next report will be published following the first quarter 2018 SNC examination. For additional information, see the attached SNC Program Review Report. FDIC: PR-58-2017
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Large Bank Directors Conference, Chicago, Illinois Good morning. Thank you to President Evans for inviting me to speak here today about the role of boards of directors of large banking firms.1Ten years ago this month, the world witnessed the first tremors of what we now think of as the Global Financial Crisis and the subsequent Great Recession. For the United States and many other countries, this would turn out to be the most painful economic period since the Great Depression. In the wake of the crisis, governments around the world instituted a wide range of reforms that were designed to reduce the likelihood and severity of a recurrence. In the United States, the core elements of those reforms included significantly higher capital standards; new liquidity requirements; forward-looking stress tests; and resolution planning. Our largest banking firms are without question much stronger than before the crisis. We are nearing completion of the major parts of this reform program, and are undertaking a thorough review to help assure that the reforms we put in place are both effective and efficient.2 During the crisis, some large banking firms incurred massive losses. Some of these losses were from products--such as super-senior collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) or structured investment vehicles (SIVs)--whose risks were not even on the radar screen of the firm's board of directors. After the crisis, the Federal Reserve significantly raised our expectations for the boards of directors of large banking firms. Taking risk in service of clients is an essential part of the business of banking, including credit risk, interest rate risk, and various forms of operational risk. Our reforms were designed to assure that boards of directors understand and approve the strategy of the company and the risks inherent in that strategy, and that the institution has the capital, liquidity, and risk management capabilities necessary to manage those risks. Today, the role of a director of a large banking firm is more expansive, more challenging, and more important than ever. Boards now oversee management's participation in highly challenging annual exercises, such as stress testing, capital planning, and resolution planning, that have fundamentally changed the business of our largest institutions. Boards now more carefully evaluate the compensation practices of these large institutions to assure that they reinforce positive incentives and discourage unwanted risk taking. Across a range of responsibilities, we simply expect much more of boards of directors than ever before. There is no reason to expect that to change. We do take seriously our obligation to assess whether our reforms are achieving their desired effects, without imposing unnecessary burden. In 2014, we began a review of these higher expectations for directors. We found that many boards have significantly improved their practices. We also found some ways to make our reforms both more effective and more efficient. For example, while directors generally say that they understand and embrace their more challenging responsibilities, we consistently hear that directors feel buried in hundreds or even thousands of pages of highly granular information, to the point where more important strategic issues are crowded out of board deliberations. Some of this granular information was likely driven by our supervisory guidance, which included specific expectations not only for the management of the institution, but also for the board of directors. Over time, this guidance has increased the number of specific directives aimed at boards well into the hundreds, which may have fostered a "check-the-box" approach by boards. There is also a widespread feeling that our supervision seems to have downplayed the difference in roles between boards and management. Our current ratings system for bank holding companies, which for large banking firms would be replaced by the currently proposed LFI ratings system, refers to the "board and senior management" as a subcomponent rating of risk management.3We have also combined the roles of the board and senior management in many of our supervisory feedback letters. After careful consideration, last month we proposed a new framework for our oversight of boards.4In formulating this proposal, we had discussions with academics, consultants, legal practitioners, and directors of banking firms. Let me start by saying what the new approach will not do. We do not intend that these reforms will lower the bar for boards or lighten the loads of directors. The new approach distinguishes the board from senior management so that we can spotlight our expectations of effective boards. The intent is to enable directors to spend less board time on routine matters and more on core board responsibilities: overseeing management as they devise a clear and coherent direction for the firm, holding management accountable for the execution of that strategy, and ensuring the independence and stature of the risk management and internal audit functions. These were all areas that were found wanting in the financial crisis, and it is essential that boards get these fundamentals right. Our new proposal will move to a principles-based approach. We have identified five common attributes that effective boards should exhibit, and for which we will have high expectations. This principles-based approach recognizes that large firms have a broad range of business models, structures, and practices. While we want to be clear about our expectations, we also want to give directors the flexibility to meet them in a manner that works for their particular boards. First, an effective board should guide the development of a clear and coherent strategy for the firm and set the types and levels of risks it is willing to take. Alignment of business strategy and risk appetite should minimize the firm's exposure to large and unexpected losses. In addition, the firm's risk management capabilities need to be commensurate with the risks it expects to take. Second, an effective board should actively manage its information flow and deliberations, so that the board can make sound, well-informed decisions that take into account risks and opportunities. Third, an effective board should hold senior management accountable for implementing the firm's strategy and risk appetite and maintaining the firm's risk management and control framework. Fourth, an effective board should ensure the independence and stature of the independent risk management and internal audit functions. It is difficult to overstate the importance of this. Risk management systems and controls may discourage or limit certain revenue-generating opportunities. Failure to ensure the independence of these functions from the revenue generators and risk takers has been shown to be dangerous, and this is something for which the board is accountable. Finally, an effective board should have a composition, governance structure, and set of established practices that are appropriate in light of the firm's size, complexity, scope of operations, and risk profile. Boards need to be aware of their own strengths and weaknesses, and to ensure that directors bring an appropriately diverse range of skills, knowledge, experience, and perspective. Significant events, such as an unexpected loss or compliance failure, should cause boards to reflect and reassess their structure, composition, and processes. An effective board takes a preventative approach and engages in probing self-assessments regularly and systematically. Before I conclude, let me say a few words about an aspect of the proposal that has attracted some attention, which is the reversal of a relatively recent practice of directing all examination and inspection findings--what we call "matters requiring attention" (MRAs) and "matters requiring immediate attention" (MRIAs)--to the board as well as to management.5The practice resulted in boards of directors reviewing and signing off on management's compliance with every MRA and MRIA. When we began that practice in 2013, our intention was to ensure that directors were in a position to hold management accountable in addressing risk management shortcomings. By 2014, we realized that the practice was "almost surely distracting from strategic and risk-related analyses and oversight by boards".6For perspective, a large banking firm may have one hundred or more MRAs outstanding at a given time, many of which are at a level of granularity that is more appropriate for management to remediate, with board oversight. The new proposed framework is designed to make boards more effective in holding management accountable in these efforts. While we have proposed that most MRAs and MRIAs be addressed in the first instance to management and not to the board, the board would continue to receive MRAs where board practices are at issue or where management has failed to promptly and adequately take the required actions. The board would also continue to receive copies of examination and inspection reports, including formal communications with the institution. In the parlance of the proposed guidance I just outlined, we fully expect the board to actively manage the information flow related to MRAs and to hold management accountable for remediating them. In doing so, a board may choose to track progress and closure of MRAs through an appropriate board committee, rather than getting into the granular detail on every individual MRA. ConclusionWe need financial institutions that are strong enough to support economic growth by lending through the economic cycle. To achieve that goal, we need strong and effective boards of directors at firms of all sizes. A strong and effective board provides strategic leadership and oversight, which is much more challenging and important than checking off lists of assigned tasks. I look forward to our continuing dialogue on this subject today and in the months to come, and reviewing carefully the comments received on the proposal. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. Jerome H. Powell, "Relationship Between Regulation and Economic Growth," (testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, June 22, 2017).Return to text 3. See SR letter 04-18, "Bank Holding Company Rating System," 69 FR 70444 (December 6, 2004).Return to text 4. Seewww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20170803a.htm.Return to text 5. MRIAs are matters of significant importance and urgency that the Federal Reserve requires banking organizations to address immediately and include, for example, matters that have the potential to pose significant risk to the safety and soundness of the banking organization, matters that represent significant noncompliance with applicable laws or regulations and repeat criticisms that have escalated in importance due to insufficient attention or inaction by the banking organization. MRAs, on the other hand, are matters that are important and that the Federal Reserve is expecting a banking organization to address over a reasonable period of time, but when the timing need not be "immediate." See Supervision and Regulation (SR) letter 13-13/Consumer Affairs letter 13-10, "Supervisory Considerations for the Communication of Supervisory Findings."Return to text 6. See "Corporate Governance and Prudential Regulation," remarks by Governor Daniel J. Tarullo at Association of American Law Schools Midyear Meeting, June 9, 2014. ("We should probably be somewhat more selective in creating the regulatory checklist for board compliance and regular consideration. One example, drawn from Federal Reserve practice, is the recent supervisory guidance requiring that every notice of a "Matter Requiring Attention" (MRA) issued by supervisors must be reviewed, and compliance signed off, by the board of directors. There are some MRAs that clearly should come to the board's attention, but the failure to discriminate among them is almost surely distracting from strategic and risk-related analyses and oversight by boards.")Return to text