The Federal Reserve Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Friday extended until February 17, 2017, the comment period for the advance notice of proposed rulemaking on enhanced cyber risk management standards for large and interconnected entities under their supervision and those entities' service providers. The agencies are considering five categories of cyber standards: cyber risk governance; cyber risk management; internal dependency management; external dependency management; and incident response, cyber resilience, and situational awareness. Originally, comments were due by January 17, 2017. The agencies extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Federal Registernotice
The federal banking agencies today fined ServiceLink Holdings, LLC (ServiceLink Holdings), $65 million for improper actions by its predecessor company, Lender Processing Services, Inc. (LPS), which resulted in significant deficiencies in the foreclosure-related services that LPS provided to mortgage servicers. The penalty assessed by the three federal banking agencies--the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency--against ServiceLink Holdings satisfied the document review provision of the previous enforcement action. The agencies continue to monitor the company's compliance with other provisions of that order. The fine will be remitted to the U.S. Treasury.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by First Citizens BancShares, Inc., Raleigh, North Carolina, to increase its ownership interest from 4.9 percent to 9.0 percent of the voting shares of Carter Bank & Trust, Martinsville, Virginia. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that it has finalized a rule adjusting the Board's maximum civil money penalties, as required by law. In November 2015, a law was passed that requires all federal agencies to adjust their maximum civil money penalty limits annually for inflation, rather than every four years as previously required. The maximum civil money penalty limits depend on several factors, including the severity and type of violation. Additionally, the law dictates the annual adjustment formula for federal agencies. A civil money penalty is a fine imposed by a federal agency as a result of misconduct. The final rule increases the maximum civil money penalty limits for 2017 by the amount required by law. The new penalty amounts apply as of January 15, 2017. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday finalized a rule adjusting its capital plan and stress testing rules, effective for the 2017 cycle. The final rule removes large and noncomplex firms from the qualitative assessment of the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), reducing significant burden on these firms and focusing the qualitative review in CCAR on the largest, most complex financial institutions. As stated by the Board last year, the Board intended to finalize these changes for the 2017 CCAR cycle, which began on January 1, 2017. The scenarios and instructions for the 2017 CCAR cycle will be released by the end of this week. CCAR evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of large financial institutions through quantitative and qualitative assessments. The qualitative assessment evaluates the strength of each firm's capital planning process. The quantitative assessment evaluates each's firm's capital adequacy, based on hypothetical scenarios of severe economic and financial market stress. Previously, the Board could object to the annual capital plan of any CCAR firm, based on the quantitative or qualitative findings of the exercise. The final rule removes the qualitative assessment of CCAR for large and noncomplex firms, which are bank holding companies and U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banking organizations with total consolidated assets between $50 billion and $250 billion, total nonbank assets of less than $75 billion, and that are not identified as global systemically important banks (GSIBs). Under the proposal, for a firm to be removed from the qualitative portion of CCAR, it also needed to have less than $10 billion in foreign exposure. However, in response to comments, the final rule eliminates that criterion. Large and noncomplex firms will still be required to meet their capital requirements under stress as part of CCAR's quantitative assessment and will be subject to regular supervisory assessments that examine their capital planning processes. The largest and most complex bank holding companies will remain subject to the qualitative and quantitative components of CCAR, and the Board may continue to object to their capital plans on both qualitative and quantitative grounds. Like the proposed rule, the final rule reduces certain reporting requirements for large and noncomplex firms. Additionally, the final rule decreases the amount of additional capital a firm can distribute to shareholders in connection with a capital plan that has not been objected to without seeking prior approval from the Board. Previously, a firm could distribute up to an additional 1 percent of its tier 1 capital beyond the amount in its capital plan. The final rule reduces that amount to 0.25 percent of tier 1 capital. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced preliminary results indicating that the Reserve Banks provided for payments of approximately $92.0 billion of their estimated 2016 net income to the U.S. Treasury. The 2016 audited Reserve Bank financial statements are expected to be published in March and may include adjustments to these preliminary unaudited results. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2016 estimated net income of $92.7 billion represents a decrease of $7.6 billion from 2015, primarily attributable to a decrease of $2.5 billion in interest income from changes as a result of the composition of securities held in the Federal Reserve System Open Market Account (SOMA) and an increase of $5.2 billion in interest expense associated with reserve balances held by depository institutions. Net income for 2016 was derived primarily from $111.1 billion in interest income from securities held in the SOMA (U.S. Treasury securities, federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgage-backed securities, and GSE debt securities). Operating expenses of the Reserve Banks, net of amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Treasury and other entities for services the Reserve Banks provided as fiscal agents, totaled $4.0 billion in 2016. In addition, the Reserve Banks were assessed $700.7 million for the costs related to producing, issuing, and retiring currency, $709.0 million for Board expenditures, and $596.2 million to fund the operations of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The Reserve Banks had interest expense of $12.0 billion associated with reserve balances and term deposits held by depository institutions, and incurred interest expense of $1.1 billion on securities sold under agreement to repurchase. Additional earnings were derived from income from services of $435 million. Statutory dividends paid to member banks totaled $711.5 million in 2016. No income was transferred to surplus due to the $10 billion aggregate surplus limitation as required by the Federal Reserve Act. The attached chart illustrates the amount the Reserve Banks distributed to the U.S. Treasury from 2007 through 2016 (estimated). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First Personal Financial Corp., Orland Park, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated November 1, 2010Terminated January 5, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North CarolinaConsent Order to Cease and Desist dated January 25, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: NongHyup Bank, Seoul, Korea and NongHyup Bank, New York Branch, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated January 17, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced it is permanently prohibiting Jason Katz, a former foreign exchange (FX) trader at Barclays PLC and later at BNP Paribas SA, from participating in the banking industry, because of his actions to manipulate FX prices. Through the use of electronic chat rooms, Katz coordinated his trading with competitors, engaged competitors to agree on the FX prices quoted to customers, disclosed confidential customer information to traders at other institutions, and engaged in other unsafe or unsound practices. Katz is separately pleading guilty to violating federal antitrust laws. Katz agreed to enter into a consent order with the Federal Reserve Board barring him from the banking industry and requiring him to cooperate in the Federal Reserve Board's ongoing investigation. The enforcement action against Katz follows the Board's May 2015 enforcement action against Barclays for unsafe and unsound practices related to compliance and control failures concerning practices in the FX markets. That action required Barclays to pay $342 million in penalties for control deficiencies related to FX trading. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Board Votes
The Federal Reserve on Thursday released aprogress reportoutlining accomplishments and anticipated steps moving forward related to the ongoing initiatives to enhance the speed, efficiency and security of the U.S. payment system. The progress report highlights collaborative efforts in support of five strategies outlined in the January 2015 publication of Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System. These strategies are being pursued by the Federal Reserve in conjunction with various private sector businesses, financial services providers, financial institutions, consumer groups and government agencies. "The Fed's priority is to advance improvements that are in the public interest so that consumers and businesses alike have access to efficient, real-time and highly secure payments in the United States," said Esther George, president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, who is leading the payment system improvement initiatives on behalf of the Federal Reserve "Through a number of collaborative efforts, the industry is making real progress on all fronts and we're expecting to achieve a number of significant milestones in 2017." The progress report details the work-to-date of two payments industry task forces created as part of the effort--one devoted to faster payments and the other to a more secure payment system. Among its accomplishments, the Faster Payments Task Force: The Faster Payments Task Force is working to complete its assessment of solution proposals and to develop recommendations and next steps for implementing safe, ubiquitous, faster payments in the United States, which it plans to publish in mid-2017, in the second part of its final report. In 2016, the Federal Reserve's Secure Payments Task Force: In 2017, the Secure Payments Task Force plans to outline ways for the industry to improve payment identity management practices, provide guidance on standardizing definitions of fraud and risk data so it can be easily interpreted and acted upon, and publish a framework for protecting sensitive payment data. "Protecting payment systems and transactions has become a critical function for central banks, financial institutions and technology providers as sophisticated cyber threats have increased in size and scale throughout the world," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Jerome H. Powell, who co-chairs the initiative's oversight committee. Other important accomplishments included in the progress report stem from efforts to enhance payment system efficiency through work on standards, directories and business-to-business payment improvements. In addition, joint efforts with industry participants have accelerated plans to implement the financial messaging standard ISO 20022 for U.S. wire transfer systems and widespread same-day ACH (automated clearing house) settlement.
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the 77th Annual Meeting of the American Finance Association, Chicago, Illinois Thank you for this invitation to discuss low interest rates and the financial system. The framing of this topic raises the question of whether low interest rates have somehow undermined the stability and functioning of the financial system. I will argue that "low for long" interest rates have supported slow but steady progress to full employment and stable prices, which has in turn supported financial stability. Indeed, by many measures the U.S. financial system is much stronger than before the crisis. That said, there are difficult tradeoffs to manage. Over time, low rates can put pressure on the business models of financial institutions. And low rates can lead to excessive leverage and broadly unsustainable asset prices--things that we watch carefully for and do not observe at this point. I will begin by focusing briefly on the macroeconomic effects of low interest rates. I will then turn to the condition of the financial system--in particular, its interplay with low rates. As always, the views I express here today are mine alone. Highly Accommodative Monetary PolicyThe financial crisis and the Great Recession posed the most significant macroeconomic challenges for the United States in a half-century, leaving behind high unemployment and below-target inflation and calling for highly accommodative monetary policies. Isolating the effects of these policies is challenging, but studies generally show that they lowered rates across the curve and moved other asset prices as well.1It is even more challenging to evaluate their effects on aggregate demand. Low rates and higher asset prices should support household and business spending and investment through various channels. But low rates may also perversely induce some households to save more in order to meet their targets for retirement. And low rates have clearly not produced a boom in corporate investment, although standard accelerator models suggest that investment has largely been consistent with the weak pace of economic growth. Nonetheless, there is good reason to think that low rates have provided significant support for demand, and my view is that they have done so.2As you can see inslide 1, we are now close to meeting our dual mandate--a reasonable summary statistic for the effects of policy. While growth has been frustratingly slow, employment gains have been solid. This is a reasonably good outcome considering the scope of the crisis and the relatively poorer performance of other major advanced economies. Other Factors Are Holding Down RatesThere are also many factors other than monetary policy that are holding down long-term interest rates. Long-term nominal and real rates have been declining for over 30 years. Thenext slidedecomposes long-term nominal yields into expected future short-term real rates, expected future inflation, and a term premium. These estimates are based on one of the Board's workhorse term structure models.3All three components have contributed to the downward trend in long-term nominal yields. The downward trend in nominal term premiums likely reflects both lower inflation risk and the fact that, with inflation expectations anchored, nominal bonds have become an increasingly good hedge against market risk. That has made bonds a more attractive investment and reduced the term premium.4As shown in thenext slide, a regression of the 10-year term premium on measures of 10-year inflation expectations and a rolling beta of Treasury returns with respect to equity returns (to proxy for the hedging value of bonds) shows that these two factors can account for a large part of the decline in the term premium. Regulations now require many financial institutions to hold more safe, high-quality liquid assets, which likely has pushed down term premiums further. Global factors may have put downward pressure on term premiums because of anxiety about the foreign outlook, which may have increased demand for U.S. assets, or because low rates abroad have depressed U.S. term premiums through a global portfolio balance channel.5And real rates are quite low globally, reflecting the step-down of productivity growth over the past 10 years as well as shifts in savings and investment demand due to demographic change.6 The Core of the Financial System Is Much StrongerBefore turning to the interplay between low rates and the financial system, I will simply point out that both improved risk management at the largest, most systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) and stronger regulation have made the core of the system much stronger and more resilient than before the crisis.7The SIFIs have more stable funding, hold much more capital and liquidity, are more conscious of their risks, and are far more resolvable should they fail. Many aspects of our financial market infrastructure, including the triparty repurchase agreement (or repo) market, central counterparties (CCPs), and money market funds are more robust as well. Low Rates Can Mean TradeoffsSo far, I have argued that low rates have supported aggregate demand and brought us very close to full employment and 2 percent inflation; that forces other than monetary policy have been pushing rates lower for more than 30 years; and that the core of the financial system is now much stronger and more resilient than before the crisis. All of that said, I would also agree that monetary policy may sometimes face tradeoffs between macroeconomic objectives and financial stability. Indeed, it would be a divine coincidence if that were not the case. There are times when all of these objectives are aligned. For example, the Fed's initial unconventional policies supported both market functioning and aggregate demand. More broadly, post-crisis monetary policy supported asset values, reduced interest payments, and increased both employment and income. All of these effects are likely to have limited defaults and foreclosures and bolstered the balance sheets of households, businesses, and financial intermediaries, leaving the system more robust. But at times there will be tradeoffs. Low-for-long interest rates can have adverse effects on financial institutions and markets through a number of plausible channels, as listed on thenext slide.8After all, low interest rates are intended to encourage some risk-taking.9The question is whether low rates have encouraged excessive risk-taking through the buildup of leverage or unsustainably high asset prices or through misallocation of capital. That question is particularly important today. Historically, recessions often occurred when the Fed tightened to control inflation. More recently, with inflation under control, overheating has shown up in the form of financial excess. Core PCE inflation remained close to or below 2 percent during both the late-1990s stock market bubble and the mid-2000s housing bubble that led to the financial crisis. Real short- and long-term rates were relatively high in the late-1990s, so financial excess can also arise without a low-rate environment. Nonetheless, the current extended period of very low nominal rates calls for a high degree of vigilance against the buildup of risks to the stability of the financial system. If we look at the channels listed here, the picture is mixed, but the bottom line is that there has not been an excessive buildup of leverage, maturity transformation, or broadly unsustainable asset prices. Low long-term interest rates have weighed on profitability in the financial sector, although firms have so far coped with those pressures. As shown in thenext slide, net interest margins (NIMs) for most banks have held up surprisingly well. NIMs have moved down for the largest banks. Return on assets, shown to the right for both groups, has recovered but remains below pre-crisis levels.Life insurershave substantially underperformed the broader equity market since 2007, suggesting that investors see the low-rate environment as a drag on profitability for the industry. Even so, data on asset portfolios do not suggest that life insurers have increased risk-taking. The same is true for banks. Both the regulatory environment and banks' own attitudes toward risk following the financial crisis have helped ensure that the largest banks have not taken on excessive credit or duration risks relative to their capital cushions. Low rates have provided support for asset valuations--indeed, that is part of their design. But I do not see valuations as significantly out of line with historical experience. Equity prices have recently increased considerably, pushing the forward price-earnings ratio further above its historical median (slide). And equity premiums (right)--the expected return above the risk-free rate for taking equity risk-- have declined, but are not out of line with historical experience. In the nonfinancial sector, valuation pressures are most concerning when leverage is high, particularly in real estate markets. Residential real estate valuations have been in line with rents and household incomes in recent years, and the ratio of mortgage debt to income is well below its pre-crisis peak and still declining. In contrast, valuations in commercial real estate are high in some markets.10And in the nonfinancial corporate sector, gross leverage is high by historical standards. Low long-term rates have encouraged corporate debt issuance at the same time that some regulations, particularly the Volcker rule, have discouraged banks from holding and making markets in such debt. High-risk corporate debt (the sum of high-yield bonds and leveraged loans) grew rapidly in 2013 and 2014 (slide), although growth has declined sharply since then.11However, firms also are holding high levels of liquid assets, so net leverage is not elevated. Firms have also lengthened their maturity profiles, and interest coverage ratios are high. As thenext slideshows, Greenwood and Hanson's measure of the share of high-yield debt in overall issuance is at a relatively low level.12And this debt is now held more by unlevered investors. Overall, I do not see leveraged finance markets as posing undue financial stability risks. And if risk-taking does not threaten financial stability, it is not the Fed's job to stop people from losing (or making) money. As I said, a mixed picture. Low interest rates have encouraged risk-taking and higher leverage in some sectors and have weighed on profitability in others, but the areas where there are signs of excess are isolated. ConclusionTo sum up, low interest rates have supported economic activity and gradually brought us back to full employment and 2 percent inflation. Better regulation and risk management have so far minimized the tradeoffs between our macroeconomic objectives, on the one hand, and financial stability, on the other. Still, a period of low rates for a long time could present significant challenges for monetary policy. It could also put pressure on the business models of some financial institutions. Ultimately, the only way to get sustainably higher interest rates is to improve the broader environment for growth, by adopting policies designed to increase productivity and potential output over the long term--policies that are mainly outside the scope of our work at the Federal Reserve.13 ReferencesAdrian, Tobias, and Nellie Liang (2014). "Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial Stability," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 690. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September (revised December 2016). Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca (2013). "Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 60 (October), pp. 771-88. D'Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei (forthcoming). "Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation-Protected Security Prices,"Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Luc Laeven, and Gustavo A. Suarez (forthcoming). "Bank Leverage and Monetary Policy's Risk-Taking Channel: Evidence from the United States,"Journal of Finance. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-80. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajšek (2012). "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,"American Economic Review, vol. 102 (June), pp. 1692-1720. Greenwood, Robin, and Samuel G. Hanson (2013). "Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns,"Review of Financial Studies, vol. 26 (June), pp. 1483-1525. Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi (2013). "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 128 (November), pp. 1687-1726. Powell, Jerome H. (2015). "Financial Institutions, Financial Markets, and Financial Stability," speech delivered at the Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, February 18. Powell, Jerome H. (2016). "Recent Economic Developments and Longer-Run Challenges," speech delivered at The Economic Club of Indiana, Indianapolis, November 29. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2015). "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate," Bank of England Staff Working Paper 571. London: Bank of England, December. Williams, John C. (2014). "Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice (PDF)," Hutchins Center Working Papers. Washington: Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, January. Yellen, Janet L. (2016). "The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26. 1.Williams (2014) compiles the results from a range of studies estimating the effect of the Federal Reserve's large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs). While the exact numbers vary and are subject to substantial uncertainty, typical estimates of the effect of a representative $600 billion in Treasury LSAPs on long-term yields are in the range of 15 to 25 basis points, an effect roughly equivalent to that of three or four rate cuts of 25 basis points.Return to text 2.See Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015). The most interest rate sensitive sectors of the economy, such as consumer durables and residential investment, have exhibited higher growth than other sectors since the second round of quantitative easing by the Federal Reserve. And, for example, Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) conclude that the decline in house prices during the recession had a substantial effect on consumption; by the same argument, if low rates supported house prices, then they would have supported consumer spending as well.Return to text 3.See D'Amico, Kim, and Wei (forthcoming).Return to text 4.The changing risk profile of nominal Treasury bonds can be seen from its capital asset pricing model (or CAPM) beta, a measure of the co-movement between returns on longer-term Treasury securities and the equity market.Figure A.1shows that the estimated rolling beta of the 10-year Treasury note with respect to the S&P 500 turned from positive to negative around 2000, indicating that Treasury bonds are now likely to act as a safe haven, performing well when equity markets do poorly.Return to text 5.Figure A.2shows the response in daily changes in 10-year U.S. Treasury yields to changes in 10-year German bund yields around European Central Bank (ECB) monetary policy decisions since 2010. The significantly positive regression coefficient is evidence of substantial spillovers from ECB monetary policy to U.S. long-term yields.Return to text 6.See Rachel and Smith (2015) and Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016).Return to text 7.See Powell (2015).Return to text 8.See Adrian and Liang (2014).Return to text 9.See Dell'Ariccia, Laeven, and Suarez (forthcoming), which finds evidence for a risk-taking channel of monetary policy based on supervisory ratings of U.S. bank loans. Bekaert, Hoerova, and Lo Duca (2013) find that accommodative monetary policy shocks lead to a decline in the VIX, a measure of implied volatility, by lowering both expected volatility and the risk premium.Return to text 10.The Federal Reserve, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, issued guidance regarding prudent management of risks from loans secured by commercial real estate (CRE) in late 2015. Of course, the annual stress tests typically feature significant declines in CRE prices, suggesting that banks are capitalized against a deterioration in this sector.Return to text 11.Gilchrist and Zakrajšek's (2012) measure of the corporate bond spread, shown inFigure A.3, is at about its average level, but their estimate of the risk premium in this market is low, so, by this measure, at least pricing is rich.Return to text 12.See Greenwood and Hanson (2013).Return to text 13.See Powell (2016) and Yellen (2016).Return to text Accessible version of figures
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from November 14 through December 14, 2016. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 13-14, 2016. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 13-14, 2016:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Governor Lael Brainard At the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Watch There are many sources of uncertainty affecting the trajectory of the U.S. economy and, by extension, the appropriate path of monetary policy. In particular, there has been speculation about significant changes to fiscal policy of late, although the magnitude, composition, and timing of any fiscal changes are as yet unknown and will depend on the incoming Administration and the new Congress as well as the vicissitudes of the budgeting process. Even once any changes are enacted, uncertainty will remain about their effects on the overall economy. It thus seems possible that monetary policy could be affected for some time by uncertainty surrounding fiscal policy and its effects on the economy.1 Macroeconomic Outcomes Are Difficult to PredictBefore I turn to the possible effects of fiscal policy, it is helpful to remind ourselves of the immense uncertainty that accompanies any attempt to forecast future economic developments. Many possible surprises could materially affect the future path of the U.S. economy, such as shocks to the price of oil, the foreign economic outlook, the rate of productivity growth, the sentiment of households and businesses, financial stability, and fiscal policy, to name a few. The resulting uncertainty makes it difficult to predict the future path of activity, unemployment, and inflation. By statute, the Federal Reserve is mandated to conduct monetary policy to promote the long run goals of maximum employment and stable prices. In today's framework, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has defined stable prices to mean 2 percent inflation. The FOMC adjusts the stance of policy in light of incoming economic information and its implications for the outlook. Uncertainty about future employment and inflation naturally translates into uncertainty about the path of future monetary policy. One useful measure of uncertainty is the magnitude of forecast errors, or the extent to which macroeconomic outcomes have differed from professional economic forecasters' expectations.2Over the past 30 years, outside forecasts of the unemployment rate four quarters ahead have missed the actual unemployment rate by more than 3/4 percentage point in either direction one-third of the time. Since notable departures from forecast values of unemployment and inflation occur with some frequency, it should not be surprising that the associated forecasts of interest rates have a similar track record. One-third of the time over the past 30 years, outside forecasts of the level of short-term interest rates four quarters ahead have been above or below the actual level by more than 1-1/4 percentage points.3Thus, it is important to keep in mind that all macro forecasts and projections of monetary policy are subject to considerable uncertainty, as they are based on information at a point in time, and actual developments could well evolve much differently. Fiscal Policy ConsiderationsAmong the many factors that can affect the aggregate economy and, by extension, monetary policy, a possible shift in fiscal policy has attracted the attention of both economic forecasters and financial markets of late. Among forecasters surveyed by Blue Chip Economic Indicators, for 2017, 44 percent indicated that they had raised their forecast of inflation and 47 percent had raised their forecast of gross domestic product (GDP) growth because of the recent U.S. election results, although on average forecast changes were modest. Markets have also reacted, and many have interpreted these changes as reflecting expectations of more expansionary fiscal policy in the coming years than previously expected. In thinking about fiscal scenarios, forecasters have several historical episodes on which to draw. For example, following the 1980 elections, tax cuts were enacted, and defense spending rose. Federal fiscal deficits, adjusted for the cyclical state of the economy, increased by roughly 2-1/2 percentage points of GDP from the period before the elections to six years following the elections, federal debt held by the public increased from about 25 percent of GDP to nearly 40 percent, and the current account deficit widened.4Following the 2000 elections, similar fiscal changes resulted in an increase in the fiscal deficit of close to 3 percentage points of GDP over the first six years of the new Administration on a cyclically adjusted basis. Of course, there are important differences in today's conditions relative to these historical settings, including the economy's cyclical position, current and projected levels of indebtedness, the relative position of the global economy, and monetary policy settings. As of today, there is substantial uncertainty about the magnitude, timing, and composition of any possible change in the stance of fiscal policy. It is instructive to contemplate the important dimensions along which fiscal policy and its effects might vary as well as their implications for monetary policy. In addition to the critical size and timing issues, there are four key dimensions: (1) the composition of policy changes and their relative effects on aggregate demand and aggregate supply, (2) the distance of the economy from full employment and 2 percent inflation, (3) the divergence in the cyclical position of the U.S. economy relative to foreign economies, and (4) the amount of fiscal policy space. Different types of policies can generate very different economic responses and have implications regarding both the amount of aggregate economic stimulus per fiscal dollar and also whether the effect is predominantly to raise aggregate demand or also to expand the supply potential of the economy. Generally, fiscal stimulus that expands spending and investment directly or is targeted to households and businesses that have the greatest propensity to spend rather than save can be expected to generate the largest response in aggregate demand.5 Focusing first on policies that affect only aggregate demand, temporary demand-based fiscal expansions can speed recovery when the economy is some distance from full employment and target inflation, particularly if conventional monetary policy is constrained by the effective lower bound. But when the economy is either close to or at full employment and inflation is converging to or at its target, additional fiscal demand will more likely result in inflationary pressures. Thus, fiscal expansions that affect only aggregate demand and are enacted when the economy is near full employment and 2 percent inflation are relatively less likely to sustainably boost economic activity and relatively more likely to be accompanied by increases in interest rates. The current nominal neutral interest rate--or the level of the federal funds rate that is consistent with output growing close to its potential rate with full employment and stable inflation--is quite low at present.6Adjusting for inflation, most estimates of the neutral rate are currently close to zero, compared with about 2 percent for the quarter-century prior to the financial crisis.7A low neutral rate implies that conventional monetary policy has less room to respond when the economy is hit by adverse shocks. With conventional monetary policy constrained in the vicinity of the lower bound, it is more difficult for the economy to recover and for inflation to move back to target.8 Policies that persistently raise aggregate demand alone can lift the neutral rate, but that may come at substantial cost. Because these policies do not affect the economy's long-term growth potential but do result in persistent fiscal deficits, they can lead to substantial increases in the debt-to-GDP ratio. The greater space for monetary policy to respond to adverse shocks provided by a higher neutral rate comes at the expense of reducing the space for fiscal policy to stabilize the economy in the event of future adverse shocks. In this regard, it matters importantly whether increased fiscal deficits predominantly raise aggregate demand or also expand the supply potential of the economy more broadly. Changes in fiscal policy that raise the level or growth rate of productivity or that induce greater labor force participation and higher levels of skill and education in the workforce raise the nation's productive capacity and result in more sustainable increases in output and living standards. The higher productivity and workforce levels engendered by these policies would likely increase investment opportunities and raise expectations of future income growth, sustainably boosting the levels of investment and consumption and, as a result, the longer-run neutral rate. Such policies are more likely to be sustainable because the boost to GDP that they provide continues to accumulate over time, limiting increases in the debt-to-GDP ratio and preserving fiscal space. In addition, the effects of fiscal policy depend importantly on the relative strength of the broader global economy. In recent years, major foreign economies have been contending with a deficiency of domestic demand. At a time when the U.S. economy has made important progress on employment and inflation, in both Europe and Japan output or inflation, or both, remain well below desired levels. As a result, forecasters expect short-term yields in these economies to remain near zero for years to come. Moreover, growth in many emerging market economies, including importantly China, has slowed in recent years, and financial conditions in some emerging economies appear fragile. Against the backdrop of deficient demand abroad, if more expansionary fiscal policy here at home raises expectations of a growing divergence between the United States and other economies, upward pressure on the exchange rate will likely result, as we have seen recently with the renewed increase in the dollar. The result could be cross-border spillovers from the increase in U.S. domestic demand, reducing the effect on U.S. real activity and inflation and potentially contributing to external imbalances. In the past few years, the effect on the dollar of increased expectations about divergence between U.S. and foreign interest rates has been especially strong.9The nearly 20 percent increase in the dollar over 2014 and 2015 coincided with falling real exports and import prices in the United States. Net exports subtracted more than 1/2 percentage point from GDP growth in both 2014 and 2015, while falling non-oil import prices likely subtracted 1/4 percentage point from the annual rate of core inflation.10 Finally, the trajectory of federal government debt relative to GDP and views regarding the debt's sustainability can also influence the effects of fiscal policy. Research suggests that increases in the debt-to-GDP ratio cause long-term interest rates to rise.11All else being equal, higher long-term interest rates reduce spending on interest-sensitive goods, possibly damping the direct effect of fiscal expansion on economic activity. The experiences of foreign economies suggest that the relationship between debt and interest rates is complex and likely non-linear, with the influence of greater debt on interest rates rising as the debt-to-GDP ratio reaches a trajectory at which investors have concerns about its sustainability. In this light, it is notable that the current ratio of debt to GDP is substantially larger than it was preceding the fiscal expansions in the early 1980s and early 2000s and has already been projected to increase further based on demographic trends.12 Guideposts for Monetary PolicyWith any future change in fiscal policy quite uncertain, monetary policy will be guided by the current state of the economy, the underlying momentum of economic activity and inflation, the level of the neutral rate, and the balance of macroeconomic risks. In recent quarters, the data have painted a consistent picture of a resilient and gently improving U.S. economy. Following a year in which the unemployment rate remained stable while labor force participation increased, we have seen in the past quarter a further reduction in the unemployment rate. Overall, I am pleased to see that full employment is within reach and could prove sustainable with the right policy mix. Payroll growth has remained sufficiently strong to continue eroding slack, increasingly along margins that had previously seemed stubbornly elevated--including the long-term unemployed, those on the margins of the labor force, and most recently those who are working part time but would prefer full-time work. Moreover, wage growth appears to be picking up gradually in a further sign that slack continues to be taken up. While the employment cost index was up only 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in September, still well below pre-crisis norms, average hourly earnings have accelerated more noticeably, increasing by 2.9 percent on a 12-month basis in December. Even so, some slack may remain: Relative to pre-crisis levels, the prime-age employment-to-population ratio remains low and the share of employees working part time for economic reasons remains elevated. Following a long period of stubbornly below-target inflation, I have been encouraged by recent signs of gradual progress toward our inflation target, as the effects of earlier dollar appreciation and oil price declines appear to be waning. Over the 12-month period ending in November, core personal consumption expenditures prices increased 1.6 percent. This rate is still noticeably below 2 percent, but it is up 1/4 percentage point from a year earlier.13In addition, market measures of longer-run inflation compensation based on nominal and inflation-protected Treasury yields have improved about 40 basis points relative to the very depressed levels prevailing through much of the preceding year, although, even with this increase, inflation compensation remains well below historical norms. In sum, the economy continues to make gradual progress toward our goals. How quickly remaining slack is utilized and inflation returns to target depends on future growth in activity. Real GDP appears to have increased by about 2 percent last year, the same pace as the year before. Consumer spending has been relatively robust--rising at more than a 3 percent annual rate in the three months ending in November--but business fixed investment has been sluggish--increasing only 1-1/2 percent in the third quarter--and has changed little, on net, since the middle of 2014. However, measures of both business and consumer sentiment have moved up noticeably recently, potentially signaling a stronger pace of investment and consumer spending in the months ahead. Meanwhile, changes in financial conditions have been somewhat offsetting since early November, with equity prices rising 7 percent, while 10-year Treasury yields are up 50 basis points, and the dollar is up 4 percent. Based on recent spending indicators, we might expect progress to continue to be gradual and steady. However, if fiscal policy changes lead to a more rapid elimination of slack, policy adjustment would, all else being equal, likely be more rapid than otherwise, with the conditions the FOMC has set for a cessation of reinvestments of principal payments on existing securities holdings being met sooner than they otherwise would have been. When the economy eventually returns to full employment and 2 percent inflation, the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will depend on the level of the neutral rate, which is expected to move up only modestly in coming years from its current low level.14On the one hand, if progress on employment and inflation occurs more quickly than I anticipate, foreign risks recede, and the fiscal impulse rises, the neutral rate might rise more rapidly. On the other hand, global economic conditions may somewhat offset the effect on the neutral rate. With weak domestic demand abroad, further tightening of financial conditions through the exchange rate could lead to some spillover of demand across borders, weighing on U.S. exports, investment, and manufacturing activity and potentially constraining the neutral rate. Finally, how strongly monetary policy should react to signs of further progress toward full employment and 2 percent inflation naturally depends on the balance of risks. Given the recent improvement in unemployment and inflation and the possibility of increased fiscal stimulus, risks in the domestic economy are closer to being balanced than they have been for some time. While great uncertainty regarding the path of fiscal policy and its economic effects will remain for some time, with the economy getting closer to full employment, the prospect of a material increase in fiscal stimulus over a sustained period could reasonably be expected to shift somewhat greater probability toward stronger inflation outcomes. But risks outside our borders are still tilted to the downside. In particular, despite recent progress, policy space in Japan and the euro area is perceived to be very limited, and the euro-area banking sector remains fragile. Downside risks are also present in emerging market economies such as China, which faces capital outflow pressures and high and rapidly growing corporate indebtedness. With a low U.S. neutral rate, conventional U.S. monetary policy does not have as much room as it did prior to the financial crisis to counter adverse shocks from abroad. ConclusionSpeculation has increased of late about the possibility of a significant fiscal policy shift on the horizon. The effects will depend on the timing, magnitude, and composition of the policies, the extent to which the policies boost aggregate supply relative to aggregate demand, the cyclical position of the economy, and the responses of the dollar and longer-term interest rates, given the fragile global economic environment and projections for the U.S. debt-to-GDP ratio. Against this uncertain backdrop, monetary policy will continue to be guided by actual and expected progress toward our goals, the level of the neutral rate, and the balance of risks. A gradual approach will remain appropriate as long as inflationary pressures remain muted, the economy remains short of our objectives, the neutral rate remains low, and downside risks from abroad remain, although this will depend on the fiscal trajectory, as it evolves, and its uncertain effects on the economy and financial markets. ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014). "Updated Historical Forecast Errors (4/9/2014) (PDF)," memorandum. Bongard, Michelle, and Benjamin K. Johannsen (2016). "The Neutral Rate and the Summary of Economic Projections," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 28. Brainard, Lael (2015). "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. Congressional Budget Office (2015).Estimated Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output in 2014 (PDF).Washington: CBO, February. Congressional Budget Office (2016).The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2016 to 2026 (PDF).Washington: CBO. Cucuru, Stephanie (forthcoming). "The Sensitivity of the USD Exchange Rate to Changes in Monetary Policy Expectations," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Engen, Eric, and R. Glenn Hubbard (2005). "Federal Government Debt and Interest Rates," in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, Volume 19. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 83-160. Evans, Charles, Jonas Fisher, Francois Gourio, and Spencer Krane (2015). "Risk Management for Monetary Policy Near the Zero Lower Bound (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 141-214. Gruber, Joseph, Andrew McCallum, and Robert Vigfusson (2016). "The Dollar in the U.S. International Transactions (USIT) Model," IFPD Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 8. Laubach, Thomas (2009). "New Evidence on the Interest Rate Effects of Budget Deficits and Debt,"Journal of the European Economic Association,vol. 7 (June), pp. 858-85. Laubach, Thomas, and John Williams (2015). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF),"Working Paper Series 2015-16. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October. Reifschneider, David, and Peter Tulip (2007). "Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecast Errors (PDF)," Financial and Economic Discussion Series 2007-60. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. I am grateful to Eric Engen, Andrew Figura, and Glenn Follette for their assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The analysis of forecast errors presented here uses data from 1986 to 2015 from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's November Survey of Professional Forecasters. For more on the construction of forecast errors, see Reifschneider and Tulip (2007) and Board of Governors (2014).Return to text 3. The short-term interest rate used in this analysis is the three-month Treasury bill rate.Return to text 4. Annual data on cyclically adjusted federal deficits can be found in table C-2 of the Congressional Budget Office (2016, p. 126) reportThe Budget and Economic Outlook: 2016 to 2026.The analysis takes a three-year centered moving average of the CBO's estimates of the cyclically adjusted federal deficit, which can be quite volatile from year to year, and compares this average for the year prior to the new Administration to the average in the sixth year of the new Administration.Return to text 5. For example, see table 3 in the Congressional Budget Office (2015, p. 6) reportEstimated Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output in 2014.Return to text 6. See Brainard (2015).Return to text 7. See Laubach and Williams (2015). For the most up-to-date Laubach-Williams estimates of the natural rate of interest, a concept closely related to the neutral rate, seewww.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/Laubach_Williams_updated_estimates.xlsx.Also see the most recent median estimates of the real neutral rate from theNew York Federal Reserve Bank's Survey of Primary Dealers (https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_survey_questions.html) and Survey of Market Participants (https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/survey_market_participants.html). For estimates of the real neutral rate based on the Summary of Economic Projections, see Bongard and Johannsen (2016).Return to text 8. For an analysis of macroeconomic behavior near the zero lower bound, see Evans and others (2015).Return to text 9. See Cucuru (forthcoming).Return to text 10. For estimates of the effect of exchange rate changes on inflation and GDP growth, see Gruber, McCallum, and Vigfusson (2016).Return to text 11. See Laubach (2009) and Engen and Hubbard (2005).Return to text 12. I am referring to the level of federal government debt held by the public.Return to text 13. Oil is an important input in the production and distribution of many consumer goods and services, such as transportation services. As a result, when the price of oil drops, production costs decline, and at least some of these cost reductions are typically passed on to consumers over time in the form of lower prices.Return to text 14. Of course, the neutral rate is not directly observable, and we will only be able to gauge its level by observing the momentum of economic activity and the extent to which the momentum is putting upward pressure on resource constraints and inflation. The median FOMC participant's estimate of the longer-run real neutral rate in the December 2016 Summary of Economic Projections was 1 percent. The median projected level of the real neutral rate at the end of 2019 in the December 2016 New York Federal Reserve Bank's Survey of Market Participants was also 1 percent.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California Watch live It is a privilege to be here today to discuss how the Federal Reserve is conducting monetary policy to promote a healthy economy. For more than 30 years, research from the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research has informed economic policy, and events such as this one have helped foster debate among scholars, policymakers, business leaders, and members of the public on critical economic issues facing our nation. I appreciate the opportunity to participate. In my remarks today, I will review the considerable progress the economy has made toward the attainment of the two objectives that the Congress has assigned to the Federal Reserve--maximum employment and price stability. The upshot is that labor utilization is close to its estimated longer-run normal level, and we are closing in on our 2 percent inflation objective. I will then discuss the prospects for adjusting monetary policy in the manner needed to sustain a strong job market while maintaining low and stable inflation. Determining how best to adjust the federal funds rate over time to achieve these objectives will not be easy. For that reason, in the balance of my remarks, I will discuss some considerations that will help inform our decisions, including the guidance provided by simple policy rules. I will conclude by touching on some key uncertainties affecting the outlook. Progress to DateMy assessment of progress to date will begin with the labor market. Since the depths of the Great Recession, about 15-1/2 million jobs have been added to the U.S. economy, on net. In 2016, job gains averaged about 180,000 per month, well above the pace of 75,000 to 125,000 per month that is probably consistent with keeping the unemployment rate stable over the longer run.1The unemployment rate is now close to estimates of its longer-run normal level, and other measures of labor utilization have improved appreciably. As shown infigure 1, a broader measure of labor underutilization--the U-6 measure, which includes not only the unemployed but also people working part time who would like full-time employment and those who would like a job but are not actively looking--has retraced nearly all of the steep run-up that occurred as a result of the recession.2 Other indicators also support the view that the labor market has largely recovered from the severe downturn that occurred in the wake of the financial crisis. As illustrated by the red dashed line infigure 2, the quits rate--an indicator of workers' confidence about leaving an existing job to pursue new opportunities--is nearly back to its pre-recession level. And some indicators, such as small businesses' assessments of the difficulty of hiring, shown by the solid black line, as well as the average length of time it takes firms to fill vacancies and the job openings rate, even suggest that the labor market is a bit tighter than before the financial crisis. Of course, both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio are still much lower than they were a decade ago. But the cyclical element in these declines looks to have largely disappeared, and what is left seems to mostly reflect the aging of the population and other secular trends.3Based on this array of labor market indicators, I judge labor utilization to be reasonably close to its normal longer-run level while also recognizing that estimates of the sustainable levels of the unemployment rate and the employment-to-population ratio are inherently imprecise.4 In the coming months, I expect some further strengthening in labor market conditions as the economy continues to expand at a moderate pace--a view that is shared by most of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).5Overall economic growth has been driven by consumer spending, which has been bolstered by substantial gains in household income and wealth. Business investment, in contrast, has been soft. But recent readings on business sentiment and new orders for equipment are consistent with the view that capital spending will likely strengthen modestly this year; another positive factor is that oil drilling, which plummeted after oil prices fell sharply back in late 2014, has recently begun to pick up. As we look to broader trends, gross domestic product (GDP) growth has been restrained in recent years by a variety of forces depressing both supply and demand, including slow labor force and productivity growth, weak growth abroad, and lingering headwinds from the financial crisis. Although I am cautiously optimistic that some of these forces will abate over time, I anticipate that they will continue to restrain overall growth over the medium term, likely holding down the level of interest rates consistent with stable labor market conditions. Turning to inflation, we are now much closer to the FOMC's 2 percent objective than we were just a year ago. Prices, as measured by the index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), rose nearly 1-1/2 percent in the 12 months ending in November, as compared with only 1/2 percent during 2015. Moreover, core PCE inflation--a better indicator of the underlying inflation trend--picked up 1/4 percentage point, to a little over 1-1/2 percent. This rise in inflation was anticipated and largely represents a fading of the effects of earlier declines in energy prices and the prices of non-energy imports. In addition, slack in labor and product markets is no longer placing downward pressure on inflation, in contrast to the situation only a few years ago when the unemployment rate was still quite elevated. Barring future major swings in oil prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar, inflation is likely to move up to 2 percent over the next couple of years, aided by a strong labor market. In light of the progress that has been achieved toward our employment and inflation objectives and the Committee's assessment of the outlook, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate at its December meeting by 25 basis points, to between 50 and 75 basis points. The Committee judges, however, that the stance of monetary policy remains modestly accommodative, and so policy should support some further strengthening in labor market conditions and thus the return of inflation to our 2 percent goal. Maintaining Sustainable Growth in a Context of Price StabilityWith the unemployment rate near its longer-run normal level and likely to move a bit lower this year, a natural question is whether monetary policy has fallen behind the curve. The short answer, I believe, is "no." It is true that many employers report difficulties in finding qualified workers in selected occupations, and that more workers are comfortable quitting jobs to take or look for better positions. But this is to be expected in a healthy labor market and not evidence that the economy as a whole is experiencing a serious worker shortage. The recent behavior of wages provides additional evidence pertaining to the degree of labor market slack. As shown infigure 3, increases in average hourly earnings, the employment cost index, and compensation per hour remain subdued, picking up only modestly of late.6Again, these data do not seem consistent with an overheated labor market. Moreover, signs of overheating in the broader economy are also scarce. For example, capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector is well below its historical average. Most importantly, although core inflation is rising gradually from a low level, this increase mainly reflects the waning of the effects of earlier movements in the dollar, not upward pressure from resource utilization. Of course, even if the labor market is not overheated currently, one might worry that overheating could rapidly emerge as labor market conditions strengthen further, causing inflation to surge. I consider this unlikely for several reasons. First, the pace of labor market improvement has slowed appreciably in the past couple of years: For example, average payroll gains moderated from 250,000 per month in 2014 to 180,000 last year, and the unemployment rate declined 1-3/4 percentage points cumulatively over 2014 and 2015, compared with only 1/4 percentage point last year.7Second, economic growth more broadly seems unlikely to pick up markedly in the near term given the ongoing restraint from weak foreign demand and other factors that I mentioned, particularly in an environment in which monetary policy is likely to become gradually less accommodative. Finally,figure 4illustrates the relationship over the past several decades between labor market pressures and core inflation. Note that during periods when the unemployment rate fell below the Congressional Budget Office's estimate of its normal long-run level, shown by the yellow shaded regions, core inflation, the solid red line, rose little, if at all. This stability is especially marked since inflation expectations became anchored during the mid-to-late 1990s.8 That said, I think that allowing the economy to run markedly and persistently "hot" would be risky and unwise. Waiting too long to remove accommodation could cause inflation expectations to begin ratcheting up, driving actual inflation higher and making it harder to control. The combination of persistently low interest rates and strong labor market conditions could lead to undesirable increases in leverage and other financial imbalances, although such risks would likely take time to emerge.9Finally, waiting too long to tighten policy could require the FOMC to eventually raise interest rates rapidly, which could risk disrupting financial markets and pushing the economy into recession. For these reasons, I consider it prudent to adjust the stance of monetary policy gradually over time--a strategy that should improve the prospects that the economy will achieve sustainable growth with the labor market operating at full employment and inflation running at about 2 percent. Evaluating the Appropriate Stance of Monetary PolicyAchieving these goals could prove challenging, however, even if the economy manages to avoid being hit with adverse shocks over the next few years. To sustain a strong job market with inflation at our 2 percent objective, policy must gradually shift toward a neutral stance, where "neutral" is defined as a level of the federal funds rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary when the economy is operating near its potential. But what level of the federal funds rate is neutral at the present time? How quickly should the funds rate target move up to this neutral level? And how will the neutral rate itself evolve over time? To help answer such questions, the FOMC considers a voluminous amount of information concerning many factors, including financial markets and credit availability, labor market conditions and overall economic activity, wages and prices, and foreign economic developments. The FOMC also evaluates forecasts from a range of economic models, assessments of key risks to the outlook, and detailed analyses of how different monetary policy strategies would affect projected outcomes and risks. Among the strategies routinely considered by the Committee are the recommendations of a variety of simple monetary policy rules. In addition, FOMC participants prepare individual projections on a quarterly basis of the most likely paths of key macroeconomic variables under theirownassessments of "appropriate monetary policy," together with their estimates of the normal longer-run values of the federal funds rate, the unemployment rate, and GDP growth.10Armed with this wealth of information, the Committee as a whole then decides on the most appropriate policy action to adopt at each of its meetings. Such a comprehensive, forward-looking approach to policymaking is similar to that employed at other central banks.11 Figure 5shows a plot of FOMC participants' most recent assessments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate through 2019. The black solid lines show the median value of the federal funds rate at the end of each year. To understand the considerations that likely underlay these judgments, I will contrast participants' assessments with the recommendations of some simple policy rules commonly used to help gauge the appropriate stance of policy. As I noted, the Committee routinely reviews policy recommendations from a variety of benchmark rules, and I believe that their prescriptions can be helpful in providing broad guidance about how the federal funds rate should be adjusted over time in response to movements in real activity and inflation. That said, I will emphasize that the use and interpretation of such prescriptions require careful judgments about both the measurement of the inputs to these rules and the implications of the many considerations the rules do not take into account. Consider first the well-known Taylor rule, which embodies key principles of good monetary policy. The rule calls for systematic adjustments in the federal funds rate relative to its expectedlonger-runneutral level in response to movements in inflation and the output gap, defined as the percentage difference between actual output and the economy's productive potential.12To implement the rule, one must decide on the appropriate definition and measurement of its inputs. Should inflation be defined using the latest noisy quarterly reading on headline PCE inflation or a measure intended to smooth through transitory price movements? What technique should be used to approximate the output gap, given that different approaches often yield materially different estimates? And what assumption should be made about the neutral value of the federal funds rate in the longer run? The Taylor rule is often implemented by assuming that the real, or inflation-adjusted, value of the longer-run neutral interest rate--which I will call R* for convenience--is equal to 2 percent, roughly the average historical value of the real federal funds rate prior to the financial crisis. For inflation, we can use the 12-month change in core PCE prices, a measure of the current underlying rate of inflation. And the output gap can be reasonably approximated as twice the difference between the estimated longer-run normal rate of unemployment and the actual unemployment rate.13The dashed red line in figure 5 shows the resulting recommendations for policy over the medium term, based on the medians of the unemployment and inflation projections submitted by FOMC participants in December but assuming--in contrast to the median of participants' December assessments--that R* equals 2 percent. As figure 5 shows, this version of the Taylor rule prescribes a much higher path for the federal funds rate than the median of participants' assessments of appropriate policy. One important factor explaining this divergence is the FOMC's growing recognition that the longer-run neutral level of the real federal funds rate has likely declined below 2 percent, contrary to what is often assumed in implementations of the Taylor rule. As illustrated by the left-hand panel offigure 6, since 2000, both FOMC participants and respondents to the Blue Chip survey have markedly reduced their projections of the level of real short-term interest rates expected to prevail in the longer run. Presumably, these revisions were made in response to accumulating evidence that lower real interest rates than those seen on average in the past would be needed permanently to keep the economy operating on an even keel. In addition, the right-hand panel shows considerable changes over time in estimates of the normal longer-run rate of unemployment, with corresponding implications for estimates of the economy's productive potential and the output gap. Such revisions would imply shifts in the level of the Taylor rule's prescriptions by as much as 1-1/4 percentage points, holding other factors constant.14Clearly, sensible implementation of policy rules requires adjustments to take such changes into account, as a failure to do so would result in poor monetary policy decisions and poor economic outcomes.15 Figure 7illustrates the policy implications of alternative revised assessments of the longer-run neutral real rate of interest. As before, the short-dashed red line shows the prescriptions of the Taylor rule using the standard 2 percent assumption for R*. The solid red line, however, shows the rule's prescriptions with R* equal to 1 percent, the median of the longer-run projections of the real federal funds rate made by FOMC participants last month. This adjustment appreciably reduces the rule's policy prescriptions. Even with this downward adjustment of the longer-run neutral rate, however, the Taylor rule's prescriptions are arguably still too restrictive. The problem is that the rule ignores the likelihood that it will likely take many years before the forces now restraining the economy dissipate to the degree envisioned in participants' estimates of the longer-run normal level of the real federal funds rate. Because overall growth has been quite moderate over the past few years despite an accommodative stance of monetary policy, some recent estimates of thecurrentvalue of the neutral real federal funds rate stand close to zero.16If the neutral rate were to remain quite low over the medium term, as would be expected if the global economy does not materially strengthen and productivity growth remains anemic, then the appropriate setting for R* in the Taylor rule would arguably be zero, yielding a yet lower path for the federal funds rate, as shown by the long-dashed red line. These considerations illustrate that there is now no obvious "right" setting for R* because we do not know how rapidly the forces restraining the economy will abate, and there is a significant risk that it could be very slow. When the economy has been hit with unusually persistent shocks, the Taylor rule, for this reason, provides a problematic benchmark. Simple policy rules also typically neglect information with potentially important implications for the economic outlook because they focus only on where conditions are today. For example, simple rules ignore such important factors as fiscal policy, trends affecting global growth, structural developments influencing the supply of credit, and overall financial conditions. One special factor at the moment pertains to the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. The downward pressure on longer-term interest rates that the Fed's asset holdings exert is expected to diminish over time--a development that amounts to a "passive" removal of monetary policy accommodation. Other things being equal, this factor argues for a more gradual approach to raising short-term rates.17 Lastly, simple rules ignore important risk-management considerations that have influenced the Committee's decisions in recent years. With the federal funds rate still near zero, the Committee recognizes that, should the economy unexpectedly weaken in the next year or two, there would likely be only limited scope to respond by lowering short-term rates. But if the economy instead began to overheat, threatening to push inflation to an undesirably high level, the FOMC would have ample scope to respond through tighter monetary policy. Such asymmetric risks arguably call for a more gradual path of rate increases than indicated by the prescriptions of a simple policy rule. The academic literature on policy rules has studied many alternatives to the Taylor rule, and the FOMC regularly reviews a number of them.18These rules embed differing but valuable perspectives, and there is no consensus among central bankers or academics about the relative utility of various rules. One such alternative is the "balanced approach" rule, illustrated by the purple short-dashed line infigure 8. This rule differs from the Taylor rule by being twice as responsive to movements in resource utilization.19The prescriptions of the balanced-approach rule in this figure, as with the solid red Taylor-rule plot, assume that R* equals 1 percent, consistent with the medians of the latest FOMC projections. Because participants on average anticipate a modest undershooting of the unemployment rate below its estimated longer-run level, the balanced-approach rule calls for a slightly faster pace of tightening over the next several years than the Taylor rule. Figure 8 also reports results for a "change" rule, shown as the green long-dashed line. As its name implies, this rule does not prescribe a particular level of the federal funds rate at a given time but rather how the existing rate should change from quarter to quarter based on two gaps--the difference between inflation and its desired level as well as the difference between the unemployment rate and its longer-run normal level.20In contrast to the other two rules, the change rule does not take a stand on the value of the longer-run neutral level of the real federal funds rate, thus avoiding a potential source of error. Instead, it moves interest rates up and down until both gaps close, an approach that in theory enables it to perform well when the true value of R* is unknown. Because both gaps are relatively modest at the moment and are projected to remain so, the change rule calls for fairly gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy over the next few years given the current outlook. The FOMC, for reasons that I have discussed, does not base its decisions on the prescriptions of any specific policy rule. Nevertheless, the three benchmarks I have described--the Taylor rule, the balanced-approach rule, and the change rule, appropriately calibrated--have historically provided useful guidance about appropriate adjustments in the general direction of monetary policy over time. This guidance is illustrated byfigure 9, which compares the path of the federal funds rate since 2000 with the prescriptions of the three rules, based on the actual rates of inflation and unemployment observed at each point in time, along with contemporaneous Blue Chip projections of the longer-run unemployment rate and R*. As the figure shows, the rules clearly signaled that a major reduction in the federal funds rate was appropriate in 2008 given the marked deterioration in economic conditions. In addition, all three rules signaled that monetary policy needed to provide more stimulus during the recession and the subsequent recovery than could be provided by keeping short-term interest rates near zero. For this reason, the Committee turned to asset purchases to help make up for the shortfall by putting additional downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. The FOMC also sought to compensate for its inability to push the federal funds rate below zero by indicating that the funds rate would need to stay unusually low for longer than would otherwise be expected and simple policy rules would prescribe.21Under this "make up" strategy, and taking into account the reasons for deviating from the Taylor rule that I discussed a moment ago, the Committee kept the federal funds rate near zero for longer than two of the rules would have prescribed. But as labor market conditions continued to improve over time, the rising trajectories for the federal funds rate prescribed by all three rules signaled that the time was drawing near to begin gradually reducing monetary accommodation. Consistent with this advice, the FOMC suspended its asset purchase program in mid-2014 and began raising the federal funds rate in late 2015.22 To sum up, simple policy rules can serve as useful benchmarks to help assess how monetary policy should be adjusted over time. However, their prescriptions must be interpreted carefully, both because estimates of some of their key inputs can vary significantly and because the rules often do not take into account important considerations and information pertaining to the outlook. For these reasons, the rules should not be followed mechanically, since doing so could have adverse consequences for the economy. ConclusionMy remarks have focused on the policy trajectory that the Committee now considers likely to be appropriate to sustain the economic expansion while keeping inflation close to our 2 percent goal. In concluding, it is important to emphasize the considerable uncertainty that attaches to such assessments and the need to constantly update them. In particular, the path of the neutral federal funds rate, which plays an important role in determining the appropriate policy path, is highly uncertain. For example, productivity growth is a key determinant of the neutral rate, and while most forecasters expect productivity growth to pick up from its recent unusually slow pace, the timing of such a pickup is highly uncertain. Indeed, there is little consensus among researchers about the causes of the recent slowdown in productivity growth that has occurred both at home and abroad.23The strength of global growth will also have an important bearing on the neutral rate through both trade and financial channels, and here, too, the scope for surprises is considerable. Finally, I would mention the potential for changes in fiscal policy to affect the economic outlook and the appropriate policy path. At this point, however, the size, timing, and composition of such changes remain uncertain.24However, as this discussion highlights, the course of monetary policy over the next few years will depend on many different factors, of which fiscal policy is just one. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 197-255. Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee (2014).The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies.New York: W.W. Norton. Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2016). "Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward,"American Economic Review, vol. 106 (May), pp. 203-07. --------- (forthcoming). "Where Has All the Skewness Gone? The Decline of High-Growth (Young) Firms in the U.S.,"European EconomicReview. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Fernald, John, and Bing Wang (2015). "The Recent Rise and Fall of Rapid Productivity Growth (PDF)," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February 9. Golden, Lonnie (2016).Still Falling Short on Hours and Pay: Part-Time Work Becoming the New Normal (PDF),Economic Policy Institute. Washington: EPI, December. Gordon, Robert J. (2016).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2016). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-073. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Ihrig, Jane, Elizabeth Klee, Canlin Li, Brett Schulte, and Min Wei (2012). "Expectations about the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and the Term Structure of Interest Rates (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-57. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Li, Canlin, and Min Wei (2013). "Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 9 (March), pp. 3-39. Nechio, Fernanda, and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2016). "Has the Fed Fallen behind the Curve This Year? (PDF)" FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-33. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November 7. Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (4), 936-66. Svensson, Lars E.O. (2005). "Monetary Policy with Judgment: Forecast Targeting,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 1 (May), pp. 1-54. Taylor, John B. (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 39, pp. 195-214. --------- (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41. Taylor, John B., and John C. Williams (2010). "Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics,vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 829-59. Werning, Ivan (2012). "Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy (PDF)," working paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, March. Woodford, Michael (2012). "Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1, pp. 185-288. Yellen, Janet (2016). "The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26. 1.The sustainable longer-run pace of payroll employment growth depends on a number of a factors, such as the growth rate of the working-age population, trend movements in labor force participation, and the prevalence of self-employment and multiple job holdings, so it cannot be predicted with precision.Return to text 2.The normal level of the U-6 measure may now be somewhat higher than it was prior to the financial crisis because of a trend toward greater reliance on part-time workers in many sectors. See Golden (2016).Return to text 3.See Aaronson and others (2014).Return to text 4.In addition, a persistently strong labor market could potentially lead some firms to rely less on part-time workers, or might encourage some people to rejoin the labor force who would otherwise sit on the sidelines. However, evidence on these sorts of endogenous supply-side effects is rather limited, as I noted in a recent speech (see Yellen, 2016).Return to text 5.A summary of the projections submitted by Committee participants for the December 2016 FOMC meeting can be found atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20161214.htm.Return to text 6.An exception to this pattern is the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker (WGT), which does show a noticeable acceleration in hourly wages as self-reported in the Current Population Survey. Like average hourly earnings, the WGT excludes benefits costs and so is less comprehensive than the ECI or business-sector compensation per hour (CPH). In addition, the WGT is based on a smaller sample than the measures shown in Figure 3 and it only covers a sub-set of the workforce--specifically, employed individuals who were also employed a year ago, and whose earnings are less than $150,000 per year. Finally, because average hourly earnings and business-sector CPH are measured as total wages divided by total hours, an increase in wages for high earners has a larger effect in those measures than a similarly proportioned increase for lower-wage workers, and this is not so for the WGT.Return to text 7.Many other labor market indicators also improved more slowly in 2016 relative to the pace seen in the prior two years, including the U-6 measure of labor utilization, the rates of job openings, hiring and quits, survey readings on net hiring plans and the difficulty of filling vacancies, and the average duration of unemployment. A notable exception to this general pattern is the labor force participation rate, which declined fairly steadily from 2007 through 2015 but then flattened out last year despite continuing downward pressure from the aging of the population and other factors. However, improvements in labor market conditions along this dimension arguably reflect an increase in potential output, and so they are probably not a source of inflationary pressures.Return to text 8.During the late 1960s through the 1970s, however, inflation did rise noticeably whenever the unemployment rate moved below its longer-run normal level, primarily because the Federal Reserve did not adequately check persistent movements in inflation by tightening monetary policy, thereby allowing inflation expectations to drift. This experience illustrates the importance of keeping inflation expectations anchored through systematic policy actions.Return to text 9.The Federal Reserve closely monitors a wide range of indicators of financial stability, which currently provide little evidence of significant increases in leverage or rapid growth in credit. However, some asset valuations, particularly for commercial real estate, are high. With regard to the linkages between labor utilization and financial stability, my interpretation of the historical evidence is that undesirable increases in leverage or the emergence of asset bubbles are not the inevitable consequence of tight labor markets per se.Return to text 10.These individual projections are published quarterly in theSummary of Economic Projectionsthat accompanies the release of the minutes from the March, June, September and December meetings of the FOMC.Return to text 11.The FOMC's procedures share many of the features of forecast targeting, an approach to monetary policymaking advocated by Svensson (2005), among others. However, while the Committee publishes participants' projections--including policy paths--in the SEP, it does not publish a "consensus" forecast, in contrast to some other central banks.Return to text 12.Formally, the rule originally published by Taylor (1993) can be written as $$ R_{t} = R^{*} + \pi_{t} + 0.5\left(\pi_{t}-\pi^{*}\right) + 0.5Y_{t}$$, where $$ R$$ is the federal funds rate, $$ R^{*}$$ is the level of the real federal funds rate that on average is expected to be consistent with sustaining maximum employment and stable inflation in the longer run, $$ \pi$$ is current inflation, $$ \pi^{*}$$ is the central bank's inflation objective (2 percent, in the case of the Federal Reserve), and $$ Y$$ is the output gap, defined as the difference between the current level of real GDP and what it would be if the economy was operating at maximum employment. Importantly, the rule embodies three key principles that central banks take into account when setting policy to stabilize inflation and the overall economy. First, a persistent movement in inflation requires a more than one-for-one response of the policy rate to stabilize inflation. Second, monetary policy should raise real interest rates above their normal longer-run level whenever inflation is above its desired level and resource utilization is higher than normal, and lower them when the opposite holds. (Note that implementing this latter principle requires estimates of both the economy's productive potential and the longer-run level of the real policy rate that would be consistent with keeping the economy operating on an even keel.) And, finally, policymakers should respond in a systematic manner to changes in economic conditions in order to help financial market participants and others better understand how policy is likely to respond over time to current and future events, thereby influencing expectations in a way that promotes economic stability.Return to text 13.Historically, percent deviations of real GDP from statistical estimates of its long-run trend are roughly twice as large on average as deviations of the unemployment rate from its estimated long-run value--a relationship known as Okun's law.Return to text 14.Additional complications arise in the measurement of economic slack because the difference between the unemployment rate and its estimated normal level is not always a complete gauge of overall labor utilization. Such was the case in the current expansion until recently because the labor force participation rate was unusually low and involuntary part-time employment unusually high, given the level of the unemployment rate. Moreover, although movements in resource utilization for the economy as a whole are generally proportional to changes in labor utilization, the relationship varies somewhat over time. Partly as a result, contemporaneous estimates of the output gap can deviate markedly from subsequent estimates for the same period calculated using revised data. For example, in early 2010, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimated that the output gap in 2009:Q2 was negative 7.7 percent, but the CBO has since lowered it to negative 6.3 percent--a large revision with important implications for assessments of the deviation of actual policy from the prescriptions of simple policy rules.Return to text 15.If monetary policy persistently followed the prescriptions of a Taylor rule that assumed that R* was 2 percent when it was in fact 1 percent, then employment would run persistently below its maximum sustainable level and inflation would run persistently below 2 percent. Under such circumstances, inflation expectations might begin to fall, creating a risk of deflation.Return to text 16.For example, see Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2016).Return to text 17.Based on estimates generated using the term-structure model developed by Li and Wei (2013) and the procedure discussed in Ihrig and others (2012) and extended by Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015), the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities continue to put considerable downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. However, this pressure is estimated to be gradually easing as the average maturity of the portfolio declines and the end-date for reinvestment draws closer. Over the course of 2017, this easing could increase the yield on the 10-year Treasury note by about 15 basis points, all else being equal. Based on the estimated co-movement of short-term and long-term interest rates, such a change in longer-term yields would be similar to that which, on average, has historically accompanied two 25 basis point hikes in the federal funds rate.Return to text 18.For example, prescriptions from seven different rules, calculated using forecasts of economic activity and inflation from different sources, are regularly posted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland athttps://www.clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators-and-data/simple-monetary-policy-rules.aspx.Return to text 19.The balanced-approach rule is $$ R_{t} = R^{*} + \pi_{t} + 0.5\left(\pi_{t}-\pi^{*}\right) + 1.0Y_{t}$$, where all terms are defined as in the Taylor rule. (See note 12 for details.) As noted by Taylor (1999), research suggests that this rule may do a better job than the Taylor rule in stabilizing real activity and inflation.Return to text 20.The change rule is $$ R_{t} = R_{t-1} + 1.2\left(\pi_{t}-2\right) + 2.0\left(U^{*}-U_{t}\right)$$, where $$ R$$ is the federal funds rate, $$ \pi$$ is four-quarter rate of core PCE inflation, $$ U^{*}$$ is the projected longer-run unemployment rate, and $$ U$$ is the current unemployment rate. In computing the prescriptions for the change rule shown in figure 8, the midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate prior to the December 2016 FOMC meeting, 0.38 percent, is used as the starting point. For a discussion of this rule (and of policy rules in general), see Taylor and Williams (2010).Return to text 21.For example, the FOMC advised in the statement released after its December 2012 meeting that conditions would likely warrant keeping the funds rate near zero at least as long as the unemployment rate was above 6-1/2 percent--a threshold that was not passed until mid-2014. As discussed by Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Werning (2012), and Woodford (2012), this type of lower-for-longer guidance can help compensate for the constraint on monetary policy created by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015) find that the FOMC's guidance, together with its asset purchases, provided significant economic stimulus in the years following the financial crisis.Return to text 22.For a closer look at the FOMC's policy actions in 2016 and their relationship to previous forecasts and subsequent changes in economic conditions, see Nechio and Rudebusch (2016).Return to text 23.To sample some of the different views about the sources of the recent slowdown in productivity growth and the prospects for faster growth in the future, see Gordon (2016), Fernald and Wang (2015), Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014), and Decker and others (2016, forthcoming).Return to text 24.A related source of uncertainty is the limited ability of economists to predict the effects of specific changes in tax policy or government spending on the overall economy. In part, this uncertainty arises because the net effect depends to some extent on the response of financial markets; in addition, estimates vary considerably on the economic effects of changes in marginal tax rates or different types of spending.Return to text Accessible Version of Figures
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Commonwealth Club, San Francisco, California Watch on-demand:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ktBgb4xHKGY Audio Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to join all of you at the Commonwealth Club today, not the least because the club and the Federal Reserve have a few things in common. Both organizations, as it happens, have a board of governors and a chair. And both the club's and the Fed's histories extend back more than a century. The club, as many here know, was founded in 1903, and the Federal Reserve a decade later. Perhaps because of our shared origins in the Progressive Era, a period of reform in American life, we hold certain values in common. According to your website, the club is nonpartisan and dedicated to the impartial discussion of issues important to your community and the nation. At the Fed, we too are nonpartisan and focused squarely on the public interest. We strive to conduct our deliberations impartially and base our decisions on factual evidence and objective analysis. This afternoon I will discuss some challenges we've faced in our recent deliberations and may face in the next few years. Perhaps, though, it is best to start by stepping back and asking, what is--and, importantly, what isn't--our job as the nation's central bank? And how do we go about trying to accomplish it? The Federal Reserve has an array of responsibilities. I'll mention our principal duties and then focus on one--monetary policy, the responsibility that gets the most public attention. In addition to monetary policy, we--in collaboration with other regulatory agencies at both the federal and state levels--oversee banks and some other financial institutions to ensure they operate safely and soundly and treat their customers fairly. We monitor the financial system as a whole and promote its stability to help avoid financial crises that could choke off credit to consumers and businesses. We also reliably and safely process trillions of dollars of payments for the nation's banks and the federal government and ensure that banks have an ample supply of currency and coin to meet the demands of their depositors. And we work with communities, nonprofit organizations, lenders, educators, and others to encourage financial and economic literacy, promote equal access to credit, and advance economic and community development. But, as I noted, monetary policy draws the most headlines. What is monetary policy, exactly? Simply put, it consists of central bank actions aimed at influencing interest rates and financial conditions more generally. Its purpose is to help foster a healthy economy. But monetary policy cannot, by itself, create a healthy economy. It cannot, for instance, educate young people, generate technological breakthroughs, make workers and businesses more productive, or address the root causes of inequality. Fundamentally, the energy, ingenuity, and know-how of American workers and entrepreneurs, along with our natural resources, create prosperity. Regulatory policy and fiscal policy--the decisions by the Administration and the Congress about how much and how the government spends, taxes, and borrows--can influence these more fundamental economic pillars. I've said what monetary policy cannot do. But what can it do? It can lean against damaging fluctuations in the economy. Nearly 40 years ago, the Congress set two main guideposts for that task--maximum employment and price stability. We refer to these assigned goals as our dual mandate. When the economy is weak and unemployment is on the rise, we encourage spending and investing by pushing short-term interest rates lower. As you may know, the interest rate that we target is the federal funds rate, the rate banks charge each other for overnight loans. Lowering short-term rates in turn puts downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, making credit more affordable--for families, for instance, to buy a house or for businesses to expand. Similarly, when the economy is threatening to push inflation too high down the road, we increase interest rates to keep the economy on a sustainable path and lean against its tendency to boom and then bust. But what exactly do the terms "maximum employment" and "price stability" mean? Does maximum employment mean that every single person who wants a job has a job? No. There are always a certain number of people who are temporarily between jobs after having recently lost a job or having left one voluntarily to pursue better opportunities. Others may have just graduated and have started looking for a job or have decided to return to working--for instance, when their child starts school. This so-called frictional unemployment is evident even in the healthiest of economies. Then there is structural unemployment--a difficult problem both for the people affected and for policymakers trying to address it. Sometimes people are ready and willing to work, but their skills, perhaps because of technological advances, are not a good fit for the jobs that are available. Or suitable jobs may be available but are not close to where they and their families live. These are factors over which monetary policy has little influence. Other measures--such as job training and other workforce development programs--are better suited to address structural unemployment. After taking account of both frictional and structural unemployment, what unemployment rate is roughly equivalent to the maximum level of employment that can be sustained in the longer run? The rate can change over time as the economy evolves, but, for now, many economists, including my colleagues at the Fed and me, judge that it is around 4-3/4 percent. It's important to try to estimate the unemployment rate that is equivalent to maximum employment because persistently operating below it pushes inflation higher, which brings me to our price stability mandate. Does price stability mean having no inflation whatsoever? Again, the answer is no. By "price stability," we mean a level of inflation that is low and stable enough that it doesn't need to figure prominently into people's and businesses' economic decisions. Based on research and decades of experience, we define that level as 2 percent a year--an inflation objective similar to that adopted by most other major central banks.1Individual prices, of course, move up and down by more than 2 percent all the time. Such movements are essential to a well-functioning economy. They allow supply and demand to adjust for various goods and services. By "inflation," we mean price changes as a whole for all of the various goods and services that households consume. No one likes high inflation, and it is easy to understand why. Although wages and prices tend to move in tandem over long periods, inflation erodes household purchasing power if it is not matched with similar increases in wages, and it eats away the value of households' savings. So, then, why don't we and other central banks aim for zero inflation? There are several technical reasons, but a more fundamental reason is to create a buffer against the opposite of inflation--that is, deflation. Deflation is a general and persistent decline in the level of prices, a phenomenon Americans last experienced during the Great Depression of the 1930s and one that Japan has confronted for most of the past two decades. Deflation can feed on itself, leading to economic stagnation or worse. It puts pressure on employers to either cut wages or cut jobs. And it can be very hard on borrowers, who find themselves repaying their loans with dollars that are worth more than the dollars they originally borrowed. I am sure we all remember learning in school about farm families in the Great Depression who couldn't pay their mortgages and lost their homes and their livelihoods when crop prices fell persistently. Another important reason to maintain a modest inflation buffer is that too low inflation impairs the ability of monetary policy to counter economic downturns. When inflation is very low, interest rates tend to be very low also, even in good times. And when interest rates are generally very low, the Fed has only limited room to cut them to help the economy in bad times. In a nutshell, the Fed's goal is to promote financial conditions conducive to maximum employment and price stability. And I have offered broad-brush definitions of each of those objectives. So where is the economy now, in relationship to them? The short answer is, we think it's close. The economy has come a long way since the financial crisis. As you know, the crisis marked the start of a very deep recession. It destroyed nearly 9 million jobs, and it's been a long, slow slog to recover from it. Unemployment peaked at 10 percent late in 2009, a level unseen for more than 25 years, and didn't move below 8 percent for nearly three years. Falling home prices put millions of homeowners "underwater," meaning they owed more on their mortgages than their homes were worth. And the stock market plunged, slashing the value of 401(k) retirement nest eggs. The extraordinarily severe recession required an extraordinary response from monetary policy, both to support the job market and prevent deflation. We cut our short-term interest rate target to near zero at the end of 2008 and kept it there for seven years. To provide further support to American households and businesses, we pressed down on longer-term interest rates by purchasing large amounts of longer-term Treasury securities and government-guaranteed mortgage securities. And we communicated our intent to keep short-term interest rates low for a long time, thus increasing the downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, which are influenced by expectations about short-term rates. Now, it's fair to say, the economy is near maximum employment and inflation is moving toward our goal. The unemployment rate is less than 5 percent, roughly back to where it was before the recession. And, over the past seven years, the economy has added about 15-1/2 million net new jobs. Although inflation has been running below our 2 percent objective for quite some time, we have seen it start inching back toward 2 percent last year as the job market continued to improve and as the effects of a big drop in oil prices faded. Last month, at our most recent meeting, we took account of the considerable progress the economy has made by modestly increasing our short-term interest rate target by 1/4 percentage point to a range of 1/2 to 3/4 percent. It was the second such step--the first came a year earlier--and reflects our confidence the economy will continue to improve. Now, many of you would love to know exactly when the next rate increase is coming and how high rates will rise. The simple truth is, I can't tell you because it will depend on how the economy actually evolves over coming months. The economy is vast and vastly complex, and its path can take surprising twists and turns. What Icantell you is what we expect--along with a very large caveat that our interest rate expectations will change as our outlook for the economy changes. That said, as of last month, I and most of my colleagues--the other members of the Fed Board in Washington and the presidents of the 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks--were expecting to increase our federal funds rate target a few times a year until, by the end of 2019, it is close to our estimate of its longer-run neutral rate of 3 percent. The term "neutral rate" requires some explaining. It is the rate that, once the economy has reached our objectives, will keep the economy on an even keel. It is neither pressing on the gas pedal to make the car go faster nor easing off so much that the car slows down. Right now our foot is still pressing on the gas pedal, though, as I noted, we have eased back a bit. Our foot remains on the pedal in part because we want to make sure the economic expansion remains strong enough to withstand an unexpected shock, given that we don't have much room to cut interest rates. In addition, inflation is still running below our 2 percent objective, and, by some measures, there may still be some room for progress in the job market. For instance, wage growth has only recently begun to pick up and remains fairly low. A broader measure of unemployment isn't quite back to its pre-recession level. It includes people who would like a job but have been too discouraged to look for one and people who are working part time but would rather work full time. Nevertheless, as the economy approaches our objectives, it makes sense to gradually reduce the level of monetary policy support. Changes in monetary policy take time to work their way into the economy. Waiting too long to begin moving toward the neutral rate could risk a nasty surprise down the road--either too much inflation, financial instability, or both. In that scenario, we could be forced to raise interest rates rapidly, which in turn could push the economy into a new recession. The factors I have just discussed are the usual sort that central bankers consider as economies move through a recovery. But a longer-term trend--slow productivity growth--helps explain why we don't think dramatic interest rate increases are required to move our federal funds rate target back to neutral. Labor productivity--that is, the output of goods and services per hour of work--has increased by only about 1/2 percent a year, on average, over the past six years or so and only 1-1/4 percent a year over the past decade. That contrasts with the previous 30 years when productivity grew a bit more than 2 percent a year. This productivity slowdown matters enormously because Americans' standard of living depends on productivity growth. With productivity growth of 2 percent a year, the average standard of living will double roughly every 35 years. That means our children can reasonably hope to be better off economically than we are now. But productivity growth of 1 percent a year means the average standard of living will double only every 70 years. Economists do not fully understand the causes of the productivity slowdown. Some emphasize that technological progress and its diffusion throughout the economy seem to be slower over the past decade or so. Others look at college graduation rates, which have flattened out after rising rapidly in previous generations. And still others focus on a dramatic slowing in the creation of new businesses, which are often more innovative than established firms. While each of these factors has likely played a role in slowing productivity growth, the extent to which they will continue to do so is an open question.2 Why does slow productivity growth, if it persists, imply a lower neutral interest rate? First, it implies that the economy's usual rate of output growth, when employment is at its maximum and prices are stable, will be significantly slower than the post-World War II average. Slower economic growth, in turn, implies businesses will see less need to invest in expansion. And it implies families and individuals will feel the need to save more and spend less. Because interest rates are the mechanism that brings the supply of savings and the demand for investment funds into balance, more saving and less investment imply a lower neutral interest rate. Although we can't directly measure the neutral interest rate, it is something that can be estimated in retrospect. And, as we have increasingly realized, it has probably been trending down for a while now. Our current 3 percent estimate of the longer-run neutral rate, for instance, is a full percentage point lower than our estimate just three years ago. You might be thinking, what does this discussion of rather esoteric concepts such as the neutral rate mean to me? If you are a borrower, it means that, although the interest rates you pay on, say, your auto loan or mortgage or credit card likely will creep higher, they probably will not increase dramatically. Likewise, if you are a saver, the rates you earn could inch higher after a while, but probably not by a lot. For some years, I've heard from savers who want higher rates, and now I'm beginning to hear from borrowers who want lower rates. I can't emphasize strongly enough, though, that we are not trying to help one of those groups at the expense of the other. We're focused very much on that dual mandate I keep mentioning. At the end of the day, we all benefit from plentiful jobs and stable prices, whether we are savers or borrowers--and many of us, of course, are both. Economics and monetary policy are, at best, inexact sciences. Figuring out what the neutral interest rate is and setting the right path toward it is not like setting the thermostat in a house: You can't just set the temperature at 68 degrees and walk away. And, because changes in monetary policy affect the economy with long lags sometimes, we must base our decisions on our best forecasts of an uncertain future. Thus, we must continually reassess and adjust our policies based on what we learn. That point leads me to repeat what I said when I began: Like the Commonwealth Club, the Federal Reserve was created more than a century ago during an era of government reform to serve the public interest. The structure established for the Federal Reserve back then intentionally insulates us from short-term political pressures so we can focus on what's best for the American economy in the longer run. I promise you, with the sometimes imperfect information and evidence we have available, we will do just that by making the best decisions we can, as objectively as we can. Thank you. I welcome your questions. 1. Our objective is 2 percent inflation as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures published by the Commerce Department's Bureau of Economic Analysis.Return to text 2. Other factors depressing the neutral rate include housing construction and lackluster exports. Housing still hasn't fully recovered from the financial crisis, in part because mortgage-qualification standards remain tight. Weak growth abroad in Europe, China, and elsewhere, some of which is related to their own productivity challenges, has hurt sales of U.S. goods.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Conversation with the Chair: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting, Washington, D.C. Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Thank you, and thank you to all the educators who have come to the Board this evening or travelled to one of the Fed's regional Reserve Banks to watch and listen via the webcast. I am very much looking forward to hearing from you about teaching economics, and I am eager to respond to your questions. For that reason, and also because I expect that school starts very early tomorrow for many of you, I will try to keep my remarks brief. But I do have a message to impart about the work you do, which is vitally important not only to your students, but also, I believe, to the world they will soon inherit and even to the mission of the Federal Reserve. First and foremost, of course, like all teachers, you are helping prepare your students for successful and rewarding lives. The knowledge you impart and the intellect and talents you help develop are powerful tools your students can use to build those lives. Like some other subjects students encounter in school, economics teaches analytical and critical thinking skills that can aid in the development and success of anyone. Part of success for your students is economic success--as capable, creative, and productive members of the workforce and as consumers adept at managing their finances. Economics provides knowledge and skills of practical use in college and in the workplace, and it also provides skills to plan and make wise financial decisions, which are some of the most important and consequential that we face in life. Your students benefit very directly from this education, but so does everyone else in society. Everyone is engaged in and depends on the economy, and nothing is more critical to a healthy and growing economy than the capability, creativity, and productiveness of its workforce. Whenever I am asked what policies and initiatives could do the most to spur economic growth and raise living standards, improving education is at the top of my list. In addition to the role you play in preparing students for jobs and careers, you also help prepare them to be responsible consumers. The economy needs productive workers, and it also depends on consumers, whose individual spending decisions, as most of you surely have taught in class, collectively account for two-thirds of economic activity. Consumers skilled in managing their finances are better prepared to weather bad times, and stronger household finances overall can help sustain growth, stabilize the economy, and mitigate an economic downturn. Stabilizing the economy and mitigating a downturn, of course, also happen to be among the Federal Reserve's primary responsibilities. When successful, monetary policy can be a powerful and effective tool to these ends, but its capabilities are dwarfed by larger factors such as the productivity of the workforce and the strength of household finances. By educating students and directly supporting their contributions to the economy as producers and consumers, all teachers, especially teachers of economics, are effectively furthering our mission at the Fed, so let me offer my thanks for making that job a little easier. To help support your important work as teachers, the Federal Reserve Board and the 12 Reserve Banks conduct programs, organize events, and publish books and other materials to spread knowledge of the role of the Fed--and economics in general--and to promote financial literacy. Before I get to those events and programs, let me say a word about what is probably the most important pedagogical aid that the Fed produces--the 182-page book calledThe Federal Reserve System: Purposes and Functions.The 10th edition ofPurposes and Functions,published in October of last year, offers a detailed and comprehensive account of what, why, and how the Fed carries out its different responsibilities. I think it is a wonderful resource for teaching about the Fed, and copies are available via the Board's website.1 Each of the Fed's Reserve Banks has community outreach and educational initiatives in the areas of the country they serve, and the outreach to economics teachers is coordinated by the group chaired by Amy Hennessy, the Federal Reserve System Economic Education Group. At the Board, we have for some years operated a program called FedEd, which sends Fed employees into schools throughout the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area and sponsors events for students here at the Eccles Building.2FedEd's outreach to schools depends on the time and sacrifice of several dozen research assistants, who are typically recent college graduates who work for two or three years at the Board. Research assistants who volunteer for FedEd visit schools; help teach about the Fed, economics, and finance; and answer questions about work opportunities at the Board. The Federal Reserve is committed to promoting diversity in our ranks and in the economics profession, and FedEd has furthered these goals by making sure to include schools with significant numbers of minority students. This past school year, FedEd sent research assistants into nine different schools and FedEd volunteers have visited 38 different schools since 2012. FedEd was back in schools last fall, drawing from 48 research assistants who volunteered to participate. FedEd also sponsors several speaker events a year that bring students into this Board Room. Students recently heard a presentation from Scott Alvarez, who oversees the Board's Legal Division, and, in February, Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer will speak to students at another event. FedEd is overseen by two research assistants, Caroline Shinkle and Jamie Lenney, along with Karen Pence, who is an economist at the Board. All three are with us this evening and prepared to answer further questions about the program. Online resources for teachers can be found on the Board's website atfederalreserve.gov, and additional resources available throughout the System are atfederalreserveeducation.org. The websites include videos in which policymakers and the staff describe the Fed's functions. Also, the sites include historical materials and a wealth of information related to the financial crisis and the Fed's response. Let me leave it there, and again thank teachers for participating in this town hall, and offer my thanks, on behalf of the Board of Governors, for the valuable work you do every day. I would be very happy to respond to your questions. 1.Purposes and Functionsis available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/pf/pf.htm.Return to text 2.More information about FedEd is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/educational-tools/fed-education.htm.Return to text