Chair Janet L. Yellen At the 2017 Herbert Stein Memorial Lecture, National Economists Club, Washington, D.C. I am delighted to address the National Economists Club, and I am also honored on this occasion to be associated with Herb Stein, whose public service and scholarship--characterized by careful analysis, clear-eyed pragmatism, and sharp wit--exemplified the best in our profession. Herb was willing to consider new ideas and new approaches to government policy, and that openness fits with the subject of my remarks today. Namely, I will discuss the unconventional monetary policy tools used by the Federal Reserve since the start of the financial crisis and Great Recession and the role that those tools may play in addressing future economic challenges. Nearly 10 years ago, with our nation mired in its worst economic and financial crisis since the Great Depression, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) confronted a key challenge to the pursuit of its congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability: how to support a weakening U.S. economy once our main conventional policy tool, the federal funds rate, had been lowered to essentially zero. Addressing that problem eventually led to a second challenge: how to ensure that we could scale back monetary policy accommodation in an orderly fashion once it was no longer needed. Failure to meet either challenge would have significantly compromised our ability to foster maximum employment and price stability, leading to serious consequences for the livelihoods of millions of Americans. I will argue today that we have met the first challenge and have made good progress to date in meeting the second. Thanks in part to the monetary policy accommodation provided in the aftermath of the crisis--especially through enhanced forward rate guidance and large-scale asset purchases--the U.S. economy has made great strides. Indeed, with the economy now operating near maximum employment and inflation expected to rise to the FOMC's 2 percent objective over the next couple of years, the FOMC has been scaling back the accommodation provided in response to the Great Recession. In no small part because of our authority to pay interest on excess reserves, the process of removing policy accommodation is working well. After discussing a few issues related to our recent decision to start reducing the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, I will address a key question: What is the appropriate future role of the unconventional policy tools that we deployed to address the Great Recession? While I believe that influencing short-term interest rates should continue to be our primary monetary policy lever in normal times, our unconventional policy tools will likely be needed again should some future economic downturn drive short-term interest rates back to their effective lower bound. Indeed, empirical analysis suggests that the neutral federal funds rate--defined as the level of the federal funds rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary when the economy is operating near its potential--is much lower than in previous decades. Consequently, the probability that short-term interest rates may need to be reduced to their effective lower bound at some point is uncomfortably high, even in the absence of a major financial and economic crisis. I will return to the question about the future of our various policy tools, but first I would like to review our experience this decade, which I view as instructive for addressing that question. Meeting the Challenge of Providing Additional AccommodationA substantial body of evidence suggests that the U.S. economy is much stronger today than it would have been without the unconventional monetary policy tools deployed by the Federal Reserve in response to the Great Recession. Two key tools were large-scale asset purchases and forward guidance about our intentions for the future path of short-term interest rates. The rationale for those tools was straightforward: Given our inability to meaningfully lower short-term interest rates after they reached near-zero in late 2008, the FOMC used increasingly explicit forward rate guidance and asset purchases to apply downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, which were still well above zero. Longer-term interest rates reflect, in part, financial market participants' expectations of the future path of short-term interest rates. As a result, FOMC communications that affect those expectations--such as the enhanced forward rate guidance provided in our post-meeting statements in the aftermath of the Great Recession--can affect longer-term interest rates.1In addition, longer-term interest rates include a term premium, which is the compensation demanded by investors for bearing the interest rate risk associated with longer-term securities. When the Federal Reserve buys longer-term securities in the open market, the remaining stock of securities available for purchase by the public declines, which pushes the prices of those securities up and thus depresses their yields by lowering the term premiums embedded in those yields.2Several studies have found that our forward rate guidance and asset purchases did appreciably reduce longer-term interest rates.3 The FOMC's goal in lowering longer-term interest rates was to help the U.S. economy recover from the recession and stem the disinflationary forces that emerged from it. Some have suggested that the slow pace of the economic recovery proves that our unconventional policy tools were ineffective. However, one should recognize that the recovery could have been much slower in the absence of our unconventional tools. Indeed, the evidence strongly suggests that forward rate guidance and securities purchases--by substantially lowering borrowing costs for millions of American families and businesses and making overall financial conditions more accommodative--did help spur consumption and business spending, lower the unemployment rate, and stave off disinflationary pressures.4 Other central banks also deployed unconventional policy tools in the years that followed the financial crisis.5Evidence accumulated from their experience also supports the notion that these tools have helped stimulate economic activity in their countries after their short-term interest rates were lowered to near-zero--and, in some cases, even below zero.6 Meeting the Challenge of Scaling Back AccommodationBy 2014, the U.S. economy was making notable progress toward the FOMC's goals of maximum employment and price stability. The unemployment rate had dropped to 6 percent by midyear--well below its Great Recession peak of 10 percent--and other measures of labor market conditions were also showing significant improvement. In addition, inflation, as measured by the change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, had reached about 1-3/4 percent by mid-2014 after hovering around 1 percent in the fall of 2013. Reflecting that progress, the Federal Reserve's focus was shifting from providing additional monetary policy accommodation to scaling it back.7A key question for the FOMC then was how to reduce the degree of accommodation in the context of a vastly expanded Federal Reserve balance sheet. One possible approach was to start by reducing the Federal Reserve's securities holdings while short-term interest rates remained at the lower bound. We could allow securities to roll off the Federal Reserve's balance sheet and even sell securities, thereby putting upward pressure on long-term rates while calibrating the pace and configuration of the reduction in our holdings as warranted by our maximum employment and price stability objectives. Eventually, once our securities holdings had shrunk sufficiently, the FOMC could start nudging up its short-term interest rate target. One problem of this "last in, first out" approach was that the FOMC does not have any experience in calibrating the pace and composition of asset redemptions and sales to actual and prospective economic conditions. Indeed, as the so-called taper tantrum of 2013 illustrated, even talk of prospective changes in our securities holdings can elicit unexpected abrupt changes in financial conditions. Given the lack of experience with reducing our asset holdings to scale back monetary policy accommodation and the need to carefully calibrate the removal of accommodation, the FOMC opted to allow changes in the Federal Reserve's securities holdings to play a secondary role in the Committee's normalization strategy. Rather than balance sheet shrinkage, the FOMC decided that its primary tool for scaling back monetary policy accommodation would be influencing short-term interest rates. As we explained in our "normalization principles" issued in September 2014, the FOMC decided to maintain the overall size of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings at an elevated level until sometime after the FOMC had begun to raise short-term interest rates.8Once normalization of the level of the federal funds rate was "well under way" and the Committee judged that the economic expansion was strong enough that further increases in short-term interest rates were likely to be warranted, the FOMC would gradually and predictably reduce the size of the balance sheet by allowing the Federal Reserve's securities holdings to "run off"--that is, we would allow our balance sheet to shrink passively by not reinvesting all of the principal payments from our securities.9 One advantage of the FOMC's chosen approach to scaling back accommodation is that both the FOMC and the public have decades of experience with adjustments in short-term interest rates in response to changes in economic conditions. Nonetheless, the post-crisis environment presented a new test to the FOMC's ability to influence short-term interest rates. Before the crisis, the FOMC could raise the federal funds rate--the rate at which banks with excess reserves lend to banks with a reserve need--by removing a small amount of reserves from the banking system. That would translate into a higher federal funds rate because reserves were relatively scarce to begin with. The intuition was simple: The FOMC would signal that it was going to tighten conditions in the reserve market, and the cost of obtaining reserves in the market--the federal funds rate--would rise. Other market interest rates would then increase accordingly. After the crisis, however, reserves were plentiful because the Federal Reserve funded its large-scale asset purchases through adding reserves to the system--crediting the bank accounts of those who were selling assets to the Fed. Moreover, in light of the FOMC's decision not to sell the longer-term securities it acquired, reserves were likely to remain plentiful for the foreseeable future. Consequently, when the time came to remove accommodation, a key question for the Committee was how to raise the federal funds rate in an environment of abundant reserves.10An important part of the answer to that question came in the Federal Reserve's authority to pay interest on excess reserves. The Congress granted the Federal Reserve that authority in 2006, to become effective in 2011. However, in the fall of 2008, the Congress moved up the effective date to October 2008. Having authority to pay interest on excess reserves means that the Federal Reserve can influence the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates regardless of the amount of excess reserves in the banking system. The mechanics of the new framework are straightforward: Banks will generally only provide short-term funding at an interest rate around or above what they could earn at the Fed. As a result, if the Federal Reserve raised the rate it paid, other short-term lending rates would likely rise as well.11This new approach for raising short-term interest rates is working well: Since December 2015, we have raised the interest paid on excess reserves and the target range for the federal funds rate by 100 basis points, and the effective federal funds rate has risen accordingly.12 A Closer Look at Our Balance Sheet StrategyIn light of our recent decision to start reducing our securities holdings this month, I would like to discuss a few aspects of our balance sheet strategy.13The FOMC anticipated that its decision to maintain the size of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings at an elevated level until sometime after the beginning of rate hikes would keep some downward pressure on longer-term interest rates well after the end of its asset purchase programs. Although estimates of the effect of our securities holdings on longer-term interest rates are subject to uncertainty, a recent study reported that the Federal Reserve's securities holdings were reducing the term premium on the 10-year Treasury yield by roughly 1 percentage point at the end of 2016.14 The guidance that the FOMC would eventually start a gradual and predictable reduction of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings implied that the downward pressure on longer-term yields would likely diminish over time as financial market participants came to expect that the start of balance sheet normalization was nearing. Indeed, with that process now under way, it is likely that our securities holdings are now depressing the term premium on the 10-year yield by somewhat less than the 1 percentage point estimate reported for late last year. Several factors suggest that the downward pressure on term premiums exerted by our securities holdings is likely to diminish only gradually as our holdings shrink. For instance, as I have already noted, our intention to reduce our balance sheet by reducing reinvestment of repayments of principal on our holdings--rather than selling assets--has been well communicated for several years now. As a result, we do not anticipate a jump in term premiums as our balance sheet reduction plan gets under way. In addition, the maturity distribution of our securities holdings is such that it will take some years for the size of our holdings to normalize via runoff.15 The judgment that the downward pressure on term premiums will decline only gradually as we reduce the size of our balance sheet stands in sharp contrast to evidence suggesting that this pressure built up rather quickly when we were expanding our balance sheet. To understand this contrast, remember that, unlike our plan to shrink our balance sheet, the various phases of our asset purchases had, to differing degrees, an element of surprise, with asset purchase announcements occasionally leaving a distinct imprint on the path of longer-term yields. Moreover, each of our asset purchase programs resulted in a rapid increase in our securities holdings during a relatively short period, whereas the normalization process will play out gradually over many years. I have focused thus far on the likely response of term premiums to our balance sheet reduction plan. Let me turn my attention briefly to the likely response of longer-term yields, which, as I have noted, reflect both a term premium component and expectations of the future path of short-term interest rates. While the available evidence points to a strong reaction of longer-term yields to our asset purchases, it is conceivable that those yields will react much more modestly to our balance sheet reduction plan. Consider, for instance, a hypothetical scenario in which the FOMC has decided not to rely on balance sheet reduction to scale back accommodation, choosing instead to continue to reinvest indefinitely all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. If financial market participants perceived no change in the economic outlook and no intention on the part of the FOMC to alter the overall stance of monetary policy, the FOMC's inclination to leave the size of the balance sheet unchanged would be taken as an indication that the FOMC would instead rely more on increases in short-term interest rates to scale back accommodation, resulting in a faster pace of short-term interest hikes. On net, longer-term yields may be little affected by this hypothetical scenario: While the decreased emphasis on balance sheet reduction would depress term premiums and hold longer-term yields lower, the expected faster pace of short-term interest rate increases would push longer-term yields higher.16 A Key Question for the FutureAs the financial crisis and Great Recession fade into the past and the stance of monetary policy gradually returns to normal, a natural question concerns the possible future role of the unconventional policy tools we deployed after the onset of the crisis. My colleagues on the FOMC and I believe that, whenever possible, influencing short-term interest rates by targeting the federal funds rate should be our primary tool. As I have already noted, we have a long track record using this tool to pursue our statutory goals. In contrast, we have much more limited experience with using our securities holdings for that purpose. Where does this assessment leave our unconventional policy tools? I believe their deployment should be considered again if our conventional tool reaches its limit--that is, when the federal funds rate has reached its effective lower bound and the U.S. economy still needs further monetary policy accommodation. Does this mean that it will take another Great Recession for our unconventional tools to be used again? Not necessarily. Recent studies suggest that the neutral level of the federal funds rate appears to be much lower than it was in previous decades.17Indeed, most FOMC participants now assess the longer-run value of the neutral federal funds rate as only 2-3/4 percent or so, compared with around 4-1/4 percent just a few years ago.18With a low neutral federal funds rate, there will typically be less scope for the FOMC to reduce short-term interest rates in response to an economic downturn, raising the possibility that we may need to resort again to enhanced forward rate guidance and asset purchases to provide needed accommodation.19 Of course, substantial uncertainty surrounds any estimates of the neutral level of short-term interest rates. In this regard, there is an important asymmetry to consider. If the neutral rate turns out to be significantly higher than we currently estimate, it is less likely that we will have to deploy our unconventional tools again. In contrast, if the neutral rate is as low as we estimate or even lower, we will be glad to have our unconventional tools in our toolkit. The bottom line is that we must recognize that our unconventional tools might have to be used again. If we are indeed living in a low-neutral-rate world, a significantly less severe economic downturn than the Great Recession might be sufficient to drive short-term interest rates back to their effective lower bound. ConclusionLet me conclude with a brief summary. As a result of the Great Recession, the Federal Reserve has confronted two key challenges over the past several years: One, the FOMC had to provide additional policy accommodation after short-term interest rates reached their effective lower bound; and two, subsequently, as we made progress toward the achievement of our mandate, we had to start scaling back that accommodation in the presence of a vastly expanded Federal Reserve balance sheet. Today I highlighted two points about the FOMC's experience with those challenges. First, the monetary policy tools that the Federal Reserve deployed in the immediate aftermath of the crisis--explicit forward rate guidance, large-scale asset purchases, and the payment of interest on excess reserves--have helped us overcome these challenges. Second, in light of evidence suggesting that the neutral level of short-term interest rates is significantly lower than it was in previous decades, the likelihood that future monetary policymakers will have to confront those two challenges again is uncomfortably high. For this reason, we must keep our unconventional policy tools ready to be deployed again should short-term interest rates return to their effective lower bound. 1.Before the Great Recession, the FOMC occasionally provided forward rate guidance, but that guidance was typically confined to a relatively short horizon.Return to text 2.In addition to depressing term premiums, large-scale asset purchases by the Federal Reserve can lower longer-term yields if those purchases are perceived by the public as a signal that short-term interest rates are likely to remain lower for longer than previously anticipated.Return to text 3.See, for instance, Eric T. Swanson and John C. Williams (2014), "Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates,"American Economic Review,vol. 104 (October), pp. 3154-85; Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011), "The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 7 (March), pp. 3-43; and Stefania D'Amico, William English, David Lopez-Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012), "The Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F415-46.Return to text 4.See, for instance, Eric M. Engen, Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015), "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).Return to text 5.The Bank of Japan had deployed unconventional tools well before the crisis.Return to text 6.See, for instance, Andrew G. Haldane, Matt Roberts-Sklar, Tomasz Wieladek, and Chris Young (2016), "QE: The Story So Far (PDF)," Staff Working Paper No. 624 (London: Bank of England, October); and Luca Gambetti and Alberto Musso (2017), "The Macroeconomic Impact of the ECB's Expanded Asset Purchase Programme (APP) (PDF)," ECB Working Paper 2075 (Frankfurt: European Central Bank, June).Return to text 7.See Janet L. Yellen (2017), "From Adding Accommodation to Scaling It Back," speech delivered at the Executives' Club of Chicago, Chicago, Ill., March 3.Return to text 8.Information on the FOMC's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policy-normalization.htm.Return to text 9.The FOMC announced in December 2015 that it anticipated maintaining its reinvestment policy until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate was "well under way." That announcement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20151216a1.pdf. More recently, in June 2017, the FOMC provided additional details regarding its approach to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings, indicating that once the balance sheet normalization plan began, principal payments received from securities held by the Federal Reserve would be reinvested only to the extent that those payments exceeded certain monthly caps. The caps would rise gradually but would remain in place during the normalization process. The June 2017 announcement, Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf.Return to text 10.For a discussion of the pre- and post-crisis frameworks for implementing short-term interest rate decisions, see Jane E. Ihrig, Ellen E. Meade, and Gretchen C. Weinbach (2015), "Rewriting Monetary Policy 101: What's the Fed's Preferred Post-Crisis Approach to Raising Interest Rates? (PDF)"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 29 (Fall), pp. 177-98.Return to text 11.The Federal Reserve created supplementary tools to be used as needed to help strengthen its influence over short-term interest rates when reserves are plentiful. For instance, the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility allows a variety of counterparties, including eligible money market funds, government-sponsored enterprises, broker-dealers, and depository institutions to invest funds overnight with the Federal Reserve at a rate determined by the FOMC.Return to text 12.For a discussion of how increases in the FOMC's target range for the federal funds rate have transmitted to other short-term interest rates, see Alyssa Anderson, Jane Ihrig, Mary-Frances Styczynski, and Gretchen C. Weinbach (2017), "How Have the Fed's Three Rate Hikes Passed through to Selected Short-Term Interest Rates?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 2).Return to text 13.The FOMC's announcement of the beginning of implementation of the balance sheet normalization plan is available on the Board's website; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement (PDF)," press release, September 20.Return to text 14.See Brian Bonis, Jane Ihrig, and Min Wei (2017), "Projected Evolution of the SOMA Portfolio and the 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 22).Return to text 15.Moreover, as the FOMC announced in June, the Committee decided to cap the monthly run-off in the Federal Reserve's securities holdings, making the balance sheet normalization process even more predictable and gradual. The FOMC's announcement is available on the Board's website; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, June 14.Return to text 16.In contrast, when the Federal Reserve was purchasing assets, short-term interest rates were at their effective lower bound, and they were expected to remain there for the foreseeable future. As a result, decisions to buy additional assets--and the resulting additional downward pressure on term premiums--were not offset by expectations of a higher path for short-term interest rates. The end result was that there was greater potential for asset purchases to have a discernible effect on longer-term yields in the years immediately following the financial crisis than in current circumstances.Return to text 17.See, for instance, James D. Hamilton, Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015), "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future," NBER Working Paper Series 21476 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August); Olivier Blanchard (2016), "Three Remarks on the U.S. Treasury Yield Curve," Peterson Institute for International Economics,RealTime Economic Issues Watch(blog), June 22, https://piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/three-remarks-us-treasury-yield-curve; and Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2016), "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2016-11 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, December).Return to text 18.FOMC participants' most recent projections of the federal funds rate are discussed in an addendum to the minutes of the Committee's September 2017 meeting, available in an October 11, 2017, press release on the Federal Reserve Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20171011a.htm.Return to text 19.See Janet L. Yellen (2016), "The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26; and David Reifschneider (2016), "Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-068 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON -- Responding to widespread damage caused by Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria, four federal financial institution regulatory agencies today took action to facilitate the recovery process by temporarily easing appraisal requirements for real estate-related financial transactions in areas declared to be a major disaster. The agencies will not require financial institutions to obtain appraisals for affected transactions (1) if the properties involved are located in areas declared major disasters; (2) if there are binding commitments to fund the transactions within 36 months of the date the areas were declared major disasters, and (3) if the value of the real properties support the institutions' decisions to enter into the transactions. The exceptions apply to transactions in areas of Florida, Georgia, Puerto Rico, Texas, and the U.S. Virgin Islands and expire three years after the date the president declared each area a major disaster. The exceptions are being made under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) and its implementing regulations. Financial institutions that use the appraisal exception must maintain information estimating the collateral's value that sufficiently supports their credit decision to enter into the transaction. The agencies will monitor institutions' real estate lending practices to ensure the transactions are being originated in a safe and sound banking manner.
On October 19, 2017, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on October 19, 2017, and will mature on October 26, 2017. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Columbia Banking System, Inc., Tacoma, Washington, to acquire Pacific Continental Corporation ("Pacific") and thereby indirectly acquire Pacific's subsidiary bank, Pacific Continental Bank, both of Eugene, Oregon. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by First Horizon National Corporation, Memphis, Tennessee, to acquire Capital Bank Financial Corp. ("CBFC"), Charlotte, North Carolina, and thereby indirectly acquire CBFC's subsidiary bank, Capital Bank Corp., Raleigh, North Carolina. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application by ING Bank N.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands, to establish a representative office in Dallas, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Reliable Community Bancshares, Inc., and MAB Acquisition Corp., both of Perryville, Missouri, to acquire Mid America Banking Corporation ("Mid America"), Rolla, and thereby indirectly acquire Mid America's subsidiary bank, Mid America Bank & Trust Company, Dixon, both of Missouri. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Southside Bancshares, Inc., Tyler, Texas, to acquire Diboll State Bancshares, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire First Bank & Trust East Texas, both of Diboll, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced five new members of its Community Advisory Council (CAC). The CAC is composed of a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer, workforce, and community development organizations and interests, including from such fields as affordable housing, economic development, labor, small business, and asset and wealth building. CAC members provide information, advice, and recommendations to the Board on relevant policy matters and emerging issues of interest. The new members of the CAC, who will replace five departing members, were selected from a pool of individuals who applied to the Board's public call for applications. Each will serve a three-year term beginning in 2018.The new members of the CAC are: Juan BonillaDeputy DirectorLawrence CommunityWorks, Inc.Lawrence, Mass. Donald Hinkle-BrownPresident & CEOReinvestment FundPhiladelphia, Pa. Barb LauExecutive DirectorAssociation of Women ContractorsSt. Paul, Minn. Jonny PriceSenior DirectorKiva U.S.San Francisco, Calif. Bethany SanchezFair Lending DirectorMetropolitan Milwaukee Fair Housing CouncilMilwaukee, Wis. These individuals will join ten existing members and will be led by incoming Chair Roberto Barragan and incoming Vice Chair Andrea Levere. The Council is scheduled to meet May 4 and October 5, 2018. Records of previous meetings may be foundhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday extended until November 30, 2017, the comment periods for its proposal to enhance the effectiveness of boards of directors, as well as its related proposal to implement a new ratings system for large financial institutions that would be aligned with the post-crisis supervisory program. The Board extended the comment periods to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Comments on the proposal for boards of directors were originally due by October 10 and comments on the rating system proposal were originally due by October 16. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Citizens First State Bank of Walnut, Walnut, Illinois,Written Agreement dated October 29, 2009Terminated October 6, 2017 The enforcement action from October 2009 can be foundhere (PDF)and other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First Bancorp, San Juan, Puerto RicoWritten Agreement issued June 3, 2010Terminated October 3, 2017 The enforcement action from June 2010 can be foundhere (PDF), and other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Liberty Shares, Inc., Hinesville, Georgia (now known as Heritage Bancorporation, Inc., Hinesville, Georgia)Written Agreement issued May 9, 2011Terminated October 23, 2017 The enforcement action from May 2011 can be foundhere (PDF), and other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued a Consent Order against Mid America Bank and Trust Company ("Mid America"), Dixon, Missouri, for deceptive practices in violation of section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act related to balance transfer credit cards issued to consumers by Mid America through third parties. The Consent Order requires Mid America to pay approximately $5 million in restitution to nearly 21,000 consumers. Under the terms of the Consent Order, Mid America will be required to refund fees paid by cardholders in connection with the deceptive marketing practices and, for certain consumers, refund the total qualifying payments and waive the remaining transferred balance. Mid America also will be required to take other corrective measures to remediate consumers' injuries, improve consumer compliance programs, and avoid violations of section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act in the future. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Bank of Gueydan, Gueydan, LouisianaOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated October 6, 2017 Farmers State Bank, Victor, MontanaOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated October 6, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve plans to continue its previously announced periodic testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) with one operation in October. These operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. On October 19, 2017, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its TDF. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $1,000,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. EDT to 12:30 p.m. EDT, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.federalreserve.org/arrow/ARROWWeb/home.do) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. EDT and 12:00 p.m. EDT. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (http://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html). Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttp://www.frbservices.org/centralbank/term_deposit_facility.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the 41st Annual Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York We live in a world defined by the rapid pace of technological change. Four of the five largest U.S. companies by market capitalization are classified as "technology companies," where the term describes the products that these companies sell and how they operate. Thanks to decades of investment in information technology, especially in electronic communication networks, consumers now expect services to be available instantly at their fingertips. This statement is true for almost every industry and every aspect of daily life, including financial transactions. This evening, I will consider how technology is changing the delivery of retail banking and payments services. I will discuss the roles of banks, fintech companies, and other stakeholders in moving the United States forward to a better payment system. I will also review the Federal Reserve's collaboration with these payment system stakeholders in pursuing that goal. I will argue that, for policymakers as well as the private sector, the challenge is to embrace technology as a means of improving convenience and speed in the delivery of financial services, while also assuring the security and privacy necessary to sustain the public's trust. As always, the views I express here are my own. Retail Banking InnovationAs with so many sectors of the economy, technology is transforming the retail banking sector. The banking industry has traditionally been characterized by physical branches, privileged access to financial data, and distinct expertise in analyzing such data.1But in today's world companies need not be bound by physical infrastructure and related overhead expenses. For example, companies can take advantage of an explosion in available data, and leverage advances in computing power, via cloud computing, analytical tools, and off-the-shelf machine learning tools, to make sense of those data. The banking industry is adjusting to this world, and facing significant challenges to traditional banking business models. For example, today financial technology can support access to credit through innovative approaches to gathering and analyzing data. Historically, a customer seeking a loan has provided financial statements to a bank or other traditional lending institution. More recently, the use of a fintech platform may allow a lender to quickly monitor and analyze more up-to-date data from a broader range of sources, including those outside of the traditional lending process, to verify an applicant's identity and make inferences about the applicant's overall financial health. For example, a business loan applicant could submit information such as shipping data or customer reviews as additional input to more traditional data sources. With this additional information, the bank would have a more complete picture of an applicant's day-to-day activity and overall financial capacity, and potentially a greater ability to provide credit to customers, including some who might have been otherwise denied a loan based on traditional data. Fintech firms are also finding ways to use banks' data, in some cases without entering into an explicit partnership with the bank. With customers' permission, fintech firms have increasingly turned to data aggregators to "screen scrape" information from financial accounts. In such cases, data aggregators collect and store online banking logins and passwords provided by the bank's customers and use them to log directly into the customer's banking account. This information can be used to provide consumers with convenient real-time snapshots of their financial information across multiple banks and accounts. These examples highlight that there is a balance that needs to be achieved in this innovative environment.2On the one hand, new technologies have enabled banks and other firms to find different ways of meeting consumers' demand for speed and convenience. On the other hand, these same technologies raise new considerations about data security and safety, as well as consumer privacy and protection. Policymakers and the financial industry must assure that enhanced convenience and speed in financial services do not undermine the safety, security, and reliability of those services. Retail Payments InnovationTechnology is also shaping changes in retail payments. As with retail banking, retail payments will need to evolve to meet consumer expectations of constant connectivity and instant access while assuring security and privacy. It is not news that consumers' lives, including the way they pay, are now intertwined with mobile phone usage. While the overall amount of time we spend on our phones continues to grow, the duration of individual phone sessions is actually shrinking. In late 2015, Google estimated that the average mobile session lasts only 70 seconds, and may be repeated dozens of times per day.3As a result, payment innovators have had to create new ways to move money that are not only fast and mobile-focused, but also sufficiently "frictionless" that consumers can now fit commerce into these brief interludes. This development has ushered in a world of multiple smartphone apps that allow for "instant" payments. We can use a payments app to move funds instantly to anyone who has that app.4Some banks have similarly collaborated to build faster payments applications that leverage their deposit account systems. And we are already moving to a world in which we need not open a special app or go to our bank's website in order to send money. Many people here will have taken an Uber or Lyft, and then paid your driver without relaunching the app, much less reaching for your wallet. Similarly, payment providers can now leverage the application programming interfaces (APIs)--essentially the protocols--of smartphone messaging services to integrate their payment tools directly into messaging applications: Nowadays, consumers can simply "attach" money while messaging a friend. Innovation in retail payments can also offer tangible benefits to consumers beyond convenience. Improvements in security, such as our ability to authenticate consumers and detect fraudulent transactions, are also possible through innovation. For instance, mobile payments introduce a wide array of ways to authenticate a consumer's identity, including two-factor authentication codes sent via text message to the phone; biometrics, like a fingerprint or face scan; device identification information; IP address; and geolocation data. Similarly, increased access to transaction data and cloud computing resources means that we have smarter, faster computational processes--like enhanced neural networks--to detect payments that do not match a consumer's spending patterns and help prevent fraudulent transactions. Both security and convenience are crucial elements for successful payments innovation. Consumers will not store their funds in a system that is not secure and will not want to transfer funds out of an otherwise secure system if the process is cumbersome. The Role of Banks in Payments InnovationThe examples I have highlighted so far illustrate payments innovations from fintech firms and banks alike. I want to spend a moment highlighting the special role of banks in the payments process, and how banks are needed in order to create innovations that can be used broadly across the economy. The traditional role of banks in the payments process has been to hold deposits and enable their transfer from one individual or business to another. A depositor might withdraw cash from the bank's ATM to pay a friend or write a check to make a payment. Over time, we have moved from ATMs and paper checks toward electronic payments and online payments through banking platforms--payment methods for which banks are still perceived as essential. More recently, consumer-facing technology has become front and center. At times, the payments process is so seamlessly integrated that one can forget that there is even a bank in the process, as with the Uber and Lyft example. But despite this shift in focus, payments innovation is still fundamentally about how, when, and where an individual's deposits can be held, transferred, and packaged with other information. And banks are still important players in making that happen. Even where this reality is obscured by several layers of technology, there is almost always a bank involved in consumer transactions. Given their importance in holding and transferring funds, banks continue to have a key role to play in the design and safety of more efficient retail payment systems. Without bank participation, it would be difficult to change how funds are transferred in a way that brings pervasive benefits to consumers. For example, if the aim is to capture the speed and continuous nature of today's commerce in the payment system as a whole--as has become a focus for many countries, including the United States--it would be difficult to do so without banks allowing the transfer of their deposits on a 24x7 real-time basis. Of course, individual payment systems are already doing this for consumers within their own network. But achieving these benefits on a broad scale would be challenging without the banking system's participation, because of the large role banks have in holding and transferring funds. All this is to say that we are at a critical juncture in the payment system's evolution, where technology is rapidly changing many facets of the payments process. Fintech firms and banks are seizing these technological changes in their own ways. But a collective and collaborative effort by all payment stakeholders will also be important as the United States works to achieve a payment system that has broad reach and can seamlessly integrate with other systems to transfer funds in a reliable, secure, and convenient manner. When we pay with cash or write a check, we don't spend a lot of time worrying about who our recipient banks with; that universality seems an appropriate standard for new payment options as well. Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment SystemAt the Federal Reserve, we believe it is important to embrace opportunities provided by technological change to improve the convenience and safety of the U.S. payment system. About five years ago, we launched our payment system improvement initiative, which committed the Federal Reserve to working with the full range of payments system stakeholders to achieve a faster, more secure payment system. We saw that technology was transforming the nature of commerce and end-user expectations for payment services. We saw some players coming to market with innovative product offerings, but it was a fragmented approach. Meanwhile, other countries were advancing on initiatives to improve the speed and safety of their payment systems, creating a gap between the U.S. payment system and those abroad. While the Federal Reserve does not have plenary authority over payment systems, as is the case in some other countries, we have often played an important role as a leader and catalyst for change. It was in this role that we issued a call to action asking stakeholders to come together in pursuit of a better payment system for the future--focusing on speed, security, efficiency, international payments, and collaboration.5I believe a collaborative approach ensures that change is designed by those whose commitment and expertise are needed to improve the payment system. Stakeholders  including banks, fintech companies, consumer groups, regulators, and others -- answered our call to action, signing up for two task forces convened by the Federal Reserve. More than 300 stakeholders joined the Faster Payments Task Force, and around 200 joined the Secure Payments Task Force. Let me first touch upon the Faster Payments Task Force, which has recently completed its work.6 The Faster Payments Task Force's mission was to identify and assess alternative approaches for implementing a safe, ubiquitous, faster payments system in the United States. The task force began its work by developing a set of effectiveness criteria laying out desirable attributes for faster payment solutions covering the broad categories of ubiquity, efficiency, safety and security, speed, legal framework, and governance. While the task force was focused on improving speed and convenience, it also underscored the importance of safety and security by establishing 11 criteria of a total of 36 focused on those objectives. The task force encouraged its members to submit proposals for faster payment solutions that would meet the criteria that its members had agreed upon. A diverse range of task force members rose to the challenge by submitting 16 proposals to be vetted against its criteria.7These proposals represent a broad universe of creative and innovative ways to deliver faster payments by embracing technology. They range in structure from solutions that use a centralized clearing and settlement mechanism to others that focus on distributed networks. Some are based on traditional assets held in transaction accounts, and others depend on new asset forms like digital currencies. The role of the task force process was not to recommend or implement a faster payment solution, but rather to offer a range of ideas to move the United States further along the path to a better payment system. We believe that the task force has successfully carried out this role. We are very grateful to the members of the Faster Payment Task Force for all of their work and for the collaborative spirit they brought to the job. But there is more to be done to advance our collective vision of a ubiquitous, real-time, secure future payment system. Last month, the Federal Reserve reaffirmed its commitment to that vision in the paper, "Federal Reserve Next Steps in the Payments Improvement Journey," which outlines refreshed strategies and tactics that we, in collaboration with the payment industry, will employ to make further progress.8I will mention just a few. One of the recommendations from the Faster Payments Task Force work was to establish an industry governance framework for collaboration and decision-making on faster payments. To move forward in creating this framework, the task force established the Governance Framework Formation Team to develop, publish, and solicit public comment on a proposal for a governance framework. This work group will carry out many of the task force recommendations and the Federal Reserve, at the request of the task force, is chairing and facilitating this effort. In addition, the Federal Reserve is considering providing settlement services--a traditional core function of a central bank--to address the future needs of a ubiquitous real-time retail payments environment. We plan to actively engage with the industry and other stakeholders to further understand gaps and requirements for real-time retail payments settlement and assess alternative models that will support needs over the long term. We also plan to explore and assess the need, if any, for other related Federal Reserve services or capabilities. In carrying out this assessment, we will be guided by current and potential market developments and challenges, as well as our long-established criteria for offering new products and services. These criteria include the need to fully recover costs over the long term; the expectation that the new service will yield clear public benefit; and the expectation that other providers alone cannot be expected to provide the service with a reasonable effectiveness, scope, and equity.9 The Federal Reserve will also continue to support the ongoing work of the Secure Payments Task Force. This task force has been working to educate stakeholders on payment security practices, risks, and actions that could enhance payment security. These are challenging topics, because they require stakeholders to be open and forthcoming about potential vulnerabilities if there is to be substantial progress. The Federal Reserve will also pursue two new efforts focused on security. Early in 2018, we plan to launch a study analyzing payment security vulnerabilities. This study is similar to other research efforts that the Federal Reserve has pursued to build foundational and collective understanding of the U.S. payment system. We also plan to build upon the contributions of the Secure Payments Task Force to establish work groups focused on approaches for reducing the cost and prevalence of specific payment security vulnerabilities. In a world of ever-escalating threats to the integrity of our payment system, this collective action is needed to sustain public confidence. These were just a few of our new initiatives. The package of next steps the Federal Reserve outlined in its recent paper confirm that we remain steadfast in our commitment to work with industry and other stakeholders to achieve a better payment system through both leadership and action. SummaryRapidly changing technology is providing a historic opportunity to transform our daily lives, including the way we pay. Fintech firms and banks are embracing this change, as they strive to address consumer demands for more timely and convenient payments. A range of innovative products that seamlessly integrate with other services is now available at our fingertips. It is essential, however, that this innovation not come at the cost of a safe and secure payment system that retains the confidence of its end users. The examples I have drawn upon today highlight that fintech firms and banks must each play a role in assuring that enhancements to convenience and speed do not undermine safety and security. More broadly, the Faster and Secure Payments Task Forces demonstrate the importance of broad and diverse stakeholder input, which are essential if the United States is to implement safe, ubiquitous real-time retail payments. Working together, we can achieve a safe and fast payments system that meets the evolving needs of consumers and our dynamic economy. 1.See, e.g., Miklos Dietz, Somesh Khanna, Tunde Olanrewaju, and Kausik Rajgopal, "Cutting Through the Noise around Financial Technology," McKinsey & Company, February, 2016, www.mckinsey.com/industries/financialservices/our-insights/cutting-through-the-noise-around-financial-technology.Return to text 2.See Lael Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack?" (speech delivered at the Northwestern Kellogg Public-Private Interface Conference on "New Developments in Consumer Finance: Research & Practice," Evanston, Illinois, April 28, 2017).Return to text 3."Your Guide to Winning the Shift to Mobile," Google, Micro-Moments, September 2015, https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/marketing-resources/micro-moments/micromoments-guide-pdf-download/.Return to text 4.Cashing the funds out of the app to use for other payments, however, has traditionally taken longer.Return to text 5.See Federal Reserve System, "Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System (PDF)," January 26, 2015.Return to text 6.See Faster Payments Task Force (2017), "The U.S. Path to Faster Payments, Final Report Part Two: A Call to Action,"https://fasterpaymentstaskforce.org/.Return to text 7.The task force recommended establishing an external Qualified Independent Assessment Team to conduct objective proposal assessments. On behalf of the task force, the Federal Reserve selected McKinsey & Company to conduct a comprehensive assessment of each faster payment solution proposal against the task force's set of criteria.Return to text 8.See Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Next Steps in the Payments Improvement Journey (PDF)," September 6, 2017.Return to text 9.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Policies: The Federal Reserve in the Payments System," revised 1990.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings for August 28 and September 20, 2017. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 19-20, 2017. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Boards Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Boards website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 19-20, 2017:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the 2017 Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C. Thank you for inviting me to speak here at the Institute of International Finance Annual Membership meeting. I am pleased to note that there have been signs lately that a sustainable global recovery may finally be materializing. This is certainly good news, although significant risks and uncertainties remain. One important question is how the emerging market economies (EMEs) will fare as global monetary conditions normalize. In our intertwined world, prospects for these economies are a significant driver of prospects for the United States and other advanced economies. In my remarks today I will argue that, despite the risks and uncertainties, EMEs are likely to manage that normalization reasonably well. As many observers have noted, EME economic prospects are strongly linked to the evolution of capital flows.1Accordingly, I will first review the recent rebound in EME capital inflows and analyze the drivers of this rebound. Against this backdrop, I will then discuss how the prospects for EMEs depend on three factors: Vulnerabilities in the EMEs themselves; the evolution of advanced-economy monetary conditions, including those in the United States; and market responses to that evolution. As always, my comments here represent my own views. The Rebound in Economic Growth and Capital Flows in Emerging MarketsAfter real GDP growth plummeted in many EMEs during the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), economic activity rebounded sharply (slide 1). But that recovery proved to be short lived and was followed by a notable, widespread fall in EME growth as advanced economies remained sluggish, economic imbalances in China mounted, and commodity prices plunged. Lately, however, the streak of weak growth in the EMEs appears to have been broken: The downward trend in Chinese growth has flattened, growth in other EMEs has picked up some, and Brazil seems to be moving into recovery mode. The factors that underlie the pickup in EMEs to a large extent represent a reversal of developments that led to the slowing. The improvement in the performance of the advanced economies has become more widespread. Chinese authorities have bolstered their economy by providing more credit stimulus. And commodity prices have bounced back from their lows in early 2016, bolstering activity and allaying financial stability concerns in commodity-exporting economies. These developments have also contributed to a modest reversal of the slowdown in global trade seen in recent years.2 A rebound in capital flows has come along with the pickup in economic performance in the EMEs.Slide 2showsnetprivate capital flows to EMEs--the difference between gross private inflows and gross private outflows. These private net inflows are quite volatile, as the experience of the past 10 years shows. Strong pre-GFC net inflows to major emerging markets (the black line)--hovering in the neighborhood of 3 to 4 percent of EME gross domestic product (GDP)--were interrupted by a collapse during the crisis, but inflows quickly recovered and stayed strong through 2010. After that, net inflows trended down for several years and turned negative by 2015. Part of this retrenchment reflected Chinese net inflows turning into net outflows due to what might be considered special circumstances--notably, changes in expectations of Chinese exchange rate policy. But even taking China out of the picture, as shown by the dashed blue line, there was a clear downward trend in net inflows. Over the past couple of years, however, net inflows have recovered and have averaged, if China is excluded, 0.7 percent of GDP in 2016 and about 1-1/2 percent of GDP in early 2017. As shown inslide 3, other measures of capital flows, such as flows into EME investment funds, show an even sharper rebound. The recent recovery of investor appetite for EME exposure has shown up in asset prices as well. Emerging-market credit spreads have declined, and equity prices have risen (slide 4). These developments are not occurring in isolation, but in the context of a general improvement in the global outlook and in investor risk sentiment. The improvement in economic fundamentals raises the following question: To what extent can the recent recovery in EME capital flows be explained by these better economic fundamentals? One way to shed light on this question is to compare the recent behavior of EME capital flows with what we might expect from a model of these flows based on historical data. In a recent study, Federal Reserve staff regressed net private capital inflows into several key EMEs on measures of investment opportunities in these economies, monetary policy variables, and risk sentiment variables.3As can be seen inslide 5, by comparing the solid and dashed lines, the model does a fairly good job overall of fitting the data. It is instructive to look at what the model tells us about the slowing of flows between 2010 and 2015. Note that the falloff in commodity prices (the red portion of the bars) was the largest contributor to the slowdown in flows. The decline in economic growth differentials between the EMEs and advanced economies (the yellow portions) was also a major contributor. In fact, growth differentials became a slightly negative contributor in 2015 after being substantially positive in 2010.4Monetary policies (the blue portions) also became less of a factor in 2015 in driving flows to EMEs. As for the recent rebound in flows, over the past year the model's predicted net inflows (the dashed line) have actually been significantly above actual net inflows (the solid line), suggesting that there is some room for flows to increase further without raising concerns. The model attributes the recovery of flows primarily to the turnaround in commodity prices and, to a substantially lesser extent, to improvements in risk sentiment (as seen by some waning of the negative contribution from the slashed green bars). The growth differential is not playing a major role because the rise in EME growth has been accompanied by a rise in advanced-economy growth.5 All in all, this evidence suggests that the recent pickup of capital flows to EMEs has not outrun its fundamental determinants, which provides some encouragement that these flows will not reverse themselves and endanger EME prospects, a situation that is also encouraging for U.S. prospects. Risks to Emerging Market Economy Prospects from the Future Course of Monetary PolicySome observers have noted that the risk of a reversal of EME capital flows may become more pronounced as U.S. and global interest rates return to more normal levels. These developments could encourage capital to return to the advanced economies and, by raising domestic interest rates and putting downward pressures on emerging market currencies, could also enlarge EME debt burdens. In assessing this risk, as I mentioned earlier, three elements are important: first, the vulnerabilities in the EMEs themselves; second, the evolution of advanced-economy monetary policies; and, third, how markets might respond to that evolution. Let me discuss each of these elements in turn. Emerging Market Economy VulnerabilitiesThere is clear empirical evidence that the response of EME financial markets to different shocks, including changes in U.S. interest rates, depends importantly on the state of economic fundamentals in the EMEs themselves. For example, Bowman and coauthors document in their study that a deterioration in a country's economic conditions significantly increases its vulnerability to adverse effects from changes in U.S. interest rates.6A case in point is the so-called taper tantrum in 2013, when rises in sovereign bond spreads were significantly greater in those EMEs with greater relative vulnerabilities. There is little doubt that over the past couple of decades, EME macroeconomic fundamentals and policy frameworks have improved substantially. One way you can see this improvement is through an index of aggregate EME vulnerability (the black line inslide 6), which is based economic data on a variety of variables from 13 major economies.7According to this index, EME vulnerabilities today stand well below those in the 1990s--a period during which financial crises in EMEs were much more prevalent. That said, the vulnerability index has been trending up since 2008. Part of this increase in the vulnerability index can be attributed to a run-up in bank credit to the private sector, which brings me to a key risk for EME prospects: the position of EME corporates. Observers have been expressing concerns about the mounting levels of corporate debt and the risk that a normalization of global conditions could exacerbate debt service burdens of EME corporations--particularly those with elevated levels of dollar-denominated debt--by raising global interest rates, boosting the value of the dollar, and perhaps damping economic activity. Given the prominence of this risk, I will discuss EME corporates in a bit more detail. Since 2008, the debt of EME nonfinancial corporations has tripled in dollar value, reaching roughly $27 trillion in the first quarter of 2017. As a share of GDP, as shown by the black line inslide 7, it has nearly doubled, to over 100 percent of GDP. China's situation is distinct from many other EMEs. On the one hand, as can be seen by the red line, its corporate debt, at 170 percent of GDP now, is much higher than most other EMEs and substantially above the level we saw in East Asia before the Asian crisis. On the other hand, Chinese corporates are much less exposed to changes in exchange rates and global interest rates. But the rising amount of debt by itself does not tell us whether this debt is excessive and how vulnerable EME corporates are to global monetary and market shocks. For that assessment we need to drill down deeper into the health of the corporate sector. In a recent study, Beltran and coauthors undertake such an analysis using a common metric of debt service capacity--the interest coverage ratio, or ICR, which is the ratio of earnings to interest expense.8All else being equal, this ratio is lower for firms that are less profitable, more leveraged, and have a higher cost of borrowing. Using firm-level data, the authors classify the debt of those firms with an ICR of less than 2 as "debt-at-risk."9They find, as shown by the black line inslide 8, that this measure of risky EME corporate debt has almost tripled since 2011 to about 30 percent of GDP. But this share is still considerably lower than the 46 percent of GDP debt-at-risk in East Asia on the eve of the Asian crisis (the horizontal dashed black line in the chart). For China, though, the debt-at-risk now exceeds what we saw in East Asia before the Asian crisis. Outside of China (the dashed blue line), EME debt-at-risk, at about 10 percent of GDP, seems much more manageable. However, as can be seen by the blue portions of the bars inslide 9, debt-at-risk in a number of EMEs, including South Korea, India, Turkey, and Brazil exceeds that average level. How will EME corporate debt fare going forward as global normalization proceeds? The results of the study I just discussed imply that a 1 percentage point increase in EME corporate borrowing costs by itself would not be so problematic, at least outside of China.10What this shock would do to debt-at-risk is shown by the red crosshatched portions of the bars in the chart. But it would be a bigger deal if the rise in borrowing costs was accompanied by a more generalized adverse turn of events in EMEs, modeled here as a 20 percent earnings reduction and a 20 percent hit to the value of EME currencies against the dollar. The estimated effects of these additional shocks on debt-at-risk are shown by the slashed red portions of the bars.11In this case, aggregate EME debt-at-risk rises from about 30 percent of GDP to around the level seen prior to the Asian financial crisis.12Notably, the increase comes mainly from China, where debtatrisk jumps to about 85 percent of GDP. Outside of China, risky debt also rises substantially but seemingly not to levels that would be considered unmanageable. Overall, based on this analysis, I would conclude that corporate debt represents a moderate degree of vulnerability for EME prospects. The situation is not alarming, but risks are significant and bear close watching, especially in China. The Evolution of Federal Reserve PolicyWhat of the evolution of monetary conditions in the advanced economies? I will confine myself here to Fed policy. One factor that favors easier adjustment in EMEs is that U.S. monetary policy normalization has been and should continue to be gradual, as long as the U.S. economy evolves roughly as expected. Since the start of normalization in December 2015, the federal funds rate has risen to about 11/4 percent from its effective lower bound (slide 10). The median projections of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants (the blue dots) have it rising to 2.9 percent by the end of 2020, fairly close to what is regarded by the median participant as its long-run value and significantly below its average value in the years prior to the GFC. As reflected in the FOMC's recent communications, the shrinkage of the Fed's balance sheet is also expected to proceed quite gradually, with slowly phased-in increases in caps on the monthly reductions in the Federal Reserve's security holdings. The expectation of gradual policy normalization should reduce the likelihood of outsized movements in interest rates. Indeed, even if we add, say, a 50 basis point term premium to the expected long-run federal funds rate, this value would still leave long-term U.S. interest rates (shown inslide 11) well below their pre-GFC averages. As long as global financial conditions normalize in an orderly fashion, EMEs should have sufficient time to adjust. And, as we saw earlier, interest rate changes of this magnitude should not lead to generalized corporate distress in EMEs, although undoubtedly some corporates are more exposed and could experience difficulties. Market ResponseAll that said, market movements can be noisy, which brings me to what I believe is the most uncertain element--the potentially volatile behavior of markets even in an environment of relatively contained EME vulnerabilities and of gradual and clearly communicated advanced-economy monetary policies. So far, markets have behaved in a manner consistent with a relatively benign scenario for EMEs: Risk sentiment is holding up, credit spreads in emerging markets have been declining, equities are up, long-term yields have hardly budged, and the dollar has been declining. Markets, however, can turn on a dime, and reactions can be outsized. This concern may be especially relevant at present, given the low level of volatility and elevated asset prices in global markets, which may increase the likelihood and severity of an adjustment. Most of the time bouts of market turbulence lead to relatively quick corrections that leave markets more resilient without substantially depressing global growth. The taper tantrum of 2013 that I mentioned earlier is a good example. Ultimately, the policy adjustments made by some of the most affected economies, along with the more realistic appraisal of risks by global investors, likely left the global economy in a somewhat better position than before the episode. That said, however, market tantrums pose complex economic and financial challenges, and such episodes carry a significant risk of snowballing into something bigger that more substantially threatens the economic expansion. ConclusionTo conclude, I have suggested that the most likely outcome is that the challenges posed to EMEs by the normalization of global financial conditions will be manageable.13So far, capital flows have been moving in line with market fundamentals. Although, EME vulnerabilities have been rising, they are still well below the levels of the crisis-prone years of the 1980s and 1990s. Global monetary conditions are expected to normalize only gradually, as the Federal Reserve and other advanced-economy central banks continue to stress clear communication and transparency. And the reaction of EME financial markets so far has been benign. But significant risks of more adverse scenarios remain. The corporate debt situation in EMEs has been worsening, particularly in China, and market reactions to even small surprises can be unpredictable and outsized. Even with these risks, however, the best thing the Federal Reserve can do--not just for the United States, but for the global economy at large--is to keep our house in order through the continued pursuit of our dual mandate. Finally, it bears remembering that Fed policy normalization is occurring not in isolation, but in the context of a solid U.S. economic recovery, which should benefit all economies around the world. ReferencesAhmed, Shaghil, and Andrei Zlate (2014). "Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World?"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 48 (November), pp. 221-48. Alfaro, Laura, Gonzalo Asis, Anusha Chari, and Ugo Panizza (2017). "Lessons Unlearned? Corporate Debt in Emerging Markets," NBER Working Paper 23407. Washington: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Ayala, Diana, Milan Nedelijkovic, and Christian Saborowski (2015). "What Slice of the Pie? The Corporate Bond Market Boom in Emerging Economies (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/148. Washington: International Monetary Fund, July. Beltran, Daniel, Keshav Garud, and Aaron Rosenblum (2017). "Emerging Market Nonfinancial Corporate Debt: How Concerned Should We Be?" IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 1. Bowman, David, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza (2015). "U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies,"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 55 (July), pp. 27-59. Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin (2015). "Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of Monetary Policy,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 71 (April), pp. 11932. Cavallo, Eduardo, Andrew Powell, Mathieu Pedemonte, and Pilar Tavella (2015). "A New Taxonomy of Sudden Stops: Which Sudden Stops Should Countries Be Most Concerned About?"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 51 (March), pp. 47-70. Chen, Jiaqian, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, and Ratna Sahay (2014). "Spillovers from United States Monetary Policy on Emerging Markets: Different This Time? (PDF)" IMF Working Paper WP/14/240. Washington: International Monetary Fund, December. Chow, Julian T.S. (2015). "Stress Testing Corporate Balance Sheets in Emerging Economies," IMF Working Paper WP/15/216. Washington: International Monetary Fund, September, available athttp://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download;jsessionid=8A054997E3FBA6EC30B9601BA692B9F4?doi=10.1.1.698.5498&rep=rep1&type=pdf (PDF). Clark, John, Nathan Converse, Brahima Coulibaly, and Steve Kamin (2016). "Emerging Market Capital Flows and U.S. Monetary Policy," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 18. Fratzscher, Marcel (2012). "Capital Flows: Push Versus Pull Factors, and the Global Financial Crisis,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 88 (November), pp. 341-56. Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013). "On the International Spillovers of U.S. Quantitative Easing," ECB Working Paper 1557. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, June. Ghosh, Atish R., Jun Kim, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Juan Zalduendo (2012). "Surges (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/12/22. Washington: International Monetary Fund, January. Hausman, Joshua, and Jon Wongswan (2011). "Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements,"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 30 (April), pp. 547-71. International Monetary Fund (2014). "Moving from Liquidity to Growth-Driven Models," chapter 1 ofGlobal Financial Stability Report.Washington: IMF, April, pp. 1-65. --------- (2016a). "Financial Stability Challenges in a Low-Growth, Low-Rate Era," chapter 1 ofGlobal Financial Stability Report.Washington: IMF, October, pp. 1-48. --------- (2016b). "Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets," chapter 2 inWorld Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long.Washington: IMF, April, pp. 63-99. --------- (2017). "Is Growth at Risk?" chapter 1 ofGlobal Financial Stability Report. Washington: IMF, October, pp.1-52. Koepke, Robin (2015). "What Drives Capital Flows to Emerging Markets? A Survey of the Empirical Literature," IIF Working Paper. Washington: Institute of International Finance, April, available athttps://www.iif.com/publication/capital-flows/what-drives-capital-flows-emerging-markets-2. Pomerleano, Michael (1998). "Corporate Finance Lessons from the East Asian Crisis (PDF)," Note 155. Washington: World Bank Group, October. Powell, Jerome H. (2013). "Advanced Economy Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Economies," speech delivered at "Prospects for Asia and the Global Economy," the 2013 Asia Economic Policy Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, Calif., November 4. --------- (2016). "The Global Trade Slowdown and Its Implications for Emerging Asia," speech delivered at "CPBS 2016 Pacific Basin Research Conference," sponsored by the Center for Pacific Basin Studies at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, Calif., November 18. Tepper, Alexander, Jeffrey Moore, Myeongguk Suh, and Sunwoo Nam (2013). "Estimating the Impacts of U.S. LSAPs on Emerging Market Economies' Local Currency Bond Markets," Staff Report 595. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January. 1. For more on this linkage, see Powell (2013).Return to text 2. For more on the global trade slowdown, see Powell (2016).Return to text 3. The specific variables in the regression include the GDP growth differential between EMEs and advanced economies, commodity prices, EME interest rate differentials with advanced economies, measures of the Federal Reserve's quantitative easing, the VIX (which is the one-month-ahead option-implied volatility of the S&P 500 index), and country-specific emerging market credit spreads (see Clark and others, 2016). Note that, because of special factors driving its flows over the past few years, China is not included in this analysis. Other studies that have also examined determinants of EME capital flows include International Monetary Fund (2016b), Koepke (2015), Ahmed and Zlate (2014), Fratzscher (2012), and Ghosh and others (2012). Generally, these papers find that many factors, including both "pull" and "push," affect EME capital flows.Return to text 4. This negative contribution reflects that the average growth differential between the selected group of EMEs, which does not include China, and the advanced economies itself became negative.Return to text 5. Variants of the model applied to gross capital inflows, rather than net capital inflows, give qualitatively similar results. In particular, the model of gross flows also finds that the pickup in these flows has been less strong than predicted by the model. However, the relative contribution of the risk variables to the pickup in EME flows relative to the turnaround in commodity prices is somewhat larger with the gross flows model than the net inflows model. The consequences of net versus gross flows for the recipient economies can potentially differ as, for example, Cavallo and others (2015) have argued.Return to text 6. See Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2015). Other papers that have looked at the effects of U.S. monetary policies on EME asset prices and the channels through which these effects are transmitted include Bruno and Shin (2015); Chen, Mancini-Griffoli, and Sahay (2014); Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub (2013); Tepper and others (2013); and Hausman and Wongswan (2011).Return to text 7. Variables used in creating the index include external debt, the current account position, foreign reserves, public debt, control of inflation, and bank credit to the private sector.Return to text 8. See Beltran, Garud, and Rosenblum (2017). Other studies that have recently investigated EME corporate vulnerabilities include Alfaro, Chari and Panizza (2017); International Monetary Fund (2014, 2016a); and Chow (2015).Return to text 9. An ICR of 2 or less is often associated with increased likelihood of distress. For example, just before the Asian financial crisis, firms in Indonesia, South Korea, and Thailand had an average ICR of 2 (see Pomerleano, 1998).Return to text 10. A 1 percentage point positive shock to the borrowing costs of EME corporates undoes about half of the decline in average borrowing costs from 2009 to 2016. Although on the face of it, this shock does not seem too large, as discussed in Beltran and others (2017), it is applied to the average interest rate on the entire existing debt, not just on new debt. Given that the average interest rate for EME firms is about 43/4 percent, a 1 percentage point rise increases the interest expense by about a fifth.Return to text 11. The calibration of the shocks is the same as in Beltran and others (2017). A 20 percent earnings shock corresponds to about half of the decline in EME corporate earnings experienced after the global financial crisis. It is difficult to say how much emerging market currencies might depreciate under stress, but 20 percent currency depreciation seems well within the plausible range. While the calibration of the shocks is the same as the above-mentioned study, the effects have been updated to reflect a larger sample of firms that is now available. Qualitatively, the results and conclusions do not change from this update.Return to text 12. In computing the new debt-at-risk after exchange rate shocks, we need the share of debt that is foreign currency-denominated, which is taken from Ayala, Nedelijkovic, and Saborowski (2015).Return to text 13. The IMF's most recentGlobal Financial Stability Report, released October 11, (IMF, 2017), also concludes that EMEs should be able to handle any reduction in flows from global monetary policy normalization "in a relatively smooth manner, given their enhanced resilience and stronger growth outlook."Return to text Accessible Version
Randal K. Quarles on Friday took the oath of office as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Vice Chair for Supervision. President Trump announced his intention to nominate Mr. Quarles on July 10, 2017. He was confirmed to both positions by the United States Senate on October 5. A biography of Mr. Quarles is available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/bios/. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lael Brainard At the Panel on Monetary Policy "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C. I enjoyed Ben Bernanke's paper titled "Monetary Policy in a New Era."1He presents a compelling diagnosis of the issues facing policymakers and discusses a variety of policy options. Bernanke proposes an approach to policy that is elegant and straightforward to communicate. I will focus on those elements that I find particularly relevant for the challenges faced by policymakers and suggest some implications and complications. My comments are not intended to address current policy.2 The New NormalPolicymakers in advanced economies are confronting a different constellation of challenges today than those that dominated the canon of U.S. monetary policymaking over the previous half-century, which I refer to as the "new normal."3A key feature of the new normal is that the neutral interest rate--the level of the federal funds rate that is consistent with the economy growing close to its potential rate, full employment, and stable inflation--appears to be much lower than it was in the decades prior to the crisis. In the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median FOMC participant expected a longer-run real federal funds rate, after subtracting inflation, of 3/4 percent, down sharply from the value the first time the policy projection was published in the January 2012 SEP of 2-1/4 percent--and the average value in the decades prior to the financial crisis of 2-1/2 percent.4 The low level of the neutral rate limits the amount of space available for cutting the federal funds rate to offset adverse developments and thereby can be expected to increase the frequency and duration of periods when the policy rate is constrained by the effective lower bound, unemployment is elevated, and inflation is below target. In this environment, frequent or extended periods of low inflation run the risk of pulling down private-sector inflation expectations, which could amplify the degree and persistence of shortfalls of inflation, thereby making future lower bound episodes even more challenging in terms of output and employment losses. To the extent it is weighing on longer-run inflation expectations, the persistently low level of the neutral federal funds rate may be a factor contributing to the persistent shortfall of U.S. inflation from the FOMC's target.5 Further complicating the ability of central banks to achieve their inflation objectives in today's new normal is the very flat Phillips curve observed in the United States and many other advanced economies, which makes the relationship between labor market conditions and price inflation more tenuous. For instance, inflation has remained stubbornly below the FOMC's 2 percent target for the past five years even as unemployment has fallen from 8.2 percent to 4.2 percent, a level that most experts believe is in the vicinity of full employment.6 Bernanke's paper provides an excellent review of the Federal Reserve's efforts to operate in this new environment and makes some interesting new proposals. Reflecting on the Fed's available "policy toolbox," Bernanke concludes that the available tools are not likely to be sufficient and proposes a framework that relies on forward guidance with commitment to help central banks achieve their inflation and employment objectives. The Makeup PrincipleThe academic literature on monetary policy suggests a variety of prescriptions for preventing a lower neutral rate of interest from eroding longer-run inflation expectations. The paper argues convincingly that many of these proposals present practical difficulties that would create a very high bar for their adoption. For instance, raising the inflation target sufficiently to provide meaningfully greater policy space could engender public discomfort or, at the other extreme, risk unmooring inflation expectations. The transition to a notably higher target is likely to be challenging and could heighten uncertainty. As I have noted previously, the persistence of the shortfall in inflation from our objective is an important consideration for monetary policy.7The makeup principle, in which policy would make up for past misses of the inflation target, is not reflected in most standard monetary policy frameworks, although it is an important precept in theory.8Some of the proposals that have been advanced to implement this principle present some difficulties. For example, while price-level targeting would be helpful in the aftermath of a recession that puts the economy at the effective lower bound, it could require tightening into a negative supply shock, which is a very unattractive feature, as Bernanke points out.9 Bernanke proposes a framework that avoids this undesirable possibility by implementing a temporary price-level targeting framework only in periods where conventional policy is constrained by the lower bound. Bernanke's proposal thus has the advantage of maintaining standard practice in normal times while proposing a makeup policy in periods when the policy rate is limited by the lower bound and inflation is below target. His proposed temporary price-level target would delay the liftoff of the policy rate from the lower bound until the average inflation over the entire lower bound episode has reached 2 percent and full employment is achieved. This type of policy, which would result in temporary overshooting of the inflation target in order to make up for the previous period of undershooting, is designed to, in Bernanke's words, "calibrate the vigor of the policy response...to the severity of the episode." The Normalization BiasThe proposed temporary price-level targeting policy is designed to address what I see as one of the key challenges facing policymakers. Following deep recessions of the type we experienced in 2008-09, there appears to be an important premium on "normalization." This was apparent in 2010, for instance, when there was substantial pressure among Group of Twenty officials to commit to timelines and targets for reducing fiscal support and to articulate exit principles for monetary policy.10This inclination proved premature, as was evident from the subsequent intensification of the euro-area crisis. Moreover, the benchmark for "normal" tends to be defined in terms of pre-crisis standards that involved policy settings well away from the lower bound, at least initially, because it may take some time to learn about important changes in underlying financial and economic relationships. For example, the factors underlying what we now understand to be the new normal of persistently low interest rates were in many cases initially viewed as temporary headwinds. In these circumstances, a standard policy framework calibrated around the pre-crisis or "old" normal may be biased to underachieving the inflation target in a low neutral rate environment. The kind of policy framework that Bernanke proposes, which pre-commits to implementing the makeup principle based on the actual observed performance of inflation during a lower bound episode, could guard against premature liftoff and help prevent the erosion of longer-term inflation expectations. Monetary policymakers operate in an environment of considerable uncertainty and therefore have to weigh the risks of tightening too little or too late against those of tightening too much or too soon. While past experience has conditioned U.S. policymakers to be highly attentive to the risks associated with a breakout of inflation to the upside, as in the 1970s, they balance these risks against those associated with undershooting the inflation target persistently, as in Japan in the late 1990s and the 2000s. In weighing these risks, the standard approach is typically designed to achieve "convergence from below," in which inflation gradually rises to its target. Given the lags in the effects of monetary policy, convergence from below would necessitate raising interest rates preemptively, well in advance of inflation reaching its target. Moreover, particularly in the early stage of a recovery, this kind of preemptive approach tends of necessity to rely on economic relationships derived from pre-crisis observations, when policy rates were comfortably above the lower bound. During a period when the policy rate is limited by the lower bound, Bernanke's proposal would represent a substantial departure from the standard approach. While a standard policy framework would tend to prescribe that tightening should start preemptively, well before inflation reaches target, Bernanke's temporary price-level target proposal would imply maintaining the policy rate at the lower bound well past the point at which inflation has risen above target. In principle, policymakers would have to be willing to accept elevated rates of above-target inflation for a period following a lengthy period of undershooting. Just as policymakers could run a risk of low inflation becoming entrenched in the standard preemptive framework, so, too, there are risks in the temporary price-level target framework. One risk is that the public, seeing elevated rates of inflation, may start to doubt that the central bank is still serious about its inflation target. It is worth noting that the policy is motivated by the opposite concern--that convergence from below, following an extended lower bound episode, may lead to an unanchoring of inflation expectations to the downside. Still, a conscious policy of overshooting may be difficult to calibrate, especially since the large confidence intervals around inflation forecasts suggest that the risks of an undesired overshooting are nontrivial. A related risk is that the central bank would lose its nerve: Maintaining the interest rate at zero in the face of a strong economy and inflation notably above its target would place a central bank in uncomfortable territory. One additional challenge of the proposed framework is specifying a path for the policy rate immediately following liftoff that smoothly and gradually eases inflation back down to target and facilitates a gradual adjustment of the labor market. In the proposed framework, once the cumulative average rate of inflation during the lower-bound period has reached the target of 2 percent, policy would revert to a standard policy rule.11This implies that a standard policy rule would kick in at a point when inflation is above target and the economy is at or beyond full employment. Even with a smoothing (inertial) property, a standard policy rule could result in a relatively sharp path of tightening, and the anticipation of the steep post-liftoff rate path itself could undo some of the benefits associated with the framework. Thus, there would likely need to be a transitional framework to guide policy initially post-liftoff that might make both communications and policy somewhat more complicated. Integrating the Policy Rate and the Balance SheetThe temporary price-level targeting framework proposed by Bernanke is appealing on a conceptual level because it proposes a simple and clear mechanism to help policymakers deal with the challenges posed by the lower bound on the policy rate in an environment of uncertainty. The reality is more complicated, however, especially if, as the paper suggests, many central banks in advanced economies are likely to operate with an additional tool when the policy rate is constrained. In the paper, Bernanke cites Chair Yellen's 2016 Jackson Hole speech, which suggests that in a recession, the FOMC could be expected to turn to large-scale asset purchases as well as forward guidance after the federal funds rate is lowered to zero.12 Today, when many central banks in advanced economies are operating with two distinct tools, policymakers consider the effects of the balance sheet as well as the policy rate in their assessment of the extent of accommodation provided by monetary policy. In the United States, from the time tapering was first discussed to the September 2017 meeting, when the path for balance sheet runoff was adopted, FOMC minutes and statements suggest that participants considered the degree of accommodation provided by both policy tools in their discussions of the sequencing and timing of changes to policy settings. Discussions about the sequencing of "normalization" and the delay of balance sheet runoff "until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way" effectively consider the extent to which maintaining the balance sheet may continue to provide makeup support for the economy while enabling the policy rate to escape the lower bound earlier than otherwise in a low neutral rate environment. As Bernanke acknowledges, now that many central banks have developed playbooks specifying the operational modalities associated with asset purchases, and there is some familiarity with their effects on asset prices and financial conditions, there is a greater likelihood that asset purchases would become a part of the policy reaction function, along with forward guidance, during lower-bound episodes. Yet, as I have noted previously in the international context, asset purchases can complicate policy frameworks and communications, because their deployment and withdrawal has tended to be discontinuous and discrete and thus may be associated with greater uncertainty about the policy reaction function.13It appears the public closely follows statements about both the policy rate and asset purchases to glean possible information about the future overall stance of monetary policy. This suggests there may be benefits in communications and predictability of a unified policy framework across the tools that is more predictable and continuous. Relatedly, one helpful elaboration of the framework Bernanke proposes might be to incorporate a unified measure, or shadow rate, that would capture the degree of policy accommodation provided through the combined settings of both asset purchases and the policy rate.14 Greater Cross-Border SpilloversMoving away from the policy proposal in the paper, there are two other aspects of a low neutral rate world that I want to touch on briefly: cross-border spillovers and financial imbalances. The new normal appears to be characterized by low neutral rates and a weak relationship between overall inflation and unemployment not only in the United States, but also in many other advanced economies with lower-bound episodes likely to be more prevalent. The current environment appears also to evidence intensified cross-border feedback into financial conditions.15In this kind of environment, it is conceivable the kind of committed forward guidance associated with the temporary price-level targeting framework proposed by Bernanke, by helping rule out anticipation of a standard preemptive tightening, could help avoid unwarranted premature tightening through the exchange rate. Given available data, it is difficult to disentangle whether the heightened cross-border feedback effects are attributable to the low level of neutral rates, particular features of today's lower-bound episodes, or the interaction of the policies adopted by many central banks. In any case, recent Federal Reserve staff analysis suggests that cross-border spillovers have increased notably since the crisis and are quite large. For instance, European Central Bank policy news that leads to a 10 basis point decrease in the German 10-year term premium is associated with a roughly 5 basis point decrease in the U.S. 10-year term premium; by contrast, these spillovers were smaller in the years leading up to the crisis.16 Moreover, news about policy rates and term premiums appears to have quite different effects on exchange rates, such that the ordering of policy normalization can have important implications for exchange rates and associated financial conditions, as I discussed earlier this year.17Recent staff estimates suggest that news about expected changes in the policy rate tends to have a large spillover through the exchange rate, whereas news about changes in term premiums tends to lead to corresponding cross-border changes in term premiums, as discussed previously, with much smaller effects on the exchange rate. Moreover, the exchange rate effect of changes in short-term rates is much greater than it was pre-crisis. For instance, policy news that leads to a 25 basis point increase in the expected interest rate portion of the 10year Treasury yield is associated with a roughly 3 percentage point appreciation in the dollar, which is three times greater than the response pre-crisis. By contrast, policy news surrounding a change in U.S. term premiums has a muted effect on the exchange rate both now and pre-crisis. Financial ImbalancesFinally, a low neutral rate environment may also be associated with a heightened risk of asset price bubbles, which could exacerbate the tradeoff for monetary policy between achieving the traditional dual-mandate goals and preventing the kinds of imbalances that could contribute to financial instability. Standard asset-valuation models suggest that a persistently low neutral rate, depending on the factors driving it, could lead to higher ratios of asset prices to underlying income flows--for example, higher ratios of prices to earnings for stocks or higher prices of buildings relative to rents. If asset markets were highly efficient and participants had excellent foresight, this would not necessarily lead to imbalances. However, to the extent that financial markets extrapolate price movements, markets may not transition smoothly to asset valuations that reflect underlying fundamentals but may instead evidence periods of overshooting.18Such forces may have played a role in both the stock market boom that ended in the bust of 2001 and the house price bubble that burst in 2007-09. The risks of such financial imbalances may be greater in the context of the kind of explicit inflation target overshooting policies proposed in the paper. Again, if market participants were perfectly rational, overshooting policies would not likely pose financial stability risks. But the combination of low interest rates and low unemployment that would prevail during the inflation overshooting period could well spark capital markets to overextend, leading to financial imbalances. Macroprudential tools are the preferred first line of defense to address such financial imbalances, which should in principle enable monetary policy to focus on price stability and macroeconomic stabilization. But the development and deployment of macroprudential tools is still relatively untested in the U.S. context, and the toolkit is limited. Although important research suggests that the situations under which monetary policy should take financial imbalances into account are likely to be very rare, some recent research has pointed out that the case in favor of taking financial imbalances into account is strengthened when the consequences of financial crises are long lasting.19In this case, another complication of a persistently low neutral rate may be a sharper tradeoff between achieving the traditional dual-mandate objectives and avoiding financial stability risks, which may make it even more difficult to achieve our price-stability objective. ReferencesBernanke, Ben S. (2017). "Monetary Policy for a New Era," paper prepared for "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 12. Brainard, Lael (2015). "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. -------- (2016a). "What Happened to the Great Divergence?" speech delivered at the 2016 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 26. -------- (2016b). "The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Foreign Affairs, Chicago, September 12. -------- (2017a). "Cross-Border Spillovers of Balance Sheet Normalization," speech delivered at the National Bureau of Economic Research's Monetary Economics Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 13. -------- (2017b). "Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5. Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne K. Thompson (2012). "What Have They Been Thinking? Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 265-98. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 139-233. Gerdrup, Karsten R., Frank Hansen, Tord Krogh, and Junior Maib (2017). "Leaning against the Wind When Credit Bites Back,"International Journal of Central Banking,September. Gourio, Francois, Anil K. Kashyap, and Jae Sim (2016). "The Tradeoffs in Leaning against the Wind (PDF)," paper presented at the 17th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 3. Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer (2014). "Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns,"Review of Financial Studies,vol. 27 (March), pp. 714-46. Kamin, Steven B., Canlin Li, and Marius D. Rodriguez (forthcoming). "International Spillovers from Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Krippner, Leo (2016). "Documentation for Measures of Monetary Policy (PDF)," Reserve Bank of New Zealand Working Paper. Wellington, New Zealand: Reserve Bank of New Zealand, July. Nakata, Taisuke, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016). "The Risk-Adjusted Monetary Policy Rule (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-061. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936-66. Svensson, Lars E. (2016). "Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind," NBER Working Papers Series 21902. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. Wu, Jing Cynthia, and Fan Dora Xia (2016). "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 48 (March-April), pp. 253-91. Yellen, Janet L. (2016). "The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future," speech at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26. 1. Bernanke (2017).Return to text 2. I am grateful to John Roberts for his assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 3. See Brainard (2015, 2016b).Return to text 4. The well-known Laubach-Williams model currently suggests an estimate of the longer-run neutral federal funds rate that is close to zero. The latest estimates are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's website athttp://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/Laubach_Williams_updated_estimates.xlsx. Over the 1960-2007 period, the real federal funds rate--measured as the nominal federal funds rate less trailing four-quarter core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation--averaged 2-1/2 percent.Return to text 5. See, for example, Brainard (2017b), Kiley and Roberts (2017), and Nakata and Schmidt (2016).Return to text 6. The inflation information refers to core PCE inflation measured on a 12-month average basis.Return to text 7. See Brainard (2017b).Return to text 8. See, for example, Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) or Reifschneider and Williams (2000).Return to text 9. As Bernanke notes, one way to avoid this feature is to adopt "flexible price-level targeting," in which policy takes into account resource utilization as well as the deviation of the price level from its target. Kiley and Roberts (2017) examine a form of flexible price-level targetingwhich they refer to as a "shadow rate rule"and find that it performs well.Return to text 10. The 2010 G-20 Toronto communiqu indicated that advanced economies "committed to fiscal plans that will at least halve deficits by 2013 and stabilize or reduce government debt-to-GDP ratios by 2016." The document is available on the U.S. Department of the Treasury's website athttps://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/international/Documents/The%20G-20%20Toronto%20Summit%20Declaration.pdf (PDF).Return to text 11. In the paper, this rule is specified as an inertial Taylor rule.Return to text 12. See Yellen (2016).Return to text 13. See Brainard (2015).Return to text 14. See, for instance, Krippner (2016) and Wu and Xia (2016).Return to text 15. See Brainard (2016a, 2016b).Return to text 16. See Kamin, Li, and Rodriguez (forthcoming).Return to text 17. See Brainard (2017a).Return to text 18. See, for example, Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012) and Greenwood and Schleifer (2014).Return to text 19. See, for example, Svensson (2016). See Gourio, Kashyap, and Sim (2016) and Gerdrup and others (2016).Return to text
Statement of Chair Janet L. Yellen on the Financial Stability Oversight Council's decision to rescind the designation of American International Group (AIG) as a systemic nonbank financial company: The financial crisis showed that the distress of large and systemic nonbank financial companies could imperil the financial stability of the United States, ultimately putting the American economy at risk. The Dodd-Frank Act gave regulators new tools to address this problem and they acted sensibly in the wake of the crisis to designate AIG for additional supervisory measures. Since the financial crisis, AIG has largely sold off or wound down its capital markets businesses, and has become a smaller firm that poses less of a threat to financial stability. For example, it has reduced its assets by more than $500 billion, wound down its Financial Products division, and sold off its mortgage insurance company. Although AIG's distress could lead to a run by policyholders on a portion of its annuities and other insurance products, the financial system should be able to handle the potential fire sales. It is important to continue to monitor large nonbank financial firms to ensure that, should they encounter distress, the functioning of the broader economy is not threatened. The possibility of de-designation provides an incentive for designated firms to significantly reduce their systemic footprint. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Group of 30 International Banking Seminar, Washington, D.C. I would like to thank the Group of Thirty for inviting me to participate in their International Banking Seminar and also thank Luis Alberto Moreno of the Inter-American Development Bank for hosting this event. My comments today will focus on U.S. economic prospects and monetary policy. Economic activity in the United States has been growing moderately so far this year, and the labor market has continued to strengthen. The terrible hurricanes that hit Texas, Florida, Puerto Rico, and our neighbors in the Caribbean caused tremendous damage and upended many lives, and our hearts go out to those affected. While the effects of the hurricanes on the U.S. economy are quite noticeable in the short term, history suggests that the longer-term effects will be modest and that aggregate economic activity will recover quickly. Starting with the labor market, through August, payroll job gains averaged 170,000 per month this year, down only a little from the average pace of gains in 2016 and still well above estimates of the pace necessary to absorb new entrants to the labor force. In September, payrolls were reported to have declined 33,000, but that weakness reflected the effects of Hurricane Irma, which hit Florida during the reference week for the September labor market surveys. I would expect employment to bounce back in subsequent months as communities recover and people return to their jobs. Other aspects of the jobs report for September were strong. The unemployment rate, which seems not to have been noticeably affected by the hurricanes, declined further to 4.2 percent, down about 1/2 percentage point from the end of 2016 and below the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' estimates of its longer-run normal level. Labor force participation continues to strengthen relative to a downward trend that reflects, in part, the aging of the population. Other labor market indicators, including the rates of job openings and the number of people who voluntarily quit their jobs, also point to strength. Wage indicators have been mixed, and the most recent news, on average hourly earnings through September, was encouraging. On balance, wage gains appear moderate, and the pace seems broadly consistent with a tightening labor market once we account for the disappointing productivity growth in recent years. I expect the labor market to strengthen further as economic growth continues. The hurricanes will likely result in some hit to GDP growth in the third quarter but a rebound thereafter, and smoothing through those movements, I'm expecting growth that continues to exceed potential in the second half of the year. The latest projections from FOMC participants have a median of 2-1/2 percent GDP growth this year. Growth of consumer spending has been supported by the ongoing job gains and relatively high levels of household wealth and consumer sentiment. Business investment has strengthened this year following surprising weakness in 2016. The faster gains partly reflect an upturn in investment in the energy sector as oil prices have firmed. But the gains have been broader than that, and some measures of business sentiment remain quite strong. Exports also have risen this year, as growth abroad has solidified and the exchange value of the dollar has declined somewhat. My fellow FOMC participants and I perceive that risks to global growth have receded somewhat and expect growth to continue to improve over the near term. The biggest surprise in the U.S. economy this year has been inflation. Earlier this year, the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) reached 2 percent, and core PCE inflation reached 1.9 percent. These readings seemed consistent with the view that inflation had been held down by both the sizable fall in oil prices and the appreciation of the dollar starting around mid-2014, and that these influences have diminished significantly by this year. Accordingly, inflation seemed well on its way to the FOMC's 2 percent inflation objective on a sustainable basis. Inflation readings over the past several months have been surprisingly soft, however, and the 12-month change in core PCE prices has fallen to 1.3 percent. The recent softness seems to have been exaggerated by what look like one-off reductions in some categories of prices, especially a large decline in quality-adjusted prices for wireless telephone services. More generally, it is common to see movements in inflation of a few tenths of a percentage point that are hard to explain, and such "surprises" should not really be surprising. My best guess is that these soft readings will not persist, and with the ongoing strengthening of labor markets, I expect inflation to move higher next year. Most of my colleagues on the FOMC agree. In the latest Summary of Economic Projections, my colleagues and I project inflation to move higher next year and to reach 2 percent by 2019. To be sure, our understanding of the forces that drive inflation is imperfect, and we recognize that this year's low inflation could reflect something more persistent than is reflected in our baseline projections. The fact that a number of other advanced economies are also experiencing persistently low inflation understandably adds to the sense among many analysts that something more structural may be going on. Let me mention a few possibilities of more fundamental influences.1 First, given that estimates of the natural rate of unemployment are so uncertain, it is possible that there is more slack in U.S. labor markets than is commonly recognized, which may be true for some other advanced economies as well. If so, some further tightening in the labor market might be needed to lift inflation back to 2 percent. Second, some measures of longer-term inflation expectations have edged lower over the past few years in several major economies, and it remains an open question whether these measures might be reflecting a true decline in expectations that is broad enough to be affecting actual inflation outcomes. Third, our framework for understanding inflation dynamics could be misspecified in some way. For example, global developments--perhaps technological in nature, such as the tremendous growth of online shopping--could be helping to hold down inflation in a persistent way in many countries. Or there could be sector-specific developments--such as the subdued rise in medical prices in the United States in recent years--that are not typically included in aggregate inflation equations but which have contributed to lower inflation. Such global and sectoral developments could continue to be important restraining influences on inflation. Of course, there are also risks that could unexpectedly boost inflation more rapidly than expected, such as resource utilization having a stronger influence when the economy is running closer to full capacity. In this economic environment, with ongoing improvements in labor market conditions and softness in inflation that is expected to be temporary, the FOMC has continued its policy of gradual policy normalization. As the Committee announced after our September meeting, we are initiating our balance sheet normalization program this month. That program, which was described in the June Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, will gradually scale back our reinvestments of proceeds from maturing Treasury securities and principal payments from agency securities. As a result, our balance sheet will decline gradually and predictably.2By limiting the volume of securities that private investors will have to absorb as we reduce our holdings, the caps should guard against outsized moves in interest rates and other potential market strains. Changing the target range for the federal funds rate is our primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. Our balance sheet is not intended to be an active tool for monetary policy in normal times. We therefore do not plan on making adjustments to our balance sheet normalization program. But, of course, as we stated in June, the Committee would be prepared to resume reinvestments if a material deterioration in the economic outlook were to warrant a sizable reduction in the federal funds rate. Also at our September meeting, the Committee decided to maintain its target for the federal funds rate. We continue to expect that the ongoing strength of the economy will warrant gradual increases in that rate to sustain a healthy labor market and stabilize inflation around our 2 percent longer-run objective. That expectation is based on our view that the federal funds rate remains somewhat below its neutral level--that is, the level that is neither expansionary nor contractionary and keeps the economy operating on an even keel. The neutral rate currently appears to be quite low by historical standards, implying that the federal funds rate would not have to rise much further to get to a neutral policy stance. But we expect the neutral level of the federal funds rate to rise somewhat over time, and, as a result, additional gradual rate hikes are likely to be appropriate over the next few years to sustain the economic expansion. Indeed, FOMC participants have built such a gradual path of rate hikes into their projections for the next couple of years. Of course, policy is not on a preset course. I have spoken about some of the uncertainties associated with the inflation outlook in particular, and we will be paying close attention to the inflation data in the months ahead. But uncertainty about the outlook is by no means limited to inflation. As always, the Committee will adjust the stance of monetary policy in response to incoming economic information and the evolution of the economic outlook to achieve its objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Moreover, we are mindful of the possibility that shifting expectations concerning the path of U.S. policy can lead to spillovers to other economies via financial markets and the value of the dollar. We remain committed to communicating as clearly and effectively as possible to help mitigate the risk of sudden changes in the policy outlook among market participants that could spur unintended effects in global financial markets. 1. For further discussion, see Janet Yellen (2017), "Inflation, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Prospects for Growth: Reassessing the Fundamentals," the 59th annual meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, Ohio, September 26.Return to text 2. For October through December of this year, the decline in the Federal Reserve's securities holdings will be capped at $6 billion per month for Treasury securities and $4 billion per month for agency securities. These caps will gradually rise over the course of the following year to maximums of $30 billion per month for Treasury securities and $20 billion per month for agency securities and will remain in place through the process of normalizing the size of our balance sheet.Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At TMPG Best Practices @ 10: A Look Back and a Look Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York I am honored to join you to celebrate the first 10 years of the Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG). The TMPG has become an essential forum where industry participants gather under the auspices of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to address market practice issues as they arise in the fast evolving markets for Treasury securities. Outside this room, you are competitors, and that vigorous competition serves your firms, your customers, and ultimately the U.S. taxpayer. But when members of the TMPG attend meetings, they bring their long experience and deep expertise to bear to safeguard the functioning and overall health of these markets. As I have heard a number of people say, TMPG members check their partisan interests at the door. The TMPG is the place where market participants recognize and address their responsibilities to each other. I know that they take that responsibility seriously, and I encourage all of the market participants here today to take the TMPG's recommendations just as seriously and to adopt them as best practices that will enhance the market's functioning. I first encountered Treasury markets in a serious way 25 years ago, when I served as Under Secretary of the Treasury for Finance under President George H. W. Bush. These markets made national headlines when we learned that a Salomon Brothers' trader had repeatedly circumvented Treasury auction rules to corner the market for the on-the-run two-year Treasury. As it became clear that Salomon's senior management had known about the issue for several months without alerting regulators, the scandal threatened to bring down one of the largest financial firms of that time. Over one memorable August weekend, we first prohibited the firm from dealing in government securities on behalf of customers, and then reduced that sanction as top Salomon management left the firm and Warren Buffett, then a large Salomon shareholder, agreed to assume the chairmanship of the board of directors. This event takes up a chapter in Buffett's biography,The Snowball, and it is a good illustration of why we need the TMPG. I reread that chapter every couple of years, and it still gives me nightmares.1 After the dust settled, we had to grapple with the wider implications of the scandal for the market itself and particularly the role of regulatory oversight. We certainly could have used a TMPG to help us with this work, but none existed at that time. Our recommendations were summarized in a joint report to the Congress issued by the Treasury Department, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the Federal Reserve Board. Among the issues we considered were how to encourage a level playing field for all market participants, and when and where regulators should respond to the periodic technical difficulties the market sometimes experienced. As we drew up the report, we were deeply aware of the importance that Treasury markets held for the American economy. The sale of Treasury bonds, notes, and bills finances the U.S. government, and those securities are in turn a primary vehicle for savings for a wide range of U.S. households. Treasury securities are also an important source of collateral within the financial system. This last role has become all the more critical in recent years as regulations have required banks to hold larger amounts of high-quality liquid assets so that they can safely meet their potential liquidity needs. We also knew that, despite the misconduct by Salomon Brothers, Treasury markets generally worked quite well. These markets are and have long been among the deepest and most liquid markets in the world. It was important to make the auction system more robust to potential manipulation, and we made several recommendations to do so and to open up the process to greater competition. However, in other areas that already worked well, we chose, for example, to open up issuance of securities that were in short supply (or "squeezed") when needed rather than to risk negatively affecting the functioning of Treasury markets by instituting more invasive regulation. There is certainly a role for regulation, but regulation should always take into account the impact that it has on markets--a balance that must be constantly weighed. More regulation is not the best answer to every problem. There is also a role for a body such as the TMPG to address market problems. The TMPG's approach to "fails" in the Treasury and mortgage-backed securities markets provides a good example. Fails--that is, the failure to deliver collateral in either a cash or repurchase agreement transaction--impose a cost on the party expecting delivery. If the practice were to become too frequent, then it could seriously impair market functioning. But at the same time, it doesn't make sense to simply outlaw the practice, since that limits flexibility in a way that may not always be called for and would likely reduce market liquidity. The TMPG's recommendations were carefully calibrated to set financial incentives that would minimize fails and have been a marked success. The TMPG also plays an important role in helping to "fill in the cracks" between the competing regulations that various Treasury market participants face. Many different institutions and individuals depend on these markets, and the regulatory system reflects that. The Government Securities Act gave the Treasury Department some rulemaking authority over all government securities brokers and dealers. But the act also required these firms to register with the SEC. At the same time, the Federal Reserve regulates many of the banks that are active in these markets, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York also plays an essential role, both as fiscal agent for the U.S. government and, by nature of its frequent activity in these markets, in conducting monetary policy operations. And of course, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission regulates Treasury futures markets. The agencies work well together, but there is real value in having an industry group help to identify issues that cross regulatory boundaries. I'll give two examples. First, in 2016, the TMPG conducted a study of financial benchmarks and uncovered uses of ICAP's federal funds open rate that had not previously been well understood.2As ICAP decided to stop publishing the rate, the TMPG also helped to guide market participants to an alternative that is aligned with the International Organizations of Securities Commissions Principles for Financial Benchmarks while steering the market away from the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) as a potential alternative--a move that now seems prescient given the subsequent news around the long-run risks to LIBOR. More recently, the TMPG has been busy creating a map of clearing and settlement in Treasury markets, work that I am sure all of the regulatory agencies will find to be of great interest. All of this is incredibly valuable. In fact, my only regret about the TMPG is that we didn't think of creating something like it earlier. As regulators, we fully support your work, and will continue to make sure that our own rules support these markets. The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority's (FINRA's) new collection of the Treasury transactions of its members through its Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine, or TRACE system, will do much to improve the regulatory agencies' understanding of the dynamics of this market. But as in the past, we should also be concerned about creating a level playing field. For that reason, the Board of Governors is continuing to negotiate with FINRA for it to act as our agent in collecting similar data from banks. We do not want to create a regulatory arbitrage where the same activity done within a broker-dealer is treated differently than when it is done within a bank. The TMPG and similar groups around the world play an important role by helping both regulators and industry leaders address market concerns before they threaten market function. I thank the members for their service and look forward to today's discussions. 1. Alice Schroeder,The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of Life(New York: Bantam, 2009).Return to text 2. The ICAP Fed Funds Open rate was a daily indicator published by ICAP, a broker in the federal funds market, as to where a representative federal fund transaction would be priced at the start of the U.S. trading day. ICAP did not consider the rate to be International Organizations of Securities Commissions compliant, although it was nonetheless used as a financial benchmark by some market participants. ICAP ceased publication of the index in September 2016.Return to text
The Federal Reserve, on behalf of the Governance Framework Formation Team, announced the 27 members of the collaborative industry short-term work group that will focus on developing a governance framework for faster payments in the United States. The work group, originally called the interim collaboration work group, was established by the Faster Payments Task Force and described in a recommendation in its July 21 final report titled, "The U.S. Path to Faster Payments." In response to the Faster Payments Task Force's request that the Federal Reserve facilitate the work of the Governance Framework Formation Team, Sean Rodriguez, faster payments strategy leader at the Federal Reserve and chair of the task force, will serve as chair of the group. "The work of the Faster Payments Task Force was successful because 300-plus payment stakeholders came to the table with a common goal of an improved payment system for the U.S.," said Rodriguez. "I've seen this same enthusiasm with the Governance Framework Formation Team. They are committed to working together in order to achieve the task force vision of ubiquitous faster payments capabilities in the U.S. by 2020." The Governance Framework Formation Team objectives include: The formation team will initially focus on the structure, decision-making and processes of a governance framework, and is committed to keeping industry stakeholders abreast of progress by seeking comment on its recommendations in the spring of next year, with the goal of concluding its work in the second half of 2018. Prior to its dissolution, the Faster Payments Task Force elected the initial membership of the Governance Framework Formation Team to ensure representation of all stakeholder perspectives in the effort, in addition to providing the team latitude to appoint additional members to secure needed expertise and perspectives. With the task force elections and subsequent appointments, the Governance Framework Formation Team believes the final roster achieves this broad representation. The members are: Lou Anne Alexander, Early Warning ServicesJames Angel, Georgetown UniversityDouglas Berg, Wells Fargo & CompanyMichael Bilski, North American Banking CompanyKevin Christensen, SHAZAM NetworkRoy DeCicco, Accredited Standards Committee (ASC) X9Susan Doyle, Commerce BankJohn Drechny, Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.Tim Dwyer, Nationwide InsuranceJan Estep, NACHA  The Electronic Payments AssociationMatthew Friend, Visa, Inc.Andrea Gilman, MastercardBarbara Gross, Bankers' BankCharles Harkness, Corporate One Federal Credit UnionJohn Hill, Fiscal Service, U.S. Department of the TreasuryMark Keeling, The Bankers BankStephen Kenneally, American Bankers AssociationSteve Ledford, The Clearing HouseGene Neyer, FinastraBrian Peters, Financial Innovation NowDeborah Phillips, Jack Henry & AssociatesTom Rea, U.S. BankAdam Rust, Reinvestment PartnersGary Stein, Consumer Financial Protection BureauChristina Tetreault, Consumers UnionDavid Walker, ECCHOBradley Wilkes, WingCash LLC Additional information about the Governance Framework Formation Team can be found onFedPaymentsImprovement.org. To follow work group efforts, sign-up via the Engage page onFasterPaymentsTaskForce.org.
Chair Janet L. Yellen At Community Banking in the 21st Century Fifth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference cosponsored by the Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri I am very glad to welcome everyone here to this conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. Since the first of these gatherings five years ago, this research and policy conference has established itself as an important event where industry leaders, academics, and supervisors discuss the latest research and exchange ideas about promoting a healthy and growing community banking industry. All of us share an interest in seeing that community banks continue their vital role in their customers' lives and in a strong and stable U.S. financial system. The Fed has been working hard to ensure that its regulation and supervision of banks are tailored appropriately to the size, complexity, and role different institutions play in the financial system. For community banks, which by and large avoided the risky business practices that contributed to the financial crisis, we have been focused on making sure that much-needed improvements to regulation and supervision since the crisis are appropriate and not unduly burdensome. One way we are doing this is through the regulatory review required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act, known as EGRPRA. The first step we took, pursuant to EGRPRA, was to listen to industry and others with a stake in how community banks are supervised, which was accomplished through soliciting written comments and by holding six outreach meetings in 2014 and 2015. Our EGRPRA report, issued in March, was focused on community banks, and it noted steps that had already taken place, for example, to simplify Call Report requirements and expand the number of firms eligible for less frequent examinations. Since that report, the Board of Governors, along with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, has proposed a rule expanding the number of commercial real estate transactions that will no longer require an appraisal, allowing for a less detailed evaluation. And just last week, the Fed, along with other regulators, took a significant step to reduce the regulatory burden on community banks and other smaller and less complex institutions by proposing to simplify several requirements in the regulatory capital rule. We have done this because we have an abiding commitment to consider how our decisions affect institutions and the customers they serve. We are well aware that community banks serve communities, businesses, and households that are often underserved by larger institutions and offer more extensive and more personalized services than are often otherwise available. We know that community bankers are part of the communities they serve, and they are often better able to understand the needs and the aspirations of their customers. We hope that the research presented at this conference stimulates discussion about the leading policy issues facing the industry and supervisors. As in the past, I see that this year's agenda includes presentations related to several important issues, including the effect of supervision on risk-tasking and the effects of greater competition on community banks. I am cheered to see that finance students at the University of Akron remain interested enough in community banking to participate in a case-study competition related to community banking, and I am pleased that the conference will hear a presentation of the winning case study. In closing, let me thank the conference organizers with the Fed and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, the scholars and others making presentations, and all of you for attending. I hope you have a terrific conference.