The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation today extended the next resolution plan filing deadline for eight large domestic banks by one year to July 1, 2019. The extension will provide the time needed for firms to remediate any weaknesses identified in their July 2017 submissions and to prepare and improve their next resolution plan submissions. Resolution plans, required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills, describe an institution's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure. Resolution plans of foreign banking organizations are focused on their U.S. operations. The agencies continue to explore ways to improve the resolution planning process and believe it is worthwhile to consider extending the cycle for living will submissions from annual to once every two years. Today's action is a step toward that end. The eight domestic firms granted the extension are Bank of America, Bank of New York Mellon, Citigroup, Goldman Sachs Group, JP Morgan Chase, Morgan Stanley, State Street Corporation, and Wells Fargo. The agencies' review of the July 1, 2017, resolution plan submissions is ongoing. This extension does not affect any actions the agencies may take concerning those plans. The agencies are also extending by one year, to December 31, 2018, the next resolution plan submission deadline for 82 foreign banks with limited U.S. operations.
The federal banking agencies on Wednesday proposed a rule intended to reduce regulatory burden by simplifying several requirements in the agencies' regulatory capital rule. Most aspects of the proposed rule would apply only to banking organizations that are not subject to the "advanced approaches" in the capital rule, which are generally firms with less than $250 billion in total consolidated assets and less than $10 billion in total foreign exposure. The proposal would simplify and clarify a number of the more complex aspects of the existing capital rule. Specifically, the proposed rule simplifies the capital treatment for certain acquisition, development, and construction loans, mortgage servicing assets, certain deferred tax assets, investments in the capital instruments of unconsolidated financial institutions, and minority interest. The proposed rule is consistent with the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act report issued by the agencies earlier this year. In that report, the agencies committed to meaningfully reducing regulatory burden, especially on community banking organizations, while at the same time maintaining safety and soundness and the quality and quantity of regulatory capital in the banking system. Comments on this proposal will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Community Bank Summary (PDF) Board Votes
The federal bank regulatory agencies today issued a joint notice of proposed rulemaking to amend their respective Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations primarily to conform to changes made by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) to Regulation C, which implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). Since 1995, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency have conformed certain definitions in their respective CRA regulations to the scope of loans reported under Regulation C and believe that continuing to do so produces a less-burdensome CRA performance evaluation process. In particular, the agencies are proposing to amend their CRA regulations to revise the definitions of "home mortgage loan" and "consumer loan," as well as the public file content requirements. These revisions would maintain consistency between the CRA regulations and the recent changes to Regulation C, which generally become effective on January 1, 2018. In addition, the draft proposal contains technical revisions and would remove obsolete references to the Neighborhood Stabilization Program. Comments on the proposal will be accepted for 30 days after publication in the Federal Register. The agencies anticipate that the proposed amendments to their CRA regulations will become effective also on January 1, 2018. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and state bank regulators recognize the serious impact of Hurricane Irma on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and will provide regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found atwww.fema.gov. Lending:Bankers should work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by Hurricane Irma. The agencies realize that the effects of natural disasters on local businesses and individuals are often transitory, and prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas should not be subject to examiner criticism. In supervising institutions affected by the hurricane, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances they face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound banking practices as well as in the public interest. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, institutions should review the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:Bankers should monitor municipal securities and loans affected by the hurricane. The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected. Appropriate monitoring and prudent efforts to stabilize such investments are encouraged. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by Hurricane Irma that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal regulatory agency to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of the effects of Hurricane Irma. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by the hurricane may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and state regulatory agency. Temporary Banking Facilities:The agencies understand that many banks face power, telecommunications, staffing and other challenges in re-opening facilities after the hurricane. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the appropriate primary federal and state regulator will expedite any request to operate temporary banking facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by the hurricane. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal and state regulator will suffice initially. Necessary written notification can be submitted later.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday adopted a final rule to enhance financial stability by requiring U.S. global systemically important banking institutions (GSIBs) and the U.S. operations of foreign GSIBs to amend qualified financial contracts to prevent their immediate cancellation or termination if the firm enters bankruptcy or a resolution process. Qualified financial contracts (QFCs) include derivatives, securities lending, and short-term funding transactions such as repurchase agreements. Given the large volume of QFCs to which GSIBs are a party, the mass termination of QFCs in the event of financial distress or failure of a GSIB may lead to the disorderly failure of the firm, spark asset fire sales, and transmit financial distress across the U.S. financial system. The final rule contains two key requirements. First, the final rule requires QFCs of GSIBs, including those with foreign counterparties, to clarify that U.S. resolution laws providing for a temporary stay to prevent mass terminations apply to the contracts. Second, the final rule prohibits the QFCs of GSIBs from allowing the exercise of default rights that could spread the bankruptcy of one GSIB entity to its solvent affiliates. "The final rule will reduce the threat that a disorderly unraveling of QFCs would pose to our financial system and the broader economy," said Governor Jerome H. Powell." GSIBs may comply with the final rule by using the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) 2015 Universal Resolution Stay Protocol or a similar resolution stay protocol described in the final regulation to amend their QFCs. In response to comments, the Board tailored the transition period based on the type of counterparty. The final rule requires GSIBs to conform their QFCs with other GSIBs within one year and within 18 months for QFCs with most other financial counterparties. Additionally, GSIBs would have two years to conform QFCs with community banks and all other counterparties. The final rule also excludes QFCs that do not contain default rights or restrictions that could undermine the orderly resolution of a GSIB. Compliance will phase in beginning on January 1, 2019. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Restrictions on Qualified Financial Contracts of Systemically Important U.S. Banking Organizations and the U.S. Operations of Systemically Important Foreign Banking Organizations; Revisions to the Definition of Qualifying Master Netting Agreement and Related Definitions:HTML|PDF Opening Statement by Chair Janet l. Yellen Opening Statement by Governor Jerome H. Powell Statement by Governor Lael Brainard Board Votes Open Board Meeting on September 1, 2017
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the September 19-20 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the September 19-20 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by PacWest Bancorp, Beverly Hills, California, to acquire CU Bancorp and thereby indirectly acquire California United Bank, both of Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act by Synovus Bank, Columbus, Georgia, to acquire substantially all the assets of, and assume the deposit liabilities from, World's Foremost Bank, Sidney, Nebraska. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by The Toronto-Dominion Bank, Toronto, Canada; TD Group US Holdings LLC, Wilmington, Delaware; and TD Bank US Holding Company, Cherry Hill, New Jersey (collectively, "TD"), to acquire Scottrade Financial Services, Inc., Town and Country, Missouri, and to merge Scottrade Bank, Town and Country, into TD's subsidiary national bank, TD Bank, National Association, Wilmington. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: AB&T Financial Corporation, Gastonia, North CarolinaWritten Agreement issued May 7, 2012Terminated September 13, 2017 The enforcement action from May 2012 can be foundhere, and other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: The First Bank of Baldwin, Baldwin, WisconsinWritten Agreement issued July 26, 2011Terminated September 19, 2017 The enforcement action from July 2011 can be foundhere, and other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application by the Bank of East Asia, Limited, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China, to upgrade its existing limited federal branch in Los Angeles, California, to a full-service branch. Attached is the Board's order relating to these actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that it has fined HSBC Holdings plc, London, United Kingdom, and HSBC North America Holdings Inc., New York, New York, $175 million for the firm's unsafe and unsound practices in its foreign exchange (FX) trading business. The Board levied the fine for deficiencies in HSBC's oversight of, and internal controls over, FX traders who buy and sell U.S. dollars and foreign currencies for the firm's own accounts and for customers. The firm failed to detect and address its traders misusing confidential customer information, as well as using electronic chatrooms to communicate with competitors about their trading positions. The Board's order requires HSBC to improve its controls and compliance risk management concerning the firm's FX trading. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: First Nebraska Bank, Valley, NebraskaOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated September 13, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Markesan State Bank, Markesan, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated September 8, 2017 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced it is prohibiting Daniel X. Brennan, a former Mortgage Production Manager at Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, from participating in the banking industry after determining he engaged in improper practices regarding residential mortgage origination. The Board found Brennan engaged in unsafe and unsound practices, or breached his fiduciary duties to Regions Bank, by making payments by personal check to a Regions Bank loan processor who processed and approved certain mortgage loans originated by Brennan in violation of Regions' policies. Brennan consented to the enforcement action by the Federal Reserve. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in July indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising moderately so far this year. Job gains have remained solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Household spending has been expanding at a moderate rate, and growth in business fixed investment has picked up in recent quarters. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and the measure excluding food and energy prices have declined this year and are running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria have devastated many communities, inflicting severe hardship. Storm-related disruptions and rebuilding will affect economic activity in the near term, but past experience suggests that the storms are unlikely to materially alter the course of the national economy over the medium term. Consequently, the Committee continues to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, and labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further. Higher prices for gasoline and some other items in the aftermath of the hurricanes will likely boost inflation temporarily; apart from that effect, inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent in the near term but to stabilize around the Committee's 2 percent objective over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but the Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1 to 1-1/4 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. In October, the Committee will initiate the balance sheet normalization program described in the June 2017 Addendum to the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Charles L. Evans; Stanley Fischer; Patrick Harker; Robert S. Kaplan; Neel Kashkari; and Jerome H. Powell. Implementation Note issued September 20, 2017
The Federal Reserve today published,Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System: Federal Reserve Next Steps in the Payments Improvement Journey,a paper identifying updated tactics it will pursue to help improve the speed, safety and efficiency of the U.S. payment system. The paper is a follow up to the Fed's strategic vision,Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System,published in January of 2015, which called for the commitment of all payment industry stakeholders to achieve five desired outcomes focused on speed, security, efficiency, international payments, and collaboration. It presents refreshed strategies and nine new tactics the Federal Reserve will employ, in collaboration with payment system stakeholders, to help achieve payment system improvements. In addition to the tactics described in this paper, the Federal Reserve will continue working to enhance its existing services and to advance ongoing initiatives. "Our 2015 paper laid out ambitious goals for the U.S. payment system that will require the sustained commitment of the Federal Reserve and the industry to achieve," said Esther George, president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and executive sponsor of the payments improvement initiative. "Thanks to the collective efforts of hundreds of payment system stakeholders during the past two years, we've made real progress. Through the strategies and tactics outlined in this next steps plan, the Federal Reserve will support continued industry momentum toward safe, ubiquitous, faster payments for our country." The Federal Reserve's strategies and tactics address the five desired outcomes as follows: "With collaboration, inclusiveness and transparency as guiding principles, the Fed will continue to advance improvements through leadership and action," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Jerome H. Powell, who co-chairs the payments initiative's oversight committee. "Our work with stakeholders over the past two years, including engagement with 500 task force members, has demonstrated that together we can help address industry challenges and seize opportunities." Media Contacts:Laura LaBarberaFederal Reserve Bank of Chicago(312) 322-2387[email protected] Dan WassmannFederal Reserve Bank of Chicago(312) 322-2374[email protected] Doug Tillett(312) 322-5201 (office)(312) 493-8088 (mobile)[email protected] Susan StawickBoard of Governors(202) 452-2955[email protected]
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the "Prospects for Growth: Reassessing the Fundamentals" 59th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, Ohio I would like to thank the National Association for Business Economics for inviting me to speak today and for the vital role the association plays in fostering debate on important economic policy questions. Today I will discuss uncertainty and monetary policy, particularly as it relates to recent inflation developments. Because changes in interest rates influence economic activity and inflation with a substantial lag, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) sets monetary policy with an eye to its effects on the outlook for the economy. But the outlook is subject to considerable uncertainty from multiple sources, and dealing with these uncertainties is an important feature of policymaking. Key among current uncertainties are the forces driving inflation, which has remained low in recent years despite substantial improvement in labor market conditions. As I will discuss, this low inflation likely reflects factors whose influence should fade over time. But as I will also discuss, many uncertainties attend this assessment, and downward pressures on inflation could prove to be unexpectedly persistent. My colleagues and I may have misjudged the strength of the labor market, the degree to which longer-run inflation expectations are consistent with our inflation objective, or even the fundamental forces driving inflation. In interpreting incoming data, we will need to stay alert to these possibilities and, in light of incoming information, adjust our views about inflation, the overall economy, and the stance of monetary policy best suited to promoting maximum employment and price stability. Recent Inflation Developments and the OutlookLet me begin by reviewing recent inflation developments and the economic outlook. As the solid blue line infigure 1indicates, inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) has generally run below the FOMC's 2 percent longer-run objective since that goal was announced in January 2012.1Core inflation, which strips out volatile food and energy prices, has also fallen persistently short of 2 percent (the red dashed line). Furthermore, both overall and core inflation, after moving up appreciably last year, have slipped again in recent months. Sustained low inflation such as this is undesirable because, among other things, it generally leads to low settings of the federal funds rate in normal times, thereby providing less scope to ease monetary policy to fight recessions. In addition, a persistent undershoot of our stated 2 percent goal could undermine the FOMC's credibility, causing inflation expectations to drift and actual inflation and economic activity to become more volatile. As noted in its recent statement, the FOMC continues to anticipate that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, inflation will rise and stabilize at around 2 percent over the medium term. This expectation is illustrated by the green stars, which represent the medians of the inflation projections submitted by FOMC participants at our meeting last week. In part, this expectation reflects the significant improvement in labor market conditions over the past few years. As shown infigure 2, the unemployment rate (the blue line) now stands at 4.4 percent, somewhat below the median of FOMC participants' estimates of its longer-run sustainable level (the black line). As the green stars indicate, labor market conditions are expected to strengthen a bit further. The inflation outlook also reflects the Committee's judgment that inflation expectations will remain reasonably well anchored at a level consistent with PCE price inflation of 2 percent in the long run, and that the restraint imposed in recent years by a variety of special factors, including movements in the relative prices of food, energy, and imports, will wane in coming quarters. To understand this assessment, it is useful to decompose the forces driving movements in inflation since the financial crisis, as estimated using a simple model of inflation that I presented in a speech two years ago.2Figure 3reports this decomposition as the contributions made by various factors to the shortfall of PCE price inflation from 2 percent, year by year. As illustrated by the purple dotted portion of the bars, labor underutilization, or "slack," accounts for a shrinking share of the shortfall since 2012 and is now having a negligible effect. By comparison, the influence of changes in relative food, energy, and import prices--the solid blue and checkered red portions--has been more substantial in the past few years, although their contribution is estimated to have greatly diminished this year.3 Not surprisingly, the simple model does not account for all of the year-to-year movements in inflation. As indicated by the green striped portion of the bars, the residual component of the shortfall was modestly positive on average from 2008 through last year. This year, however, inflation has been unexpectedly weak from the model's perspective. This unusually large error does not necessarily imply that inflation is more likely to continue to come in on the low side in coming years.4Some of the recent decline in inflation, although not all, reflects idiosyncratic shifts in the prices of some items, such as the large decline in telecommunication service prices seen earlier in the year, that are unlikely to be repeated. As the green dashed line infigure 4illustrates, if the average change in consumer prices each month is calculated excluding items whose price changes are outliers on both the high and low side, the resulting "trimmed mean" measure of inflation shows less of a slowdown this year.5 Based on analyses of this sort, my colleagues and I currently think that this year's low inflation is probably temporary, so we continue to anticipate that inflation is likely to stabilize around 2 percent over the next few years. But our understanding of the forces driving inflation is imperfect, and we recognize that something more persistent may be responsible for the current undershooting of our longer-run objective. Accordingly, we will monitor incoming data closely and stand ready to modify our views based on what we learn. Uncertainty about the Inflation OutlookAlthough we judge that inflation will most likely stabilize around 2 percent over the next few years, the odds that it could turn out to be noticeably different are considerable. This point is illustrated byfigure 5. Here the red line indicates the median of the latest inflation projections submitted by FOMC participants that I showed previously. The pertinent feature of this figure is the blue shaded region around the red line, which shows a 70 percent confidence interval around FOMC participants' median outlook. The width of this region reflects the average accuracy of inflation projections made by private and government forecasters over the past 20 years. As the figure shows, based on that history, there is a 30 percent probability that inflation could be greater than 3 percent or less than 1 percent next year.6 Most of this uncertainty reflects the influence of unexpected movements in oil prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar, as well as that of idiosyncratic developments unrelated to broader economic conditions. These factors could easily push overall inflation noticeably above or below 2 percent for a time. But such disturbances are not a great concern from a policy perspective because their effects fade away as long as inflation expectations remain anchored.7For this reason, the FOMC strives to look through these transitory inflation effects when setting monetary policy. Such was the case when rising oil prices pushed headline inflation noticeably above 2 percent for several years prior to the financial crisis. Similarly, the Committee substantially discounted the reductions in inflation that occurred from 2014 through 2016 as a result of the decline in oil prices and the effects of the dollar's appreciation on import prices. A more important issue from a policy standpoint is that some key assumptions underlying the baseline outlook could be wrong in ways that imply that inflation will remain low for longer than currently projected. For example, labor market conditions may not be as tight as they appear to be, and thus they may exert less upward pressure on inflation than anticipated. Alternatively, long-run inflation expectations, which have an important influence on actual inflation, may not be consistent with the FOMC's 2 percent goal. More broadly, the conventional framework for understanding inflation dynamics could be misspecified in some fundamental way. Let's now consider each of these possibilities in turn. Resource UtilizationThe unemployment rate consistent with long-run price stability at any time is not known with certainty; we can only estimate it. The median of the longer-run unemployment rate projections submitted by FOMC participants last week is around 4‑1/2 percent. But the long-run sustainable unemployment rate can drift over time because of demographic changes and other factors, some of which can be difficult to quantify--or even identify--in real time.8For these and other reasons, the statistical precision of such estimates is limited, and the actual value of the sustainable rate could well be noticeably lower than currently projected.9Thus, although FOMC participants generally view current labor utilization as probably somewhat greater than what can be sustained in the longer run, the statistical evidence from past experience does not rule out the possibility that some slack still remains in the labor market. If so, the economy could sustain a higher level of employment and output in the longer run than now anticipated--a very beneficial outcome, albeit one that would require recalibrating monetary policy over time in order to reap those benefits and compensate for the accompanying reduction in inflationary pressures. A related question is whether the unemployment rate alone is an adequate gauge of economic slack for the purposes of explaining inflation. Although the unemployment rate is probably the best single summary measure of labor utilization, some indicators have shown less improvement since the financial crisis.10As the solid blue line infigure 6illustrates, the employed share of the "prime-age worker" population--that is, persons from ages 25 to 54--remains noticeably below the 2007 level.11But employment rates for this group may now be permanently lower than in the past as a result of declining employment opportunities for less-skilled workers, a rising number of people receiving disability insurance, and other worrisome trends.12Similarly, although the share of part-time workers who would like a full-time job is still somewhat above where it stood before the last two recessions (the dashed red line), it could reflect a structural change in firms' reliance on part-time labor.13In addition, these two measures have to be weighed against other labor indicators that have either returned to, or are currently above, their pre-recession levels. As shown infigure 7, those indicators include the quits rate (the short-dashed blue line), household perceptions of job availability (the short-and-long-dashed green line), the jobs opening rate (the long-dashed red line), and the percentage of small firms finding it hard to fill jobs (the solid black line). On balance, the unemployment rate probably is correct in signaling that overall labor market conditions have returned to pre-crisis levels. But that return does not necessarily demonstrate that the economy is now at maximum employment because, due to demographic and other structural changes, the unemployment rate that is sustainable today may be lower than the rate that was sustainable in the past. In that regard, some observers have pointed to the continued subdued pace of wage growth as evidence that the economy is not yet back to full employment. As shown infigure 8, labor compensation as measured by the employment cost index (the short-dashed red line) has been growing at more or less the same rate since 2014, and hourly compensation in the nonfarm business sector (the short-and-long-dashed green line)--a quite noisy measure, even after smoothing--is actually growing more slowly. But growth in average hourly earnings (the solid blue line) and the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker (the long-dashed black line) have clearly picked up.14In addition, productivity growth has been quite weak in recent years, and empirical analysis suggests that it is has been holding down aggregate growth in labor compensation independent of labor utilization in recent years.15An analysis of the pattern of wage growth at the U.S. state level also suggests that subdued growth for the country as a whole probably reflects sluggish productivity or some other factor common to all states, because cross-state differences in wage growth are about what one would expect given cross-state differences in unemployment rates.16Finally, I would note that the percentage of firms planning wage increases has moved back up to its pre-recession level, many firms report difficulties in finding qualified workers, and some have responded by expanding training programs and offering signing bonuses--possible harbingers of stronger wage gains to come. Overall, I view the data we have in hand as suggesting a generally healthy labor market, not one in which substantial slack remains or one that is overheated. That said, the evidence does not allow for any definitive assessment, so policymakers must remain open minded on this question and its implications for reaching our inflation goal. Inflation ExpectationsAnother source of uncertainty concerns inflation expectations. In standard economic models, inflation expectations are an important determinant of actual inflation because, in deciding how much to adjust wages for individual jobs and prices of goods and services at a particular time, firms take into account the rate of overall inflation they expect to prevail in the future. Monetary policy presumably plays a key role in shaping these expectations by influencing the average rate of inflation experienced in the past over long periods of time, as well as by providing guidance about the FOMC's objectives for inflation in the future. Even so, economists' understanding of exactly how and why inflation expectations change over time is limited.17Moreover, we have to contend with the fact that we do not directly observe the inflation expectations relevant to wage and price setting. Instead, we can only imperfectly infer how they might have changed based on survey responses and other data. The FOMC's outlook depends importantly on the view that longer-run inflation expectations have been stable for many years at a level consistent with PCE price inflation that will average around 2 percent in the longer run. Provided this stability continues, standard models suggest that actual inflation should stabilize at about 2 percent over the next two or three years in an environment of roughly full employment, absent any future shocks. However, there is a risk that inflation expectations may not be as well anchored as they appear and perhaps are not consistent with our 2 percent goal. To assess this risk, the FOMC considers a variety of survey measures of expected longer-run inflation, some of which are shown infigure 9. Long-range projections of PCE price inflation made by private forecasters, the solid red line, have been remarkably stable for many years, as have been the longer-run inflation expectations reported in surveys of financial market participants (not shown).18Households' longer-term expectations as reported in the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the short-dashed blue line, have also been fairly stable overall since the late 1990s.19That said, results from this survey, as well as a survey of consumers carried out by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, do hint that expectations may have slipped a bit over the past two or three years. If so, stabilizing inflation at around 2 percent could prove to be more difficult than expected.20 In theory, differences between yields on conventional Treasury securities and those on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) are also informative about inflation expectations in that they measure the compensation received by investors for exposing themselves to future changes in consumer prices. As indicated by the long-dashed green line, TIPS inflation compensation for the five-year period starting five years from now has fallen roughly 1 percentage point over the past three years. This decline could be interpreted as a significant drop in market participants' expectations for the most likely outcome for inflation in the longer run. However, research suggests that the fall in TIPS inflation compensation instead primarily reflects a decline in inflation risk premiums and differences in the liquidity of nominal and indexed Treasury securities.21This research notwithstanding, the notable decline in inflation compensation may be a sign that longer-term inflation expectations have slipped recently. Misspecified Inflation DynamicsAnother risk is that our framework for understanding inflation dynamics could be misspecified in some fundamental way, perhaps because our econometric models overlook some factor that will restrain inflation in coming years despite solid labor market conditions. One possibility in this vein is a continuation of the subdued growth in health-care prices that we have seen in recent years--a sector-specific factor not controlled for in standard models. Because health care accounts for a large share of total consumer spending, this slow growth has restrained overall inflation materially and may continue to do so for some time.22A similar situation occurred during the 1990s, when a significant shift in health insurance enrollment away from fee-for-service and toward HMO (that is, Health Maintenance Organization) plans reduced cost pressures and held down overall inflation for several years. If these sorts of favorable supply-type shocks continue, achieving our 2 percent inflation goal over the medium term may require a more accommodative stance of monetary policy than might otherwise be appropriate. Some commentators have conjectured that, because of rising trade volumes and the integration of production chains across countries, U.S. inflation now depends on global resource utilization, not just on conditions here at home and those effects arising through movements in energy and import prices. However, studies of this issue do not, on balance, provide much empirical support for this possibility.23Moreover, foreign economic growth has firmed this year and the global economy appears to have largely recovered, so any influence that global resource utilization might have on U.S. inflation would presumably be small. Nevertheless, increased competition from the integration of China and other emerging market countries into the world economy may have materially restrained price margins and labor compensation in the United States and other advanced economies. In fact, one study concludes that most of the decline in the labor share of national income in the United States since the late 1980s can be attributed to offshoring of labor-intensive production.24If this restraint on the labor share continues to build over the next few years (and not merely holds steady), then it could indirectly hold down the growth of domestic wages and prices in ways not captured by conventional models. More speculatively, changes in the structure of the domestic economy may also be altering inflation dynamics in ways not captured by conventional models. The growing importance of online shopping, by increasing the competitiveness of the U.S. retail sector, may have reduced price margins and restrained the ability of firms to raise prices in response to rising demand.25That said, the economy overall appears to have become more concentrated and less dynamic in recent years, which may tend toincreasefirms' pricing power.26Because these changes occur slowly, determining their complex effects on the economy will, as a practical matter, require studying data over a considerable time. Finally, I would note the possibility that inflation may rise more sharply in response to robust labor market conditions than anticipated. The influence of labor utilization on inflation has become quite modest over the past 20 years, implying that the inflationary consequences of misjudging the sustainable rate of unemployment are low. But we cannot be sure that this modest sensitivity will persist in the face of strong labor market conditions, given that we do not fully understand how it came to be so modest in the first place. Although the evidence is weak that inflation responds in a nonlinear manner to resource utilization, this risk is one that we cannot entirely dismiss. Policy ImplicationsWhat are the policy implications of these uncertainties? For one, my colleagues and I must be ready to adjust our assessments of economic conditions and the outlook when new data warrant it. In this spirit, FOMC participants--like private forecasters--have reduced their estimates of the sustainable unemployment rate appreciably over the past few years in response to the continual flow of information about the always changing economy.27To the extent these assessments change over time, so too will the outlook and judgments about the appropriate stance of monetary policy. Importantly, even if resource utilization is currently lower than we estimate or if longer-run inflation expectations are running at levels consistent with longer-run PCE price inflation somewhat below 2 percent, the FOMC can still achieve its inflation goal. Under those conditions, continuing to revise our assessments in response to incoming data would naturally result in a policy path that is somewhat easier than that now anticipated--an appropriate course correction that would reflect our commitment to maximum employment and price stability. Similar considerations apply to other important sources of uncertainty, such as the value of the neutral real interest rate--that is, the inflation-adjusted level of the federal funds rate consistent with keeping the economy operating on an even keel. Estimates of this rate have declined considerably in recent years, and, by some estimates, the real neutral rate is currently close to zero. But the neutral rate changes over time as a result of the interaction of many forces, including demographics, productivity growth, fiscal policy, and the strength of global demand, so its value at any point in time cannot be estimated or projected with much precision. My FOMC colleagues and I will therefore need to continue to reassess and revise our assessments of the neutral rate in response to incoming data and adjust monetary policy accordingly. How should policy be formulated in the face of such significant uncertainties? In my view, it strengthens the case for a gradual pace of adjustments. Moving too quickly risks overadjusting policy to head off projected developments that may not come to pass. A gradual approach is particularly appropriate in light of subdued inflation and a low neutral real interest rate, which imply that the FOMC will have only limited scope to cut the federal funds rate should the economy be hit with an adverse shock.28But we should also be wary of movingtoogradually. Job gains continue to run well ahead of the longer-run pace we estimate would be sufficient, on average, to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force. Thus, without further modest increases in the federal funds rate over time, there is a risk that the labor market could eventually become overheated, potentially creating an inflationary problem down the road that might be difficult to overcome without triggering a recession. Persistently easy monetary policy might also eventually lead to increased leverage and other developments, with adverse implications for financial stability. For these reasons, and given that monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation with a substantial lag, it would be imprudent to keep monetary policy on hold until inflation is back to 2 percent. ConclusionTo conclude, standard empirical analyses support the FOMC's outlook that, with gradual adjustments in monetary policy, inflation will stabilize at around the FOMC's 2 percent objective over the next few years, accompanied by some further strengthening in labor market conditions. But the outlook is uncertain, reflecting, among other things, the inherent imprecision in our estimates of labor utilization, inflation expectations, and other factors. As a result, we will need to carefully monitor the incoming data and, as warranted, adjust our assessments of the outlook and the appropriate stance of monetary policy. But in making these adjustments, our longer-run objectives will remain unchanged--to promote maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Appendix: PCE Inflation Model, Inflation Decomposition Procedure, and the ECI Growth Equation PCE Inflation Model The inflation model used in the decomposition procedure includes two equations: an identity for the change in the price index for total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and a simple reduced-form forecasting equation for core PCE price inflation. The identity is $$$$ \pi_t=\pi_t^c+\omega_t^e{RPIE}_t+\omega_t^f{RPIF}_t,$$$$ where $$ \pi_t$$ and $$ \pi_t^c$$ denote growth rates (expressed as annualized log differences) of total and core PCE prices, respectively. $$ {RPIE}_t$$ and $$ {RPIF}_t$$ are annualized growth rates for prices of consumer energy goods and services and prices of food and beverages, both expressed relative to core PCE prices, and $$ \omega_t^e$$ and $$ \omega_t^f$$ are the weights of energy and food in total consumption. The core inflation forecasting equation is $$$$ \pi_t^c=.41\pi_t^e+.36\pi_{t-1}^c+.23\pi_{t-2}^c-.08{SLACK}_t+.56{RPIM}_t+\epsilon_t,$$$$ where $$ \pi_t^e$$ is expected long-run inflation; $$ {SLACK}_t$$ denotes the level of resource utilization, $$ {RPIM}_t$$ controls for the effect of changes in the relative price of core imported goods, $$ \epsilon_t$$ is a white-noise error term, and the coefficients are ordinary least squares estimates obtained using data from 1990:Q1 to 2014:Q4.29 For estimation purposes, $$ {SLACK}_t$$ is approximated using the unemployment rate less the Congressional Budget Office's (CBO) historical series for the long-run natural rate. From 2007 to the present, $$ \pi_t^e$$ is approximated using the median forecasts of long-run PCE price inflation reported in the Survey of Professional Forecasters; from 1991:Q4 to 2006:Q4, the series is based on the median long-run forecasts of inflation as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), less a constant adjustment of 40 basis points to put the CPI forecasts on a PCE basis; before 1991:Q4, $$ \pi_t^e$$ is approximated by the long-run inflation expectations reported in the Hoey survey. The relative import price term, $$ {RPIM}_t$$, is defined as the annualized growth rate of the price index for core imported goods (defined to exclude petroleum, natural gas, computers, and semiconductors) less the lagged four-quarter change in core PCE inflation, all multiplied by the share of nominal core imported goods in nominal GDP.30 Inflation Decomposition Procedure To decompose recent movements in inflation into its various components, the series used in the inflation model--for which complete quarterly data are available only through 2017:Q2 in most cases--are first extended through the end of 2017. In the case of inflation, the extensions are consistent with the medians of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' projections for total and core PCE inflation in 2017 that were reported at the press conference following the September 2017 FOMC meeting.31Similarly, $$ {SLACK}_t$$ over the second half of 2017 is defined to be consistent with the median of FOMC projections for the 2017:Q4 unemployment rate less the CBO's estimates of the historical path of the long-run natural rate. The CBO's 2017 estimate is slightly higher than the median of FOMC participants' most recent projections of the normal longer-run level of the unemployment rate. For changes in the price of core imports, the 2017:H2 extrapolations are based on a regression of this series on current and lagged changes in exchange rates. This approach predicts that core import prices should rise about 4-1/2 percent at an annual rate in the second half of this year.32Energy and food prices over the second half of 2017 are assumed to rise at annual rates of 10 percent and 1.6 percent, respectively; these assumptions (which take into account published monthly PCE data through July and published CPI data through August, as well as recent movements in gasoline prices in the wake of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma) ensure that the combined contribution of food and energy prices to inflation in 2017 is consistent with the median difference between FOMC participants' projections for total and core inflation. Finally, nominal spending shares for food, energy, and core imports are assumed to remain unchanged at their 2017:Q2 levels, and long-run inflation expectations are assumed to remain constant at 2 percent. After computing historical $$ \epsilon_t$$ tracking errors for the two equations of the model, the final step in the decomposition procedure is to run a sequence of counterfactual simulations of the model from 1990:Q1 through 2017:Q4. One by one, each explanatory variable of the model is set to zero, and the model is simulated; the resulting difference between actual inflation and its simulated value equals the historical contribution of that particular factor. Importantly, the simulations are all dynamic in that the lagged inflation term in the core inflation equation is set equal to its simulated value in the preceding period rather than its actual value. As a result, the decompositions incorporate the effects of changes in lagged inflation that are attributable to previous movements in the explanatory variables. ECI Growth Equation The estimated equation for the employment cost index (ECI) is: $$$$ \pi_t^w=-0.72+.58\pi_{t-1}^e+.10\pi_{t-1}^w+.12\pi_{t-2}^w+.10\pi_{t-3}^w+.11\pi_{t-4}^w-.19{SLACK}_t-.57\Delta{SLACK}_t+.58{MA\_PROD}_t+\varepsilon_t,$$$$ where $$ \pi_t^w$$ is the annualized log difference of the ECI for hourly compensation of private industry workers, $$ \pi_t^e$$ and $$ {SLACK}_t$$ have the same definition as the corresponding variables from the PCE price inflation model, $$ \Delta{SLACK}_t$$ denotes the first difference of $$ {SLACK}_t$$, $$ {MA\_PROD}_t$$ is a moving average of an estimate of trend productivity growth for the business sector, and $$ \varepsilon_t$$ is an error term.33The coefficients are obtained from a restricted least squares regression using quarterly data from 1988:Q1 to 2017:Q2.34Trend productivity growth is estimated as the low-frequency component of the annualized log difference of business-sector output per hour from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Productivity and Costs report.35The moving average of trend productivity growth (which is used in the estimation) is computed as a geometrically declining weighted average, $$$$ {MA\_PROD}_t=0.95{MA\_PROD}_{t-1}+0.05{PROD}_t,$$$$ where $$ {PROD}_t$$ denotes trend productivity growth and where the moving average is initialized in 1955:Q1 with that quarter's estimate of the trend growth rate. The model is used to compute a decomposition of ECI growth following a procedure similar to that used to construct the decomposition for core PCE price inflation. The table summarizes the results of this decomposition over various periods; note that the column labeled "Slack" combines the effects of $$ \Delta{SLACK}_t$$ and $$ {SLACK}_t$$, the effect of the model's constant term is included in the column labeled "Trend productivity," and the column labeled "Other" gives the contributions of the model's tracking errors. Model-Based Decomposition of ECI Hourly Compensation Growth Note: ECI growth is reported as average percent changes at an annual rate for the periods shown; contributions are expressed in percentage points. The contribution of the model's constant term is included in the contribution for trend productivity. Contributions may not sum to total growth because of rounding. ReferencesAaronson, Daniel, Luojia Hu, Arian Seifoddini, and Daniel G. Sullivan (2015). "Changing Labor Force Composition and the Natural Rate of Unemployment," Chicago Fed Letter 338. Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May. Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 197-255. Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor (2011). "Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings," in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds.,Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4B (Amsterdam: North Holland), pp. 1043-171. Andreasen, Martin M., and Jens H.E. Christensen (2016). "TIPS Liquidity and the Outlook for Inflation," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-35. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November 21. Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson (2013). "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,"American Economic Review,vol. 103 (October), pp. 2121-68. Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan (2003). "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in Unemployment,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 118 (February), pp. 157-205. Barnichon, Regis, and Christian Matthes (2017). "The Natural Rate of Unemployment over the Past 100 Years," FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August 14. Barnichon, Regis, and Geert Mesters (2017). "How Tight Is the U.S. Labor Market?" FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-07. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March 20. Borio, Claudio, and Andrew Filardo (2007). "Globalization and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation (PDF)," BIS Working Paper 227. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, May. Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton (2017). "Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 397-476. Clemens, Jeffery, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Adam Hale Shapiro (2016). "Medicare Payment Cuts Continue to Restrain Inflation," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-15. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May 9. Council of Economic Advisers (2016). "Benefits of Competition and Indicators of Market Power (PDF)," Council of Economic Advisers Issue Brief. Washington: CEA, April. Curran, Enda, and Michelle Jamrisko (2017). "Expect a Return to Inflation--But Not as We Once Knew It," Bloomberg, May 16, www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-05-16/amazon-effect-means-global-inflation-just-ain-t-what-it-once-was. Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn (2017). "Composition and Aggregate Real Wage Growth,"American Economic Review,vol. 107 (May), pp. 349-52. Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, and Benjamin Pyle (2016). "What's Up with Wage Growth?" FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-07. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March 7. Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2016). "Declining Business Dynamism: Implications for Productivity?" Hutchins Center Working Paper 23. Washington: Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, September. Deming, David J. (forthcoming). "The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market,"Quarterly Journal of Economics. Elsby, Michael W., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin (2013). "The Decline of the U.S. Labor Share (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 1-52. Feenstra, Robert C., and David E. Weinstein (2017). "Globalization, Markups, and U.S. Welfare,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 125 (August), pp. 1040-74. French, Eric, and Jae Song (2014). "The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply,"American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,vol. 6 (May), pp. 291-337. Hathaway, Ian, and Robert E. Litan (2014).Declining Business Dynamism in the United States: A Look at States and Metros.Washington: Brookings Institution, May. Ihrig, Jane, Steven B. Kamin, Deborah Lindner, and Jaime Marquez (2010). "Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypotheses,"International Finance,vol. 13 (Winter), pp. 343-75. J.P. Morgan (2017). "U.S.: Tight State Labor Markets Show Effects on Wage Growth," Economic Research Note. New York: J.P. Morgan, August 3. Juselius, Mikael, and Elod Takats (2015). "Can Demography Affect Inflation and Monetary Policy?" BIS Working Paper 485. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, February. Peneva, Ekaterina (2014). "Residual Seasonality in Core Consumer Price Inflation," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 14. Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott (2016). "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing Employment,"American Economic Review,vol. 106 (July), pp. 1632-62. Reifschneider, David, and Peter Tulip (2017). "Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve's Approach (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Reifschneider, Dave, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2015). "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (May), pp. 71-109. Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore, Ryan Nunn, Lauren Bauer, and Audrey Breitwieser (2017).The Closing of the Jobs Gap: A Decade of Recession and Recovery.Washington: Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution, August 4. Trainer, David (2016). "How the Internet Economy Killed Inflation,"Forbes,September 28. Valletta, Rob, and Catherine van der List (2015). "Involuntary Part-Time Work: Here to Stay?" FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-19. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June 8. Yellen, Janet L. (2014). "Labor Market Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Re-evaluating Labor Market Dynamics," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 21-23. -------- (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Amherst, Mass., September 24. -------- (2016). "Macroeconomic Research after the Crisis," speech delivered at "The Elusive 'Great' Recovery: Causes and Implications for Future Business Cycle Dynamics," 60th annual economic conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Mass., October 14. Yoon, Jong-Won, Janill Kim, and Jungjin Lee (2014). "Impact of Demographic Changes on Inflation and the Macroeconomy (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/14/210. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. 1. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf.Return to text 2. The simple model links the current rate of inflation to several factors, including lagged inflation, long-run inflation expectations, labor utilization, and changes in the relative prices of food, energy and imports (Yellen, 2015). Additional details on the model can be found in the appendix.Return to text 3. In the decomposition procedure, movements in core inflation affect headline inflation one-for-one; as a result, the contributions of food and energy price inflation are defined as each component's price change relative to the core, weighted by its share in total nominal consumer spending. The estimated contribution of movements in import prices is also computed relative to core inflation; thus, if import prices are rising at the same rate as core inflation, they have no estimated effect on the shortfall of overall inflation from 2 percent. In addition, the decomposition takes account of lags in the adjustment of core inflation to movements in resource utilization and other factors. More details on the decomposition procedure can be found in the appendix.Return to text 4. In the simple model, inflation depends in part on lagged inflation. As a result, an unexplained movement in inflation is predicted to influence inflation beyond the current quarter, but to a degree that fades over time. On average, the model predicts that roughly 85 percent of any unexplained movement will have disappeared after four quarters.Return to text 5. In general, price changes measured over a few months tend to be noisy, even when measured on a core or trimmed-mean basis. For this reason, the FOMC usually focuses on the growth rate of PCE prices over the previous 12 months, which smooths through the volatility in the monthly price data. This approach also sidesteps distortions in the monthly data associated with residual seasonality; these distortions are likely to hold down month-to-month changes in prices over the balance of the year (see Peneva, 2014). That said, 12‑month rates of inflation will continue to be held down through early 2018 by the unusually weakmonthlyreadings on price changes recorded in early 2017.Return to text 6. See Reifschneider and Tulip (2017) for details on the calculation of these confidence intervals.Return to text 7. This statement abstracts from any persistent effects such disturbances might have on real activity, which could have implications for monetary policy.Return to text 8. For example, Aaronson and others (2015) estimate that increases in the average age and educational attainment of U.S. workers will reduce the sustainable rate of unemployment almost 1/2 percentage point between 2014 and 2020. Barnichon and Mesters (2017) also present evidence that demographic changes have somewhat reduced the structural unemployment rate in the United States in recent years. Relatedly, Yoon, Kim, and Lee (2014) and Juselius and Takats (2015) estimate that ongoing demographic transitions are having modest disinflationary effects in the United States and other developed economies.Return to text 9. The statistical evidence also suggests that the sustainable rate of unemployment could be higher. As illustrated by the results reported in Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox (2015) and Barnichon and Matthes (2017), standard errors for estimates of the sustainable rate of unemployment are typically at least 1/2 percentage point. Accordingly, if the sustainable rate is estimated to be about 4-1/2 percent, there is roughly a 15 percent probability that the actual value is less than 4 percent; symmetrically, there is a 15 percent probability that it is greater than 5 percent.Return to text 10. Several years ago, I discussed the interpretation of a wide range of labor market indicators at length (Yellen, 2014).Return to text 11. The employment-to-population ratio for all persons aged 16 and over has recovered much less than the prime-age ratio since 2007, in large part reflecting the ongoing retirement of the baby boomers and a rise in school attendance rates for young adults aged 20 to 24 (Aaronson and others, 2014). Schanzenbach and others (2017) estimate that the substantial overall employment-to-population gap that opened up in the wake of the financial crisis finally closed in July 2017.Return to text 12. The labor force participation rate for prime-age men has been declining for decades. Evidence suggests that a portion of the decline is attributable to a reduction in the demand for low-skilled workers resulting from advances in technology and globalization. For a general discussion of the decline in male labor force participation, see Aaronson and others (2014). For a discussion of the role played by technical factors in this decline, see Deming (forthcoming) and Acemoglu and Autor (2011); for a discussion of the role of globalization, see Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2016). In addition to these factors, Autor and Duggan (2003) and French and Song (2014) present evidence suggesting that increases in the number of people on disability rolls have also been important. Relatedly, an alarming deterioration in health outcomes among low-education workers, including a rise in deaths related to alcohol, drugs, and suicide, may be having an adverse effect on both male and female employment (Case and Deaton, 2017).Return to text 13. For a discussion of how secular forces may be influencing the trend share of part-time employment, see Valletta and van der List (2015).Return to text 14. In contrast to the other wage and compensation measures, the Wage Growth Tracker only measures wage changes for individuals who had a job in both the current month and a year ago.Return to text 15. For example, predictions from a simple empirical model track recent movements in the employment cost index reasonably well, because the model estimates that the increasing upward pressure on compensation growth from rising labor utilization is being offset by a declining contribution from productivity growth. (See the appendix for further details.) Relatedly, research also suggests that cyclical changes in the composition of the workforce associated with the absorption of new workers with relatively low skills and experience may be currently restraining growth in both aggregate wages and productivity. See Daly and Hobijn (2017) and Daly, Hobijn, and Pyle (2016), who also point to the retirement of baby boomers as a factor holding down wage growth.Return to text 16. See J.P. Morgan (2017) for more on this analysis.Return to text 17. As I discussed in a speech one year ago, I view expectations formation as one of the key areas requiring further research by economists (see Yellen, 2016).Return to text 18. In the Survey of Primary Dealers conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the median of respondents' longer-term projections for PCE inflation have been essentially flat at 2 percent since the survey began in 2011. Similarly, in the Blue Chip Financial Indicators survey, which solicits the views of a large number of financial firms (as well as a few other institutions) about the extended outlook every June and December, the median of long-run expectations for GDP price inflation has stayed close to 2.1 percent over the past six years. Comparisons of results from these surveys to those reported in the Survey of Professional Forecasters (as well as surveys of households) are somewhat complicated by differences in the projection period used. For example, some surveys include the low rates of inflation expected over the next few years in the calculation of projected longer-run averages, while other surveys exclude them.Return to text 19. Expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years as reported in the Michigan survey runs appreciably above PCE price inflation on average since the mid-1990s, perhaps because households are less informed about actual inflation developments than professional forecasters and financial firms. For this reason, it may be best to focus on changes over time in the Michigan measure, not on the level.Return to text 20. In addition to monitoring survey measures of expected inflation, Federal Reserve staff also use statistical techniques to try to directly estimate possible movements over time in the underlying long-run trend in inflation, using data for actual inflation and other series, including resource utilization. Many of these statistical estimates suggest that the underlying trend in PCE inflation is currently somewhat below 2 percent. Econometrically, however, it is extremely difficult if not impossible to disentangle estimates of the underlying trend in PCE inflation from estimates of the sustainable rate of unemployment. To be consistent with the data, the higher one's estimate of trend inflation or expected long-run inflation, the lower must be one's estimate of the sustainable unemployment rate, at least over the medium run.Return to text 21. For example, Andreasen and Christensen (2016) show that once TIPS liquidity premiums are taken into account, the model-implied one-year inflation expectation becomes more stable and shows a smaller decline since 2013. In addition, quotes on inflation derivatives suggest that most of the decline in inflation compensation over this period is associated with investor perceptions of reduced risks of above-target inflation outcomes rather than increased risks of below-target inflation outcomes.Return to text 22. Personal consumption expenditures include all medical services, including those paid by Medicare and Medicaid; prices for the latter may be viewed as "administered" because they are essentially set by the government. The formulas used to set Medicare prices were adjusted by the 2010 Affordable Care Act and additional legislation passed in 2015, resulting in smaller increases in prices for the same increase in costs than would have been the case in the prior decade. In addition, Medicaid prices have probably been restrained somewhat by budget pressures on state governments. Aside from these direct influences of government policy on healthcare prices, some research suggests that lower Medicare prices tend to lead to lower negotiated prices by private insurers as well (see Clemens, Gottlieb, and Shapiro, 2016).Return to text 23. In an early study, Borio and Filardo (2007) reported results suggesting that global economic slack adds considerable explanatory power to reduced-form inflation equations (such as the one discussed in the appendix), and that its role has been growing over time. However, Ihrig, Kamin, Lindner, and Marquez (2010) subsequently argued that the estimated link was not robust to alternative measures of global resource utilization. Federal Reserve Board staff have updated this analysis using data through early 2017 and confirmed that global slack does not appear to exert an appreciable direct effect on domestic inflation in the United States and most other advanced economies.Return to text 24. Using sector-level data, Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin (2013) estimate the contributions of offshoring, the substitution of capital for low-skilled labor, and several other factors on the aggregate U.S. labor share of income, and find that only offshoring has been important. They also conclude that the decline in the labor share since the late 1980s has been overstated as a result of statistical measurement problems. In contrast to the influence of globalization on the U.S. labor share, Feenstra and Weinstein (2017) find that the influence of increased globalization on price markups in the United States has been modest.Return to text 25. For more on the inflation implications of innovation in the retail sector, see Curran and Jamrisko (2017) and Trainer (2016).Return to text 26. For a review of changes over time in the competitive structure of the overall economy, see Council of Economic Advisers (2016). For a discussion of the evidence for, and some of the implications of, changes in the dynamism of the economy, see Hathaway and Litan (2014) and Decker and others (2016).Return to text 27. The median of FOMC participants' projections of the longer-run unemployment rate has declined almost a full percentage point over the past five years; the revision in the long-run consensus forecast reported in the Blue Chip Survey between October 2012 and March 2017 was slightly larger.Return to text 28. It might be thought that the FOMC could mitigate this problem by raising the federal funds rate higher than might otherwise be called for while the economy continues to expand in order to increase the extent to which interest rates could be cut later should a recession occur. But this strategy would be counterproductive, because it would only serve to weaken economic activity and push down inflation before the recession.Return to text 29. Although the data used in the decomposition analysis have been revised and extended, the specification of the model and the estimation period are the same as that discussed in a speech I gave two years ago (Yellen, 2015). As a result, the estimated coefficients of the model are essentially unchanged. Extending the estimation period through 2017:Q2 has little effect on the estimated coefficients and the decomposition estimates.Return to text 30. This measure of core import prices is constructed by Board staff using published and unpublished data provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis and the Bureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 31. The information on participants' forecasts provided at the September 20, 2017, press conference is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20170920.pdf.Return to text 32. The level of core import prices, expressed relative to core consumer prices, displayed a modest downward trend from 1990 through 2001 but since then has displayed little persistent trend, particularly if one controls for shifts related to recent changes in the real exchange rate. If the post-2001 pattern persists in coming years, then $$ {RPIM}_t$$ would be expected to converge to zero within a few quarters and core PCE inflation to converge to 2 percent within two or three years, assuming that the unemployment rate remains near 4-1/2 percent (the median of the longer-run projections provided by FOMC participants) and there are no further shocks to the exchange rate and other factors. If, however, core import prices were expected to resume trending down relative to consumer prices, then the model as specified would imply that the unemployment rate consistent with inflation stabilizing at 2 percent in the longer run would be somewhat lower than 4-1/2 percent.Return to text 33. The ECI series used here is obtained from a ratio splice of the SIC- and NAICS-based indexes; the SIC-based index is used before 2001 and the NAICS-based index used thereafter. (All data used in the model were current as of September 1, 2017.)Return to text 34. The estimation procedure imposes the joint restriction that the sum of the coefficients on $$ \pi_{t-1}^e$$ and the lagged ECI growth terms are equal to 1, and that the coefficients on $$ \pi_{t-1}^e$$ and $$ {MA\_PROD}_t$$ are equal. This joint restriction receives a $$ p$$ value of 0.57.Return to text 35. The low-pass component is obtained from a band-pass filter. The filter width and cutoffs are set equal to the values used in Douglas Staiger, James Stock, and Mark Watson (2001), "Prices, Wages, and the U.S. NAIRU in the 1990s," in Alan Krueger and Robert Solow, eds.,The Roaring Nineties: Can Full Employment Be Sustained?(New York: Russell Sage Foundation and Century Foundation Press), pp. 3‑60. Before the series' starting point in 1947:Q2, actual productivity growth is padded with an ARIMA(4,1,0) model; after its 2017:Q2 endpoint, the series is padded with the CBO's January 2017 forecast of average nonfarm business trend productivity growth from 2017 to 2027 (which is 1.67 percent in log differences) and with the 2027 value of the CBO forecast (1.77 percent) thereafter.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard At "Banking and the Economy: A Forum for Minority Bankers," a conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri I would like to thank President George and her staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City for inviting me to participate in today's conference, which is a joint effort of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Richmond, and St. Louis as well as the Federal Reserve Board.1 Diversity in Financial ServicesAs you may know, this is the second minority bankers forum hosted by the Federal Reserve System. Diversity and inclusion are important to the strength of the banking industry, and therefore I am pleased that the Federal Reserve System is sponsoring this conference. Among other benefits, diversity and inclusion strengthen organizations by improving deliberations and decisionmaking. Banks with more diverse workforces are also better able to reach broader groups of customers, especially customers who have historically been underbanked, when they show that serving those customers is a top priority. One of the most effective ways of showing a commitment to a diverse customer base is showing a commitment to a diverse workforce. We now have substantial empirical evidence documenting the benefits of diversity in broadening the range of ideas and perspectives that are brought to bear on solving problems, and thereby contributing to better outcomes, in research, policy, and business. Studies suggest that increased diversity alters group dynamics and decisionmaking in positive ways. Microeconomic experiments and other research have confirmed these ideas. One experiment found that greater racial diversity helped groups of business students outperform other students in solving problems. And another found similar benefits from gender diversity. A study of 2.5 million research papers across the sciences found that those written by ethnically diverse research teams received more citations and had a greater influence than papers by authors with the same ethnicity.2 As a bank regulator, the Federal Reserve has an interest in promoting diversity in the financial services industry. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago is actively engaged in developing diverse talent in the financial services industry as a key partner of the Financial Services Pipeline Initiative (FSP). The FSP is a collaborative of about 20 financial services organizations that are working together to increase the representation of Latinos and African Americans, at all levels, within the Chicago-area financial services industry. The members of this initiative recognize they have a collective interest in developing a diverse pipeline of talent. They are more likely to be more successful in achieving their internal pipeline goals if they succeed in improving diversity and inclusion in the finance workforce more broadly. Another example of our work to promote diversity at banking institutions is the standards developed by the Board's Office of Minority and Women Inclusion to promote transparency and awareness of diversity policies and practices within banking institutions. The Board encourages banking institutions not only to provide their policies, practices, and self-assessment information to the Board, but also to disclose this information to the public. We hope that this new self-assessment tool will help individual banks achieve their own diversity and inclusion goals and contribute to greater diversity in the banking industry more generally. I also want to take this opportunity to update you on what we are doing to preserve and promote Minority Depository Institutions (MDIs). Though I know that only some of you work for MDIs, the Federal Reserve recognizes their vital role in serving low- and moderate-income and minority communities as well as bringing diversity to the field of banking. I make a point of meeting with the leadership of MDIs as I travel around the country so I can hear firsthand about the challenges these institutions face and the important work they are doing to provide financial services to minority and historically underserved populations. I have heard from CEOs of MDIs about how challenging it can be to simultaneously serve their target market and be a bank of choice in a competitive banking market. Some have managed to thread that needle successfully by remaining firmly rooted and accessible in the communities they serve as well as maintaining their focus on trust, loyalty, and personalized relationship banking, which is a particular strength and competitive advantage for MDIs. The Federal Reserve has developed a national outreach program called the Partnership for Progress to assist MDIs in confronting business model challenges, cultivating safe banking practices, and competing more efficiently. Recently, the Board doubled its resources for this program to better support MDIs. We brought to bear the resources of our community development function, which promotes economic growth and financial stability in lower-income communities. Combining the resources of our banking and supervision staff with our community development staff allows us to be more creative in supporting MDIs around the country. Recognizing that there has been a dearth of MDI research in recent decades, last year, for the first time, we commissioned two external researchers to develop papers on MDIs. The resulting new papers, along with another written by economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, were presented at the interagency biennial MDI conference this past April in Los Angeles. We are in the process of commissioning research for next year in an effort to deepen our understanding of these unique institutions. Labor Market DisparitiesTurning to the workforce more broadly, I want to spend some of my time today talking about disparities and share some findings from a conference we hosted yesterday at the Board titled "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" In fulfilling its dual mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has set a target of 2 percent for inflation but does not have a similarly fixed numerical goal for maximum employment. That is because the level of maximum employment depends on "nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market," which "may change over time and may not be directly measurable."3Understanding how close the labor market is to our full-employment goal requires consulting a variety of evidence along with a healthy dose of judgment. This approach to maximum employment has allowed the FOMC to navigate the current expansion in a way that has likely brought more people back into productive employment than might have been the case with a fixed unemployment rate target based on pre-crisis standards. The Federal Reserve is also keenly interested in disparities in employment, labor force participation, income, and wealth because they may have implications for the growth capacity of the economy. When we consider appropriate monetary policy, we need to have a good sense of how fast the economy can grow without fueling excessive price inflation. At a time when the retirement of the baby-boom generation looks likely to be something of a drag on the growth of the labor force, it is especially important to consider whether relatively low levels of employment and labor force participation for some prime working-age groups represent slack that, if successfully tapped, could increase the labor force and boost economic activity. More broadly, when a person who was previously unemployed or discouraged secures a job, not only does it boost the economy, but that person also may gain a greater sense of economic security, self-sufficiency, and self-worth and be better able to invest in their family's future. With a richer understanding of economic or social barriers that inhibit labor market success and prosperity for some groups, we may better grasp how much these individuals can be helped by broad economic expansion and how much targeted intervention is required through other policy means.4 There is also an important connection between the economy's potential growth rate and equality of opportunity. Large disparities in opportunity based on race, ethnicity, gender, or geography mean that the enterprise, exertion, and investments of households and businesses from different groups are not rewarded commensurately. To the extent that disparities in income and wealth across race, ethnicity, gender, or geography reflect such disparities in opportunity, families and small businesses from the disadvantaged groups will then underinvest in education or business endeavors, and potential growth will fall short of the levels it might otherwise attain.5 Aside from reducing the long-run productive potential of the economy, persistently high levels of income and wealth inequality may also have implications for the robustness of consumer spending, which accounts for roughly two-thirds of aggregate spending in the United States. The gaps in household income and wealth between the richest and poorest households are at historically high levels, as income and wealth have increasingly accrued to the very richest households. For example, results from the Federal Reserve's latest Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which is due to be released soon, indicate that the share of income held by the top 1 percent of households reached 24 percent in 2015, up from 17 percent in 1988. The share of wealth held by the top 1 percent rose to 39 percent in 2016, up from 30 percent in 1989.6Some research suggests that widening income and wealth inequality may damp consumer spending in the aggregate, as the wealthiest households are likely to save a much larger proportion of any additional income they earn relative to households in lower income groups that are likely to spend a higher proportion on goods and services.7 Disparities by Race and EthnicityWhen we disaggregate the economy-wide labor market statistics, we find significant and persistent racial and ethnic disparities.8In August, the national unemployment rate of 4.4 percent, which is low by historical standards, masked substantial differences across different demographic groups. As shown infigure 1, unemployment rates ranged from 3.9 percent for whites to 4 percent for Asians, 5.2 percent for Hispanics, and 7.7 percent for African Americans. Labor force participation rates, shown infigure 2, also differ substantially, although by less than unemployment rates, with the rate for African Americans lowest at 62.2 percent. These differences are not a recent development--similar differences across racial and ethnic dimensions have existed for as long as these data have been collected. Even more striking, a significant portion of the gaps in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups cannot be attributed to differences in their underlying characteristics, such as age and education levels.9 Although the differences in employment rates between racial and ethnic groups are still quite large, they have narrowed recently, after having widened considerably during the recession, and are near their lowest levels in decades. Differences in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups tend to widen sharply during recessions, as less advantaged groups shoulder an outsized share of total layoffs, and these differences shrink during recoveries. For example, in the second quarter of 2017, the unemployment rate for black adult men was a little more than 3 percentage points higher than for white adult men. This differential, while sizable, is nonetheless close to the smallest gap seen since comparable data became available in the mid-1970s. Differences in unemployment rates are similarly near historical lows for black women relative to white women, and for Hispanics relative to whites. Since racial disparities tend to get smaller throughout the course of an economic expansion, it seems likely that racial differences in unemployment rates will continue to shrink if the overall unemployment rate falls further.10 More broadly, the persistent disparities in employment outcomes are mirrored in significant and persistent racial and ethnic differences in families' income and wealth. According to forthcoming findings from the latest SCF and as shown infigure 3, the average income for white families in 2015 was about $123,000 per year, compared with $54,000 for black families and $57,000 for Hispanic families.11Disparities in wealth, shown infigure 4, are even larger: Average wealth holdings for white families in 2016 were about $933,000, compared with $191,000 for Hispanic families and $138,000 for black families.12Moreover, these racial and ethnic gaps in average family income and wealth have generally widened rather than narrowed over the past few decades. Based on SCF data, median family wealth has grown much more rapidly for white families than for other families over the past few decades, while median family incomes have risen by about the same amount for white, black, and Hispanic families. As the economic expansion continues and brings more Americans off the sidelines and into productive employment, it seems likely that the positive trends in employment and participation rates for historically disadvantaged groups will continue. That said, the benefits of a lengthy recovery can only go so far, as the research points to some barriers to labor market outcomes for particular groups that appear to be structural. After controlling for sectoral and educational differences, the research suggests that these factors include discrimination as well as differences in access to quality education and informal social networks that may be an important source of information and support regarding employment opportunities.13 Federal Reserve Work on Labor Market DisparitiesWhile the policy tools available to the Federal Reserve are not well suited to addressing the barriers that contribute to persistent disparities in labor market outcomes, understanding these barriers and efforts to address them is vital in assessing maximum employment as well as potential growth. The Federal Reserve is deeply engaged in understanding disparities through our data collection, research collaboration, and community development work. One way the Federal Reserve seeks to obtain a clearer picture is by collecting data ourselves. For instance, some of the data I have cited today come from the Federal Reserve's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances, which provides detailed information on income and wealth holdings by demographic groups. The Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking provides a portrait of household finances, employment, housing, and debt; the Survey of Young Workers provides insights into younger adults' employment experiences soon after entering the labor force; and the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities Survey provides information about income generating activities that are often outside the scope of other employment and income surveys.14 Each recent edition of the semiannualMonetary Policy Report(MPR) has focused on some aspect of the comparative economic experience of different racial and ethnic groups. In addition, as indicated in the minutes published after each meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), Federal Reserve staff regularly report on the differential labor experiences of different racial and ethnic groups as background for the FOMC's deliberations on monetary policy. Across the Federal Reserve System, a variety of initiatives are aimed at understanding economic disparities and how to foster more-inclusive growth. The Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis brings together researchers from a variety of fields to analyze barriers to economic opportunity and advancement. The Economic Growth and Mobility Project at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia aims to bring together researchers with community stakeholders to focus on differences in poverty and economic mobility across demographic characteristics. The Investing in America's Workforce Initiative is a collaboration between the Federal Reserve System and academic research institutions to promote investment in workforce skills that better align with employers' needs.15 In short, a deeper understanding of labor market disparities is central to the mission of the Federal Reserve because it may help us better assess full employment, where resources may be underutilized, and the likely evolution of the labor market and overall economic activity. Let me conclude by thanking you again for having me here today and allowing me the opportunity to explore some of the factors that influence labor market disparities. ReferencesAlichi, Ali, Kory Kantenga, and Juan Solè (2016). "Income Polarization in the United States (PDF)," IMF Working Paper 16/121. Washington: International Monetary Fund. Bayer, Amanda, and Cecelia Elena Rouse (2016). "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 30 (Fall), pp. 221-42. Bernstein, Jared (2013). "The Impact of Inequality on Growth." Washington: Center for American Progress. Bricker, Jesse, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, Sarah Pack, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A. Windle (forthcoming). "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,"Federal Reserve Bulletin. Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017). "Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Carpenter, Seth, and William M. Rodgers (2004). "The Disparate Labor Market Impacts of Monetary Policy,"Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, vol. 23 (Fall), pp. 813-30. Fryer, Jr., Roland G. (2011). "Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimination," in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds.,Handbook of Labor Economics,vol. 4b. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 855‑971. Marrero, Gustavo, and Juan Rodrìguez (2013). "Inequality of Opportunity and Growth,"Journal of Development Economics,vol. 104 (September), pp. 107-22. Ritter, Joseph A., and Lowell J. Taylor (2011). "Racial Disparity in Unemployment,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 93 (February), pp. 30-42. Semega, Jessica L., Kayla R. Fontenot, and Melissa A. Kollar (2017). "Income and Poverty in the United States: 2016 (PDF),"Current Population Reports,pp. 60-259. Washington: U.S. Census Bureau, September. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "So We All Can Succeed: 125 Years of Women's Participation in the Economy," speech delivered at "125 Years of Women at Brown," a conference sponsored by Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, May 5. 1. I am grateful to Amanda Roberts and Christopher Smith for their assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Bayer and Rouse (2016).Return to text 3. The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals.pdf.Return to text 4. For evidence on the relationship between monetary policy and labor market disparities between some demographic groups, see Carpenter and Rodgers (2004).Return to text 5. For more on inequality of opportunity see Marrero and Rodriquez (2013).Return to text 6. Staff calculations from forthcoming SCF data (to be released on September 27); for additional analysis of these data, see Bricker and others (forthcoming).Return to text 7. See Bernstein (2013) and Alichi, Kantenga, and Solè (2016) for more on the potential link between income and wealth inequality and consumer spending.Return to text 8. For a discussion of gender disparities, see Yellen (2015).Return to text 9. See Cajner and others (2017) for more on racial gaps and the labor market.Return to text 10. Data on recent estimates of unemployment rates for adult men (20 years and older) by race and ethnicity are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Historical gaps are provided by Cajner and others (2017).Return to text 11. Staff calculations from forthcoming SCF data. Recent estimates of household income from Current Population Survey data and reported by the Census in Semega, Fontenot, and Kollar (2017) are qualitatively similar, in that between 2013 and 2016 for both sets of data, family income has increased for whites, blacks, and Hispanics (with greater increases, in percentage terms, for black and Hispanic families).Return to text 12. Racial and ethnic differences in median income and wealth are somewhat smaller. For example, in 2016 median income for white families was about $61,000, compared with $35,000 for black families and $39,000 for Hispanic families. Median wealth was about $171,000 for white families, compared with about $20,000 for black and Hispanic families. The larger gap in average income and wealth than median income and wealth reflects a greater concentration of income and wealth among the wealthiest white families than for other races and ethnicities.Return to text 13. For example, see Fryer (2011) and Ritter and Taylor (2011).Return to text 14. Further information on these surveys are found on the Board's website; see theSurvey of Consumer Finances; theSurvey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking;the Survey of Young Workers; and theSurvey of Enterprising and Informal Work Activities (PDF).Return to text 15. For information about the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, seehttps://www.minneapolisfed.org/institute, for information about the Economic Growth and Mobility Project, seehttps://www.philadelphiafed.org/egmp, and for information about the America's Workforce Initiative, seehttps://www.investinwork.org.Return to text Accessible Version
Stanley Fischer submitted his resignation Wednesday as Vice Chairman and as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, effective on or around October 13, 2017. He has been a member of the Board since May 28, 2014. "Stan's keen insights, grounded in a lifetime of exemplary scholarship and public service, contributed invaluably to our monetary policy deliberations. He represented the Board internationally with distinction and led our efforts to foster financial stability," said Chair Janet L. Yellen. "I'm personally grateful for his friendship and his service. We will miss his wise counsel, good humor, and dry wit." Dr. Fischer, 73, was appointed to the Board by President Obama for an unexpired term ending January 31, 2020. His term as Vice Chairman expires on June 12, 2018. During his time on the Board, he served as chairman of the Board's Committee on Financial Stability as well as the Committee on Economic and Financial Monitoring and Research. He represented the Board internationally including at the Financial Stability Board, the Bank for International Settlements, the Group of 20, the Group of Seven, the International Monetary Fund, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Before joining the Board, Dr. Fischer was governor of the Bank of Israel, from 2005 to 2013. He was vice chairman of Citigroup from February 2002 to April 2005. He served as first deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund from September 1994 through August 2001. From January 1988 to August 1990, he was the chief economist of the World Bank. He was a professor of economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from 1977 to 1999 and associate professor from 1973 to 1977. Prior to joining the faculty at MIT, he was an assistant professor of economics and postdoctoral fellow at the University of Chicago. Dr. Fischer was born in Lusaka, Zambia, in October 1943. He received his B.Sc. and M.Sc. in economics from the London School of Economics. He received his Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1969. Dr. Fischer is married with three adult children. A copy of his resignation letter is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At "20 Years On," a conference sponsored by the Bank of England, London, England Revised version: October 12, 2017 Vice Chairman Fischer updated his remarks to elaborate on topics raised at the Bank of England conference for which the speech wasoriginally prepared. It is a pleasure to speak at this commemoration of 20 years of Bank of England monetary policy independence. In my remarks today, I will consider how central banking in the United Kingdom and the United States has evolved in response to the challenges of recent years. I will address a limited set of topics and will have time to touch only briefly on each.1 These remarks are divided into three parts. In the first part, I will discuss several aspects of aggregate monetary policy: central bank independence, policy transparency, and policy tools. In the second part, I consider differences between the approaches of the two banks to their lender-of-last-resort function. And, third, I will close with brief reflections on the central bank's responsibility for financial stability. Revisiting Goal Independence versus Instrument IndependenceWe start by considering a central bank that influences economic activity only through its influence over the general level of interest rates.2More than two decades ago, Guy Debelle and I offered two terms--goal independenceandinstrument independence--to describe such a central bank's degree of independence. Our definitions were as follows: "A central bank has goal independence when it is free to set the final goals of monetary policy. ... A bank that has instrument independence is free to choose the means by which it seeks to achieve its goals."3In May 1997, the Bank of England achieved instrument independence--something the Federal Reserve had already long had.4 Under the new law, the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), rather than the Treasury, set the policy interest rate. Inflation targeting, which began in the United Kingdom in 1992, continued under the new system and was codified in the Bank of England Act of 1998.5The MPC was given an explicit numerical inflation target, corresponding to effective price stability, alongside an implied stabilization goal for real economic activity.6Consequently, the Bank of England from 1997 had the combination that Debelle and I advocated: instrument independence but not goal independence. We also judged that the vagueness of the Federal Reserve's statutory objectives meant that the Federal Reserve "has considerable goal independence."7Today both the FOMC and the MPC have a numerical inflation goal--2 percent. However, this numerical goal is not specified in legislation in either country. In the United Kingdom, the Chancellor of the Exchequer sets the MPC's inflation target: currently 2 percent per year for the U.K. consumer price index.8In the United States, in the FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, first issued in 2012 and discussed annually, Committee participants have judged that the longer-run inflation objective that corresponds to the Federal Reserve's mandate is a rate of 2 percent per year, as measured by the change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures.9 In practice there is little difference between the policy goals of the two central banks, or between the variables that are targeted. But there is a subtle difference between them in terms of who sets the inflation target. To date, that difference has not generated any major divergence between the approaches to monetary policy of the two central banks. Although much has changed in central banking since the 1990s, the case for instrument independence and against goal independence remains sound. The case against goal independence is that it is not appropriate in a democracy: goals should reflect the preferences of society at large and should not be determined by unelected officials. The goals of monetary policy should be set by the central government, as is the case in both the United States and the United Kingdom. We all know what the goals of the Bank of England and the Fed are: For both, the goals are stability of the price level and full employment. Although there is a hint of a lexicographic ordering in favor of the rate of inflation in the Bank of England's mandate, the Federal Reserve's dual mandate unambiguously places equal weight on both goals. Across the world, there seems to be a preference for inflation either to be the only goal variable or to be lexicographically emphasized over unemployment. But I do not regard that difference as very significant. There is no central bank that--in Mervyn King's terminology--is an "inflation nutter."10 Instrument independence is necessary because, without it, the central bank is unable to set the stance of monetary policy that it believes to be most consistent with achievement of the statutory mandate. That said, there are, to be sure, degrees of instrument independence, and one can easily envisage central banks with considerable instrument independence whose actions on their instruments are constrained by law or by decisions by the treasury. For example, in a country that has committed its central bank to enforce an exchange rate band (with the exchange rate free to move within the band), the central bank will not be fully instrument independent, though it may have a substantial amount of independence with respect to the precise settings of the policy interest rate and other monetary tools. Historically, central banks were frequently created to finance public spending. However, these banks--such as those in Sweden and the United Kingdom--were later sometimes given their operational independence in part to create a greater separation of monetary policy from fiscal policy--in particular, in order to ensure that they would not be vulnerable to pressure to finance the government budget (that is, to monetize public spending). Around the world, the fear of the central bank losing its ability to meet its price stability goal may well have been the prime reason for governments to implement instrument independence.11 Fundamentally, however, central bank instrument independence is desirable because monetary policy is an esoteric and complicated art or science, involving technical judgments that have economy-wide and often long-lasting consequences: A separate institution is needed to manage and take responsibility for monetary policy. Central banks have over the years--in some cases over a few centuries--amassed an expertise and developed a character that makes them the natural candidates to perform the functions expected of such institutions. As the Governor of the Riksbank has observed, the most important skill and reputation that a central bank needs is one ofreliability.12That is, both the central government and the general public should be confident that their central bank can be relied on to deliver a stable price level and close to full employment, along with financial stability. If such independent institutions did not exist, we would have to invent them; if they exist and perform well, the country is blessed; and if they exist and perform badly, they need to be reformed--by a change in the laws by which they are governed, by changes in their structure, or by changes in personnel--and sometimes all of the above. Transparency, Accountability, and CommunicationsIn a paper written for the Bank of England's tercentenary, I considered how an instrument-independent central bank might conduct itself.13My discussion noted that an independent central bank should adhere to the "principle of accountability to the public of those who make critically important policy decisions."14Accountability, in the senses I defined it, included the requirement "to explain and justify its policies to the legislature and the public"--that is, policy transparency and communications.15Transparency, public accountability, and policy communications form the quid pro quo of central bank independence, and they can also contribute to achievement of macroeconomic goals. These were points the FOMC recognized in its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which observed that clarity concerning policy decisions "increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society." In my coverage of these issues today, however, I would like to concentrate on the Bank of England, which in the past quarter-century has been an innovator in several ways with regard to accountability and transparency. Calls for more transparency concerning U.K. monetary policy and the Bank of England's monetary actions predated independence. For example, in the late 1950s, Richard Sayers observed: "It may not be wise to turn the central bank into a goldfish bowl, but at least some relaxation of the traditional secretiveness would make for better health in the nation's monetary affairs."16And some Bank communications vehicles, such as the economic analysis in theQuarterly Bulletinand testimony and speeches by the Governor and other Bank officials, were of long standing by the mid-1990s. But the Bank of England made further strides toward improved transparency and communications during the 1990s. In 1993, it initiated theInflation Report.From the beginning, theInflation Reportwas intended to increase transparency about the U.K. monetary policy reaction function--that is, the connection between policy instruments and economic variables, including the goal variables.17After independence, theInflation Reportpresented the MPC's inflation forecast. Furthermore, alongside other Bank statements, theInflation Reportprovides a publicly available analysis of the economy and of economic implications of developments like Brexit. The content reflects the Bank's change in focus--from markets in the pre-inflation-targeting era to macroeconomic implications of financial and other developments.18 The Bank expanded its policy communications after 1997, publishing MPC analogues to the FOMC releases (some of them only recent innovations by the Fed), namely, postmeeting MPC statements and meeting minutes. And an innovation of Mervyn King in the early years of inflation targeting that has continued in the era of independence is theInflation Reportpress conference. Here, senior Bank figures discuss the MPC's forecast and the state of the economy. This innovation was a forerunner of the Federal Reserve Chair's press conference, begun in 2011, in which the Chair describes the latest policy decision together with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) of FOMC participants. New Monetary Policy ToolsThe MPC and FOMC have extensively--particularly in recent years--used two monetary policy tools other than decisions on the current short-term interest rate. These tools are forward guidance and asset purchases.19 Monetary authorities used to be reluctant to discuss the future course of the policy rate.20By 1997, however, there was widespread recognition of the merits of clarity on the reaction function and of having long-term interest rates incorporate accurate expectations of future policy. These considerations led to the FOMC's use of forward guidance regarding the short-term interest rate in its postmeeting statements during the mid-2000s. The MPC, in contrast, for a long time generally preferred to let markets infer likely future rates from the extensive communication it provided about its reaction function.21 Beginning in 2008, with the policy rate at or near its lower bound, regular forward guidance acquired new efficacy.22Through forward guidance, additional accommodation from short-term interest rate policy could be provided by lengthening the period over which the policy rate was expected to remain at its lower bound. The knowledge that the short-term policy rate likely would be lower for longer would put downward pressure on longer-term rates. The FOMC has provided forward guidance on the policy rate in its postmeeting statements ever since the target federal funds rate was brought to the lower bound in December 2008. In addition, the SEP shows individual FOMC participants' expectations regarding the policy rate, though it does not identify the individuals in the interest rate dot plot. In the United Kingdom, the MPC started providing forward guidance in its postmeeting statements in 2013.23 As the policy rate--Bank Rate--is still at its lower bound in the United Kingdom, it remains to be seen whether MPC forward guidance will continue during policy firming. For its part, the FOMC has provided forward guidance in its policy statements during the tightening phase that began with the increase in the target range for the federal funds rate in December 2015. I expect that the Bank of England will also likely continue to use forward guidance when it begins to raise the policy interest rate above its effective lower bound. Asset purchases are less of a new tool than forward guidance. In the early post-World War II decades, both U.K. and U.S. authorities sporadically attempted to influence long-term interest rates directly by transacting in longer-term Treasury securities. By 1997, however, monetary policy operations in longer-term securities markets had fallen into disuse.24The financial crisis changed matters, with both countries' central banks expanding their balance sheets through large-scale purchases of longer-dated securities to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and set in motion movements in asset prices and borrowing costs that would stimulate spending by households and businesses. It is widely, though not universally, recognized that these asset purchases helped contain the economic downturns in the United Kingdom and the United States and underpinned the subsequent recovery in each country. This experience raises the question of whether the balance sheet will continue to be a routine tool of monetary policy once interest rates normalize.25The FOMC has indicated its preference that, barring large adverse shocks to the economy, adjustments to the federal funds rate will be the main means of altering the stance of monetary policy.26 Changing Perspectives on the Lender of Last ResortThe second section concerns the role of the lender of last resort. The financial crisis and recession confirmed the value of central bank tools that affect the financial system, beyond those most associated with monetary policy. One of these tools is the discount window or lender-of-last-resort function. As of the mid-2000s, the posture of the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve toward the lender-of-last-resort function reflected the principles enunciated by Bagehot and the long absence of a severe financial crisis: The discount rate stood above the key policy rate by a fixed amount; the discount window was not used for macroeconomic stabilization; and depository institutions were the users of the discount window, typically on a short-term basis.27 In 1978, Rudi Dornbusch and I noted that the lender-of-last-resort function should imply that "the central bank steps in to ensure that funds are available to make loans to firms which are perfectly sound but, because of panic, are having trouble raising funds."28In the financial crisis that started in 2007, wide-ranging measures were taken along these lines. In order to improve the functioning of U.S. credit markets, the Federal Reserve made numerous changes to its lending arrangements: The spread of the discount rate over the policy rate was lowered, lending was extended to include loans to nondepository financial institutions, and facilities were created allowing longer maturity of, and broader collateral for, loans than was usual for the central bank.29 After its own experience during the financial crisis, the Bank of England permanentlywidenedlender-of-last-resort access to include not only commercial banks, but also other systemically important financial institutions.30In the United States, the discount rate has for several years been back to its normal relationship with the policy rate, and the special lending facilities have long since been wound up. Emergency lending facilities of the type seen during the financial crisis remain feasible, if needed, though their usage has not been incorporated into the Federal Reserve's routine lender-of-last-resort powers, along the lines of the changes seen in the United Kingdom. Instead, the restriction on their deployment has been tightened by requiring approval by the U.S. Treasury. Discount window lending puts public funds at risk--though I stress that the Federal Reserve's lending during the crisis did not, in fact, lead to any losses. The lender of last resort is also a less impersonal, and more allocative, device than aggregate monetary policy tools, because it involves direct lending by the central bank instead of an attempt by monetary policy to alter the overall cost of private-sector borrowing. For these reasons, the lender-of-last-resort function is bound to be more rule driven than interest rate policy, and it is inevitably associated with collateral arrangements and other safeguards to protect against losses and with strict eligibility criteria. The Financial Stability Responsibility of the Central BankOur third and final section concerns the financial stability responsibility of the central bank. This responsibility has been subject to considerable institutional change over the past two decades. Until 1997, the Bank of England had wide supervisory and regulatory powers. With the reforms of the late 1990s, the Bank had a deputy governor responsible for financial stability, but regulatory powers were largely moved to a different institution, the Financial Services Authority (FSA). A decade later, the financial crisis demonstrated that financial imbalances can ultimately endanger macroeconomic stability and highlighted the need for enhanced central bank oversight of the financial system. In the post-crisis era, the FSA became two separate regulatory authorities, one of which--the Prudential Regulation Authority, created in 2012--is part of the Bank of England. In effect, regulatory powers have largely returned to the Bank. It is fair to say that the Bank was initially glad to cede many of its financial powers, but that it was later even more glad to have those powers restored. Financial supervision has also been reformed in the United States in light of the crisis. The Federal Reserve, which always had regulatory powers, received enhanced authority and devoted more resources to financial stability.31In both countries, it remains the case that not all financial stability responsibilities rest with the central bank--so it is less independent in this area than in monetary policy proper--and the central bank's tools for achieving financial stability are still being refined. Indeed, as I have noted previously, a major concern of mine is that the U.S. macroprudential toolkit is not large and not yet battle tested.32 The Federal Reserve and the Bank of England benefit from each other's experience as they develop and improve arrangements to meet their financial stability responsibilities. One major innovation that deserves mention is that the Bank of England has two policy committees: Alongside the MPC is the Financial Policy Committee (FPC). Although they coordinate and have partially overlapping memberships, the MPC and FPC are distinct committees. Why have both the MPC and the FPC? I offer a few possible reasons. First, not all of a central bank's responsibilities typically rest with its monetary committee. This is true not only of the Bank of England, but also of the Federal Reserve: Our financial regulatory authority resides in the Board of Governors, not the FOMC. Second, aggregate monetary policy tools--typically, one is talking of the policy interest rate--are often blunt weapons against financial imbalances, so deploying them might produce a conflict between financial stability and short-term economic stabilization. Macroprudential tools may be more direct and more appropriate for fostering financial stability.33Third, financial policy might need less frequent adjustment than monetary policy. Perhaps reflecting this judgment, the FPC meets on a quarterly basis, which contrasts with the MPC's eight meetings a year.34The lower frequency of meetings may also reflect the desirability of a relatively stable regulatory structure; financial tools likely should not be as continuously data dependent as monetary policy tools. It is clear that the U.K. institutional framework for the preservation of financial stability has much to be said for it. But it also seems clear that there is no uniquely optimal set-up of the framework for the maintenance of financial stability that is independent of the size and scale of the financial system of the country or of its political and financial history. ConclusionIt has been more than 20 years since the Bank of England celebrated its 300th birthday with a conference focused on central bank independence. Since then, central banks' operating frameworks have undergone substantial changes, many in response to the financial crisis. But the case for monetary policy independence set out in the 1990s remains sound, and monetary policy independence is now widely accepted in the United Kingdom, as it long has been in the United States. It is also clear that central bank responsibilities other than policy rate decisions--specifically, the lender-of-last-resort function and financial stability--are closely connected with monetary policy and that these responsibilities play a prominent role in macroeconomic stabilization. Let me conclude by observing that, while the crisis and its aftermath motivated central banks to reappraise and adapt their tools, institutions, and thinking, future challenges will doubtless prompt further reforms.35Or, if I may be permitted a few final words on my way out the door, the watchwords of the central banker should be "Sempervigilans," because history and financial markets are masters of the art of surprise, and "Never say never," because you will sometimes find yourself having to do things that you never thought you would. ReferencesAllsopp, Christopher (2002). "Macroeconomic Policy Rules in Theory and Practice,"Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,vol. 42 (Winter), pp. 485-504. Bagehot, Walter ([1873] 1897).Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. Bank of England (2015a).The Bank of England Act 1998, the Charters of the Bank and Related Documents(PDF). London: BOE, July. -------- (2015b).The Bank of England's Sterling Monetary Framework: Updated June 2015(PDF). London: BOE. -------- (2017a). "Monetary Policy Committee (MPC)," webpage, BOE. -------- (2017b).Inflation Report(PDF). London: BOE, August. -------- (2017c). "Financial Policy Committee Meeting Records and Statements," webpage, BOE. Batini, Nicoletta, and Edward Nelson (2005). "The U.K.'s Rocky Road to Stability," Working Paper Series 2005-020A. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, March. Bean, Charles (2009). "Comment on 'Interest Rate Signals and Central Bank Transparency,'" in Richard H. Clarida and Francesco Giavazzi, eds.,NBER Seminar on Macroeconomics2007. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 52-54. Bernanke, Ben S. (2010). "Central Bank Independence, Transparency, and Accountability," speech delivered at the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies International Conference, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, May 25. -------- (2011). "The Effects of the Great Recession on Central Bank Doctrine and Practice," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 56th Economic Conference, Boston, October 18. -------- (2012). "Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress," statement before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, February 29. -------- (2015).The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and Its Aftermath.New York: W.W. Norton and Company. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, April 26-27, 2016," press release, May 18. -------- (2017). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 14-15, 2017," press release, April 5. Burns, Arthur F. (1977). "Statement before the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives, July 26, 1977 (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 63 (August), pp. 717-21. Carney, Mark (2014).Speech delivered at the Lord Mayor's Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London at the Mansion House (PDF), London, June 12. -------- (2016).Letter from the Governor of the Bank of England to the Chancellor of the Exchequer (PDF), February 4. Cecchetti, Stephen G. (2009). "Crisis and Responses: The Federal Reserve in the Early Stages of the Financial Crisis,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 23 (Winter), pp. 51-75. Crockett, Andrew D. (1994). "Rules versus Discretion in Monetary Policy," in J. Onno de Beaufort Wijnholds, Sylvester C.W. Eiffinger, and Lex H. Hoogduin, eds.,A Framework for Monetary Stability: Papers and Proceedings of an International Conference Organised by De Nederlandsche Bank and the CentER for Economic Research at Amsterdam. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, pp. 165-84. Debelle, Guy, and Stanley Fischer (1994). "How Independent Should a Central Bank Be? (PDF)" inGoals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers,proceedings of a conference held in North Falmouth, Massachusetts, in June 1994. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 195-221. Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer (1978).Macroeconomics. New York: McGraw-Hill. Eichengreen, Barry, and Peter M. Garber (1991). "Before the Accord: U.S. Monetary-Financial Policy, 1945-51," in R .Glenn Hubbard, ed.,Financial Markets and Financial Crises. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 175-206. Federal Open Market Committee (2017).Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF), amended effective January 31 (original version adopted effective January 24, 2012). Fischer, Stanley (1987). "Monetary Policy," in Rudiger Dornbusch and Richard Layard, eds.,ThePerformance of the British Economy. Oxford, United Kingdom: Clarendon Press, pp. 6-28. -------- (1994). "Modern Central Banking," in Forrest Capie, Charles Goodhart, Stanley Fischer, and Norbert Schnadt, eds.,The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England.New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 262-308. -------- (1995). "Modern Approaches to Central Banking," NBER Working Paper Series 5064. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March. -------- (2015a). "Central Bank Independence," speech delivered at the 2015 Herbert Stein Memorial Lecture, National Economists Club, Washington, November 4. -------- (2015b). "Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 2. Goodhart, Charles A.E. (1999). "Monetary Policy and Debt Management in the United Kingdom: Some Historical Viewpoints," in K. Alec Chrystal, ed.,Government Debt Structure and Monetary Conditions.London: Bank of England, pp. 43-97. Hammond, Philip (2017). "Remit of the Bank of England (PDF)," letter from the Chancellor of the Exchequer to the Governor of the Bank of England, March 8. Howe, Geoffrey (1981). "Written Answers: Minimum Lending Rate," House of Commons debates, June 4, http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/written_answers/1981/jun/04/minimum-lending-rate#S6CV0005P0_19810604_CWA_167. King, Mervyn (1997). "Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in Practice,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 39 (June), pp. 81-97. -------- (2002). "The Inflation Target Ten Years On,"Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,vol. 42 (Winter), pp. 459-74. Leigh-Pemberton, Robin (1992). "The Case for Price Stability (PDF),"Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,vol. 32 (November), pp. 441-48. Madigan, Brian (2009). "Bagehot's Dictum in Practice: Formulating and Implementing Policies to Combat the Financial Crisis," inFinancial Stability andMacroeconomic Policy,proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Annual Economic Symposium. Kansas City, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 169-89. Meltzer, Allan H. (2009).A History of the Federal Reserve,vol. 2, book 1:1951-1969. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Sayers, R.S. (1958).Modern Banking, 4th ed. Oxford, United Kingdom: Clarendon Press. Tucker, Paul (2007). "Money and Credit: Banking and the Macroeconomy (PDF)," speech delivered at the Monetary Policy and the Markets Conference, London, December 13. Woodford, Michael (2013). "Forward Guidance by Inflation-Targeting Central Banks." CEPR Discussion Paper 9722. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, November. Yellen, Janet L. (2017). "Inflation, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the 59th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, September 26. 1. I am grateful to Ed Nelson of the Federal Reserve Board for his excellent assistance. Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The implications for monetary policy of central bank actions other than the use of its general monetary policy tools will be considered in the latter parts of this presentation.Return to text 3. See Debelle and Fischer (1994, p. 197).Return to text 4. U.S. monetary policy independence in the post-World War II era dates at least from the Federal Reserve/Treasury Accord of 1951. See Eichengreen and Garber (1991). I discussed Federal Reserve independence in detail in Fischer (2015a).Return to text 5. See the text of the act in Bank of England (2015a). (Since 1998, the U.K. Parliament has made a number of amendments to the Bank of England Act 1998--among them a change, in 2016, to the frequency of MPC meetings, from monthly to eight times a year. See Bank of England (2017a).)Return to text 6. From the start of inflation targeting in the United Kingdom in 1992, it was made clear that the authorities, when faced with a situation in which inflation was different from the target rate, would generallynotseek to restore inflation to target as quickly as possible. Rather, they typically would opt for a policy that sought to bring inflation back to target gradually, without unnecessary destabilization of real output. See Leigh-Pemberton (1992) and Bernanke and others (1999, pp. 156-57). This approach has continued in the MPC era, as discussed later. It is an approach consistent with the MPC's remit in the Bank of England Act 1998 to achieve the inflation target through policies consistent with the economic policy of the U.K. government, "including its objectives for growth and employment."Return to text 7. See Debelle and Fischer (1994, p. 217).Return to text 8. For the most recent statement by the Chancellor of the Exchequer on the inflation target to be pursued by the MPC, see Hammond (2017).Return to text 9. See Federal Open Market Committee (2017). See Bernanke (2012) for testimony discussing the longer-run objective shortly after it was announced. Bernanke (2015, p. 528) indicated that the FOMC's announcement of the 2 percent longer-run objective was preceded by consultation between himself and congressional leaders. In Fischer (2015a), I took the explicit 2 percent longer-run objective as the means by which the FOMC had made its legislated price stability goal operational.Return to text 10. See King (1997, p. 89).Return to text 11. For further discussion, see, for example, Bernanke (2010), Debelle and Fischer (1994, p. 217), and Fischer (1994, pp 262, 290-91). Initially, the argument was that the central bank was needed to prevent inflation from becoming too high; now, the argument is couched in terms of symmetry of the losses from both too-high and too-low inflation.Return to text 12. The Governor of the Riksbank is Stefan Ingves.Return to text 13. See Fischer (1994, 1995). Much of my discussion was with particular reference to the United Kingdom, and I argued that the Bank of England should receive independence.Return to text 14. See Fischer (1994, p. 262).Return to text 15. See Fischer (1994, p. 301).Return to text 16. See Sayers (1958, p. 314).Return to text 17. See Crockett (1994, p. 183). The desire to be explicit about the reaction function has continued to be a theme of policymaker statements in the era of the MPC. See, for example, King (2002), Allsopp (2002), Tucker (2007), and Bean (2009).Return to text 18. The MPC arrangements also require that a letter be written from the Bank Governor to the Chancellor of the Exchequer in the event of an overshoot or undershoot of the inflation target that is in excess of 1 percent. As well as providing accountability, this arrangement gives the Bank an opportunity to emphasize the longer-term nature of the inflation goal and the consideration given in MPC policy decisions to the stabilization of real economic activity. For example, Carney (2016) outlined, among other things, "the horizon over which the MPC judges it appropriate to return inflation to the target" and "the trade-off that has been made with regard to inflation and output variability in determining the scale and duration of any expected deviation of inflation from the target."Return to text 19. In addition to these tools, the MPC has used the Funding for Lending Scheme to boost bank lending. It is beyond the scope of my talk to discuss this further innovation.Return to text 20. For example, Federal Reserve Chairman Arthur Burns once noted (Burns, 1977, p. 717): "Federal Reserve officials are extremely careful to avoid any public comment that might suggest or imply some particular outlook for interest rates." In the United Kingdom, in 1981 Chancellor of the Exchequer Geoffrey Howe observed (Howe, 1981) that it was not the authorities' "practice toforecastinterestrate movements."Return to text 21. Although it provides an inflation forecast in theInflation Report, the MPC does not form an interest rate forecast in conjunction with that inflation forecast. Instead, its current practice is to report a "CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate expectations" (Bank of England, 2017b, chart 5.1). The fact that the MPC'sInflation Reportforecasts (for real output growth, inflation, and the unemployment rate) condition on market expectations of interest rates is one difference between the MPC forecasts and the FOMC participants' projections that are summarized in the SEP. Another difference is that the SEP consolidates information on the projections constructed and submitted separately by the individual FOMC participants, while theInflation Report's economic projections are arrived at collectively by the MPC and are therefore the forecasts of the committee as a whole. This is another aspect of the differences of behavior between the two monetary committees that is both interesting and possibly important, but for which there is not enough time for a more detailed discussion.Return to text 22. Woodford (2013) provides an analysis of the value of forward guidance under various conditions, including the case in which the policy rate is at its lower bound.Return to text 23. See Carney (2014) for a discussion of the benefits of forward guidance for the U.K. economy.Return to text 24. Federal Reserve operations for monetary policy purposes in longer-term securities markets had largely been absent since the Operation Twist experiment of the early 1960s (see, for example, Meltzer (2009, pp. 316-23)). In the United Kingdom, operations in longer-term securities markets had continued to figure importantly in monetary policy until the mid-1980s, reflecting attempts by the authorities to influence the term structure of interest rates or to control the stock of money or the volume of liquidity (see Fischer (1987), Goodhart (1999), and Batini and Nelson (2005)). A difference between most of these earlier operations and those in the modern era is that recent years' asset purchases have usually involved an expansion of the central bank's overall balance sheet.Return to text 25. For a recent discussion of the Federal Reserve's position on the matter, see Yellen (2017).Return to text 26. See, for example, Board of Governors (2017).Return to text 27. See Bagehot ([1873] 1897) for the classic discussion of the central bank's role as lender of last resort.Return to text 28. See Dornbusch and Fischer (1978, p. 528).Return to text 29. This is a very brief and simplified discussion of the actions taken by the Federal Reserve with regard to the discount window during the crisis. See, among others, Cecchetti (2009) and Madigan (2009) for detailed discussions. For reasons of space, I will not recount the United Kingdom's policy response in this area during the crisis.Return to text 30. Specifically, the Bank provided access to the largest broker-dealers subject to U.K. regulation and to central counterparties. See Carney (2014) and Bank of England (2015b).Return to text 31. This resource decision led, in 2010, to the creation within the Federal Reserve Board of the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research (which later became the Division of Financial Stability).Return to text 32. See Fischer (2015b).Return to text 33. For policymakers' consideration of this point in the U.S. context, see, for example, Bernanke (2011) and Board of Governors (2016).Return to text 34. See Bank of England (2017c).Return to text 35. It is worth noting that the 20-year period that is the focus of these remarks constitutes only a little over 6 percent of the history of the Bank of England--and there certainly have been a lot of surprises during that short period in the history of the second oldest of the world's central banks.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At The Economic Club of New York New York, New York Overall, the U.S. economy remains on solid footing, against the backdrop of the first synchronized global economic growth we have seen in many years and accommodative financial conditions. This benign outlook is clouded somewhat by uncertainty about government funding and the fiscal outlook, and geostrategic risk has risen. While the heartbreaking human toll exacted by Hurricane Harvey is already all too clear, it will take some time to assess the macroeconomic impact. The labor market continues to bring more Americans off the sidelines and into productive employment, which is a very welcome development. Nonetheless, there is a notable disconnect between signs that the economy is in the neighborhood of full employment and a string of lower-than-projected inflation readings, especially since inflation has come in stubbornly below target for five years. With normalization of the federal funds rate under way and the start of gradual balance sheet normalization widely anticipated, I will want to take some time to assess the path of the federal funds rate that will best support a sustainable move in inflation to our 2 percent goal.1Sustainably achieving our inflation objective is especially important, given the apparent persistently low level of the neutral rate and the resulting limited room for maneuver above the effective lower bound. Let me start by reviewing the economic outlook. There has been a noteworthy pickup in business investment this year compared with last year. Investment in the equipment and intellectual property category has risen at an annual rate of 6 percent so far this year after remaining roughly flat last year. The latest data on orders and shipments of capital equipment suggest that solid growth will likely continue in the second half of the year. In addition, oil drilling had rebounded this year after dropping sharply last year, although Hurricane Harvey creates uncertainty about drilling in coming months. While lackluster consumer spending was one of the key reasons for the weak increase in first-quarter gross domestic product (GDP), growth in personal consumption expenditures (PCE) bounced back strongly in the second quarter, and recent readings on retail sales suggest another solid increase in consumer spending this quarter. Of course, the likely economic effects of Hurricane Harvey raise uncertainties about the economic outlook for the remainder of the year. Based on past experience, it appears likely that the hurricane will have a notable effect on GDP in the current quarter, although output is likely to rebound by the end of the year. According to the U.S. Department of Energy, between 20 and 30 percent of the nation's oil refining capacity was shut down at the peak last week, and it is estimated that about 50 percent of petrochemical production was similarly shut down. Some oil production has also been disrupted. These developments have put upward pressure on gasoline prices. Based on previous hurricane events, the increase in gasoline prices should be short lived, but this outcome is uncertain and will depend on the extent of damage to refining capacity. Improvements in the labor market have continued. According to last Friday's labor market report, nonfarm payrolls have increased around 185,000 per month over the three months through August, about the same as the average monthly gains last year. The unemployment rate has been roughly flat for the past several months at 4.4 percent, which is 1/2 percentage point lower than at the same time last year. The employment-to-population ratio for prime-age workers has also improved over the past year, although it is still 2 percentage points lower than its pre-crisis peak in 2007. Earlier this year, many observers saw the prospect of fiscal stimulus as presenting the possibility of a substantial boost to domestic demand. Since then, however, many commentators have downgraded their assessments of the extent and timing of fiscal stimulus, and I have revised my outlook as well. That said, we are seeing synchronized global economic growth for the first time in many years. Foreign economies--including Canada, the euro area, and China--have posted robust GDP growth so far this year. This improvement has been reflected here at home in dollar depreciation; higher earnings and stock prices; tighter risk spreads; and an increase in net exports, which made a small positive contribution in the first half of this year after holding down GDP growth over the past several years. In addition, there are indications that, before too long, central banks in several major economies could begin normalizing monetary policy, in many cases through adjustments to their balance sheets as well as their policy rates. Those changes in foreign monetary policies could have important implications for term premiums and, in turn, longer-term Treasury rates, depending on the timing and approach.2 Despite this benign picture for the U.S. economy and continued increases in resource utilization, core inflation, as measured by changes in the PCE price index for items other than food and energy, slowed by almost 1/2 percentage point relative to the pace a year ago. Indeed, both overall and core inflation were only 1.4 percent for the year through July, well short of the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) objective. To what extent does it make sense to look through the recent low inflation readings on the grounds they are transitory? It appears that temporary factors, such as discounted cell phone plans, are pushing down inflation to some extent this year. By the same token, it is likely that other temporary factors--for example, prescription drug prices--boosted inflation last year. Going forward, we should see a temporary boost to headline inflation due to Hurricane Harvey's effect on gasoline prices that I mentioned earlier. Temporary factors, by their nature, have little implication for the underlying trend in inflation. In contrast, what is troubling is five straight years in which inflation fell short of our target despite a sharp improvement in resource utilization. It is instructive to put the shortfall in inflation in recent years in perspective by comparing inflation in the past few years with the last time the economy was in the neighborhood of full employment--namely, just before the financial crisis. In particular, over the past three years, unemployment has averaged roughly 5 percent. Similarly, over the three years ending in early 2007--before the unemployment rate started rising--the unemployment rate also averaged 5 percent. Despite a similar degree of resource utilization, core inflation averaged 2.2 percent from 2004 to 2007, notably higher than the comparable three-year average inflation rate today of 1.5 percent. Why is inflation so much lower now than it was previously? The fact that the period from 2004 to 2007 had inflation around target with similar unemployment rates casts some doubt on the likelihood that resource utilization is the primary explanation.3Similarly, a 12-quarter average is typically long enough that temporary factors should not be the dominant concern. One key factor that may have played a role in the past three years is the decline in import prices, reflecting the dollar's surge, especially in 2015. By contrast, in the 2004‑07 period, non-oil import prices increased at roughly a 2 percent annual rate and had a more neutral effect on inflation. Nonetheless, while the decline in non-oil import prices likely accounts for some of the weakness in inflation over the past few years, these prices have begun rising again in the past year at a time when inflation remains relatively low. So if import prices, resource utilization, and transitory factors together do not provide a complete account, why has inflation been so much lower in the past few years than it was previously? In many of the models economists use to analyze inflation, a key feature is "underlying," or trend, inflation, which is believed to anchor the rate of inflation over a fairly long horizon. Underlying inflation can be thought of as the slow-moving trend that exerts a strong pull on wage and price setting and is often viewed as related to some notion of longer-run inflation expectations. There is no single highly reliable measure of that underlying trend or the closely associated notion of longer-run inflation expectations. Nonetheless, a variety of measures suggest underlying trend inflation may currently be lower than it was before the crisis, contributing to the ongoing shortfall of inflation from our objective. That conclusion is suggested by estimates based on time-series models, longer-run expectations from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers and Survey of Professional Forecasters, and market-based measures of inflation compensation. Starting with time-series models, one model that has been used by a variety of researchers suggests that underlying trend inflation may have moved down by perhaps as much as 1/2 percentage point over the past decade.4Market-based measures of inflation compensation provide another read on inflation expectations. Comparing the three-year period ending in the second quarter of this year with the three-year period ended just before the financial crisis, 10-year-ahead inflation compensation based on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) yields is 3/4 percentage point lower.5Survey-based measures of inflation expectations are also lower. The Michigan survey measure of median household expectations of inflation over the next five to 10 years suggests a 1/4 percentage point downward shift over the most recent three-year period compared with the pre-crisis years, similar to the five-year, five-year forward forecast for the consumer price index from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. Why might underlying inflation expectations have moved down since the financial crisis? One simple explanation may be the experience of persistently low inflation: Households and firms have experienced a prolonged period of inflation below our objective, and that may be affecting their perception of underlying inflation. A related explanation may be the greater proximity of the federal funds rate to its effective lower bound due to a lower neutral rate of interest.6By constraining the amount of policy space available to offset adverse developments using our more effective conventional tools, the low neutral rate could increase the likely frequency of periods of below-trend inflation. In short, frequent or extended periods of low inflation run the risk of pulling down private-sector inflation expectations.7 Given today's circumstances, with the economy near full employment and inflation below target, how should the FOMC achieve its dual-mandate goals? Some might determine that preemptive tightening is appropriate on the grounds that monetary policy operates with long lags, and inflation will inevitably accelerate as the labor market continues to tighten because of the Phillips curve. However, in today's economy, there are reasons to worry that the Phillips curve will not prove very reliable in boosting inflation as resource utilization tightens. Since 2012, inflation has tended to change relatively little as the unemployment rate has fallen considerably, from 8.2 percent to 4.4 percent.8In short, the Phillips curve appears to be flatter today than it was previously.9This is also apparent in a number of advanced foreign economies, where declines in their unemployment rates to relatively low levels have failed to generate significant upward pressures on inflation.10Given the flatness of the Phillips curve, it could take a considerable undershooting of the natural rate of unemployment to achieve our inflation objective if we were to rely on resource utilization alone. For all these reasons, achieving our inflation target on a sustainable basis is likely to require a firming in longer-run inflation expectations--that is, the underlying trend. The key question in my mind is how to achieve an improvement in longer-run inflation expectations to a level that will allow us to achieve our inflation objective. The persistent failure to meet our inflation objective should push us to think broadly about diagnoses and solutions. The academic literature on monetary policy suggests a variety of prescriptions for preventing a lower neutral rate of interest from eroding longer-run inflation expectations.11One feature that is common to many proposals is that the persistence of the shortfall in inflation from our objective should be one of the considerations in setting monetary policy. Most immediately, we should assess inflation developments closely before making a determination on further adjustments to the federal funds rate. Monetary PolicyThis brings me to the implications for monetary policy. A key upcoming decision for the Committee is when to commence balance sheet normalization. I consider normalization of the federal funds rate to be well under way, the criterion for commencing balance sheet normalization. The approaching change to our reinvestment policy has been clearly communicated and is well anticipated. In principle, the FOMC could use both the balance sheet and the federal funds rate as active tools for setting monetary policy. However, I view the federal funds rate as the preferred active tool, because its effect on financial conditions and the economy has been more extensively tested and therefore is better understood than changes to the balance sheet. As a result, once we set in motion the change in balance sheet policy, as long as the economy evolves broadly as expected, we should allow the balance sheet to run off in the background at the gradual pace that was announced. We would primarily look to ongoing adjustments in the federal funds rate to calibrate the stance of monetary policy as economic conditions evolve. Once balance sheet normalization is under way, I will be looking closely at the evolution of inflation before making a determination about further adjustments to the federal funds rate. We have been falling short of our inflation objective not just in the past year, but over a longer period as well. My own view is that we should be cautious about tightening policy further until we are confident inflation is on track to achieve our target. Unless we expect inflation to move quickly back toward target--or there are indications that the short-run neutral rate has moved up further--a variety of empirical estimates suggest we could approach neutral without too many additional rate increases. Many forecasters assume that the neutral rate of interest is very low currently, and that it is likely to be low relative to historical norms in the longer run.12For example, the well-known Laubach-Williams model currently suggests an estimate of the longer-run neutral federal funds rate that is actually slightly below zero.13And in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median longer-run nominal federal funds rate was 3 percent, which implies the long-run real federal funds rate would only be 1 percent, lower than its average in the decades before then of around 2-1/2 percent.14 These estimates suggest that the neutral rate of interest is likely to rise only modestly in the medium term. It is worth remembering, in addition, that the Federal Reserve's balance sheet policy may be reinforcing this tendency over the next several years. A recent study suggests balance sheet runoff could boost the level of the term premium on the 10-year Treasury yield by about 40 basis points over the first few years.15Typical rules of thumb suggest that such an increase in term premiums would imply a decrease in the short-run neutral rate of interest. Although the FOMC expects to begin normalizing its balance sheet relatively soon, several foreign central banks are continuing their purchases of longer-term assets in their own currencies.16Because longer-term government securities in the major economies are close substitutes, the ongoing balance sheet programs of some foreign central banks will likely continue to hold down U.S. longer-term interest rates. But with economies abroad strengthening, it may not be too long before some foreign central banks will end their net purchases and, eventually, begin reducing their balance sheets. As that happens, the current downward pressure on longer-term interest rates from foreign spillovers will abate. For these reasons, my current expectation is that the short-run neutral rate of interest may not rise much over the medium term. But this is an open question and bears close monitoring. Of course, it is entirely possible that other factors will be working to offset this downward pressure on the equilibrium funds rate--as could be the case, for instance, if fiscal stimulus is greater than many observers currently expect. To the extent that the neutral rate remains low relative to its historical value, there is a high premium on guiding inflation back up to target so as to retain space to buffer adverse shocks with conventional policy. In this regard, I believe it is important to be clear that we would be comfortable with inflation moving modestly above our target for a time. In my view, this is the clear implication of the symmetric language in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. Before concluding, it is worth considering the possible implications of a sustained period of low neutral rates and low unemployment for financial imbalances. Historically, extended periods with very low unemployment rates tend to be associated with below-average spreads of expected returns on risky assets over safe interest rates--low bond risk premiums, for example, or low equity premiums. Although, to some extent, low risk premiums and rising asset valuations may be consistent with strong economic fundamentals, such as low default rates and strong corporate earnings, there have also been episodes when a very strong economy and low unemployment rate have led to overvaluation of asset prices, underpricing of risk, and growing financial imbalances. Thus, in today's environment, it is important to be vigilant to the signs that asset valuations appear to be elevated, especially in areas such as commercial real estate and corporate bonds, as well as the exceptionally low levels of expected volatility. Nonetheless, there are few signs of a dangerous buildup of leverage or of maturity transformation, which have traditionally been important contributors to financial instability. This is due, in no small measure, to the improvements in capital, liquidity, and risk management made by the financial institutions at the core of the system, which are associated with post-crisis financial reforms, as well as money market reform and the greater transparency in the derivatives markets. To conclude, much depends on the evolution of inflation. If, as many forecasters assume, the current shortfall of inflation from our 2 percent objective indeed proves transitory, further gradual increases in the federal funds rate would be warranted, perhaps along the lines of the median projection from the most recent SEP. But, as I noted earlier, I am concerned that the recent low readings for inflation may be driven by depressed underlying inflation, which would imply a more persistent shortfall in inflation from our objective. In that case, it would be prudent to raise the federal funds rate more gradually. We should have substantially more data in hand in the coming months that will help us make that assessment. ReferencesBlanchard, Olivier (2016). "The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s?" Policy Brief PB16‑1. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, January,https://piie.com/publications/pb/pb16-1.pdf. Bonis, Brian, Jane Ihrig, and Min Wei (2017). "The Effect of the Federal Reserve's Securities Holdings on Longer-Term Interest Rates," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 20. Brainard, Lael (2015). "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, Dec. 1. -------- (2016). "The "New Normal" and What it Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Foreign Affairs, Chicago, Ill., September 12. -------- (2017). "Cross-Border Spillovers of Balance Sheet Normalization," speech delivered at the National Bureau of Economic Research's Monetary Economics Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 13. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics(PDF), report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business, held in New York, N.Y., on March 3. International Monetary Fund (IMF, 2013). "The Dog that Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Is It Just Sleeping (PDF)," inWorld Economic Outlook April 2013: Hopes Realities, and Risks. Washington: International Monetary Fund. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Nakata, Taisuke, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016). "The Risk-Adjusted Monetary Policy Rule (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-061. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2007). "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 39 (s1, February), pp. 3-33, available athttps://scholar.harvard.edu/stock/publications/why-has-inflation-become-harder-forecast. 1. I am grateful to John Roberts for his assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Brainard (2017) for a fuller discussion of this topic.Return to text 3. According to Congressional Budget Office estimates, the natural rate of unemployment was about the same in the two periods: It was 4.8 percent in the 2014-17 period and 5.0 percent a decade earlier.Return to text 4. Stock and Watson (2007) introduced an estimate of trend inflation that assumed time-varying volatility. Cecchetti and others (2017) provided a recent update of that model; their estimate of trend inflation for core PCE prices has been about 1-1/2 percent in the past few years, compared with readings above 2 percent in the 2006-08 period (see figure 4.1, p. 23).Return to text 5. Of course, inflation compensation isn't a straight read on inflation expectations, as liquidity and term premiums can affect it. Still, inflation suggests a notable downward shift in expectations.Return to text 6. See Brainard (2016) for a fuller discussion of this topic.Return to text 7. See, for example, Kiley and Roberts (2017) and Nakata and Schmidt (2016).Return to text 8. The inflation information refers to core PCE inflation measured on a 12-month average basis.Return to text 9. Similarly, inflation did not fall very much as the unemployment rate climbed to 10 percent during the Great Recession. See Blanchard (2016), Kiley (2015), and Brainard (2015).Return to text 10. See IMF (2013).Return to text 11. See, for example, Kiley and Roberts (2017).Return to text 12. See, for example, theJuly 2017 Survey of Market Participants (PDF)from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Return to text 13. Latest estimates from the Laubach-Williams model are available athttp://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/Laubach_Williams_updated_estimates.xlsx.Return to text 14. Over the 1960-2007 period, the real federal funds rate--measured as the nominal federal funds rate less trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation--averaged 2-1/2 percent.Return to text 15. Bonis, Ihrig, and Wei (2017).Return to text 16. For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC statement," press release, July 26.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. I want to compliment the organizers and others for gathering an outstanding group of researchers and papers for this conference. Understanding why some groups persistently fare better than others in the job market and how these disparities may affect the economy's overall performance is vitally important to the Federal Reserve. While opportunity and inclusion have long been central to American values, it is increasingly clear that they are also central to the strength of our economy.1 As directed by the Congress, the Federal Reserve's dual mandate is to promote maximum employment and stable prices. In fulfilling its dual mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has set a target of 2 percent for inflation but does not have a similarly fixed numerical goal for maximum employment. That is because the level of maximum employment depends on "nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market," which "may change over time and may not be directly measurable."2Understanding how close the labor market is to our full-employment goal requires consulting a variety of evidence along with a healthy dose of judgment. The recognition that maximum employment evolves over time to reflect changes in the economic landscape serves us well by requiring FOMC participants to develop a nuanced understanding of labor market developments. This approach to maximum employment has allowed the FOMC to navigate the current expansion in a way that has likely brought more people back into productive employment than might have been the case with a fixed unemployment rate target based on pre-crisis standards. This is especially true at a time when the traditional Phillips curve relationship is flatter than in the past, which means that price inflation is likely to be less informative regarding labor market tightness than it was previously.3It therefore seems particularly valuable to look beyond inflation and headline unemployment to assess the strength of the labor market. Even when aggregate economic statistics look strong, studying geographic areas and demographic groups that are not faring as well can point to ways of further improving the economy's performance. The Federal Reserve is also keenly interested in disparities in employment, labor force participation, income, and wealth because they may have implications for the growth capacity of the economy. When we consider appropriate monetary policy, we need to have a good sense of how fast the economy can grow without fueling excessive price inflation. At a time when the retirement of the baby-boom generation looks likely to be something of a drag on the growth of the labor force, it is especially important to consider whether relatively low levels of employment and labor force participation for some prime working-age groups represent slack that, if successfully tapped, could increase the labor force and boost economic activity. More broadly, when a person who was previously unemployed or discouraged secures a job, not only does it boost the economy, but that person also may gain a greater sense of economic security, self-sufficiency, and self-worth and be better able to invest in their family's future. With a richer understanding of economic or social barriers that inhibit labor market success and prosperity for some groups, we may better grasp how much these individuals can be helped by broad economic expansion and how much targeted intervention is required through other policy means. There is also an important connection between the economy's potential growth rate and equality of opportunity. Large disparities in opportunity based on race, ethnicity, gender, or geography mean that the enterprise, exertion, and investments of households and businesses from different groups are not rewarded commensurately. To the extent that disparities in income and wealth across race, ethnicity, gender, or geography reflect such disparities in opportunity, families and small businesses from the disadvantaged groups will then underinvest in education or business endeavors, and potential growth will fall short of the levels it might otherwise attain.4 Aside from reducing the long-run productive potential of the economy, persistently high levels of income and wealth inequality may also have implications for the robustness of consumer spending, which accounts for roughly two-thirds of aggregate spending in the United States. The gaps in household income and wealth between the richest and poorest households are at historically high levels, as income and wealth have increasingly accrued to the very richest households. For example, results from the Federal Reserve's latest Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which is due to be released soon, indicate that the share of income held by the top 1 percent of households reached 24 percent in 2015, up from 17 percent in 1988. The share of wealth held by the top 1 percent rose to 39 percent in 2016, up from 30 percent in 1989.5Some research suggests that widening income and wealth inequality may damp consumer spending in the aggregate, as the wealthiest households are likely to save a much larger proportion of any additional income they earn relative to households in lower income groups that are likely to spend a higher proportion on goods and services.6 Disparities by Race and EthnicityWhen we disaggregate the economy-wide labor market statistics, we find significant and persistent racial and ethnic disparities.7In August, the national unemployment rate of 4.4 percent, which is low by historical standards, masked substantial differences across different demographic groups. As shown infigure 1, unemployment rates ranged from 3.9 percent for whites to 4 percent for Asians, 5.2 percent for Hispanics, and 7.7 percent for African Americans. Labor force participation rates, shown infigure 2, also differ substantially, although by less than unemployment rates, with the rate for African Americans lowest at 62.2 percent. These differences are not a recent development--similar differences across racial and ethnic dimensions have existed for as long as these data have been collected. Even more striking, a significant portion of the gaps in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups cannot be attributed to differences in their underlying characteristics, such as age and education levels.8 Although the differences in employment rates between racial and ethnic groups are still quite large, they have narrowed recently, after having widened considerably during the recession, and are near their lowest levels in decades. Differences in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups tend to widen sharply during recessions, as less advantaged groups shoulder an outsized share of total layoffs, and these differences shrink during recoveries. For example, in the second quarter of 2017, the unemployment rate for black adult men was a little more than 3 percentage points higher than for white adult men. This differential, while sizable, is nonetheless close to the smallest gap seen since comparable data became available in the mid-1970s. Differences in unemployment rates are similarly near historical lows for black women relative to white women, and for Hispanics relative to whites. Since racial disparities tend to get smaller throughout the course of an economic expansion, it seems likely that racial differences in unemployment rates will continue to shrink if the overall unemployment rate falls further.9 More broadly, the persistent disparities in employment outcomes are mirrored in significant and persistent racial and ethnic differences in families' income and wealth. According to forthcoming findings from the latest SCF and as shown infigure 3, the average income for white families in 2015 was about $123,000 per year, compared with $54,000 for black families and $57,000 for Hispanic families.10Disparities in wealth, shown infigure 4, are even larger: Average wealth holdings for white families in 2016 were about $933,000, compared with $191,000 for Hispanic families and $138,000 for black families.11Moreover, these racial and ethnic gaps in average family income and wealth have generally widened rather than narrowed over the past few decades. Based on SCF data, median family wealth has grown much more rapidly for white families than for other families over the past few decades, while median family incomes have risen by about the same amount for white, black, and Hispanic families. As the economic expansion continues and brings more Americans off the sidelines and into productive employment, it seems likely that the positive trends in employment and participation rates for historically disadvantaged groups will continue. That said, the benefits of a lengthy recovery can only go so far, as the research points to some barriers to labor market outcomes for particular groups that appear to be structural. After controlling for sectoral and educational differences, the research suggests that these factors include discrimination as well as differences in access to quality education and informal social networks that may be an important source of information and support regarding employment opportunities.12While the policy tools available to the Federal Reserve are not well suited to addressing the barriers that contribute to persistent disparities in labor market outcomes, understanding these barriers and efforts to address them is vital in assessing maximum employment as well as potential growth. Geographic DisparitiesThe Federal Reserve System benefits not only from our engagement with research, statistics, and surveys, but also from our presence in communities all across America. This local presence, by design, provides valuable perspectives on how Americans in different communities are experiencing the economy and the varied challenges that lie beneath the aggregate numbers. While traveling around the country with our community development staff, I have been struck by the widening gulf between the economic fortunes of our large metropolitan areas and those of our small cities, towns, and rural areas. The statistics bear this out. Over the past 30 years, the convergence in income across regions of the country has slowed dramatically.13Much of the gains in employment, income, and wealth since the end of the recession, and more broadly over the past few decades, have accrued to workers and families in larger cities. Since some workers and families may find it difficult to move, this concentration of economic opportunities in larger cities may have adverse implications for the well-being of these households and, potentially, the growth capacity of the economy as a whole. Although pockets of opportunity and poverty are found in large metropolitan and rural areas alike, a greater share of the new jobs and business establishments created during the recovery that followed the Great Recession have been in larger metro areas than was the case in previous recoveries.14In countless rural towns and small cities we are seeing how a deep economic setback can leave a profound and long-lasting mark. These experiences challenge common assumptions about the ability of local economies to recover from a setback. This could be the legacy of the concentrated presence of an industry that experiences decline due to trade or technology, or it could be the byproduct of a lack of connectivity--whether by highways or broadband. Technological change, globalization, and other shifts in demand and costs are not new to the U.S. economy, but there are troubling signs that less diversified or connected localities have a diminished ability to adapt. And the evidence suggests that concentrated economic shocks and the associated labor market stress also have broader consequences for health and mortality.15 To provide some sense of the magnitudes, on average over the past year the unemployment rate for adults of prime working age (25 to 54) was about 1 percentage point higher in nonmetropolitan areas than in larger metro areas.16But there is an even greater gap in labor force engagement, as can be seen infigure 5. The participation rate for prime-age adults in larger metro areas is currently nearly 3‑1/2 percentage points above the participation rate for prime-age adults in nonmetro areas. Interestingly, the geographic participation rate gap between more and less populous areas is apparent for all races as well as, in recent years, for both men and women.17 This gap in labor force participation between large cities and other areas has widened substantially since just before the Great Recession: Since 2007, the participation rate for prime-age adults in nonmetro areas has fallen nearly 3 percentage points, as compared with less than 1 percentage point on net in larger metro areas. Indeed, since 2007, the large decline in labor force participation in small metro and rural areas can explain about 40 percent of the economy-wide decline in prime-age labor force participation, even though these areas account for a smaller 25 percent of the population. Before discussing possible contributors to this growing participation gap, it is important to emphasize that less populous areas appear to be falling behind in ways beyond these employment outcomes. Based on forthcoming SCF data, for example, the average annual income for families in metro areas was about $54,000 higher than for families in nonmetro areas, and the average wealth holdings for families in metro areas exceeded average wealth for families in nonmetro areas by nearly $500,000--and these gaps have more than doubled over the past three decades.18iThe gaps in many other measures of well-being have widened as well. In small towns and rural areas, college attainment rates have increased by less, disability rates have increased by more, divorce rates have risen by more, and mortality due to lung disease, cancer, or cardiovascular disease have either improved by less or worsened by more.19Opioid use is also most prevalent in less populous metro and rural areas.20 I have seen many of these challenges first hand. In the small towns and hollers of eastern Kentucky, I visited with community development financial institutions that are trying to plug the gap in access to credit so that small businesses can continue operating and hiring locally, and so that families can access housing that is safe and affordable. In rural communities in the Mississippi Delta, I learned about diminished access to financial services available to rural residents, which can be a barrier to housing and business investment and pose vexing challenges to local governments. In Texas, I learned about barriers to economic development in the ruralcoloniasareas on the southern border associated with underinvestment in physical and broadband infrastructure.21 As we consider the long-term health of the U.S. economy, it is important to better understand the decade-long decline in aggregate labor force participation. It is striking that in larger metro areas, the labor force participation rate for prime-age men has recently retraced much of the decline experienced during the recession, while in smaller metro and rural areas, the labor force participation rate remains well below its pre-recession level, with only modest improvements of late. The evidence increasingly suggests that much of the decline relates to a sustained decline in job opportunities for prime-age men, especially less-educated prime-age men, resulting in languishing wages relative to other groups.22Indeed, it is notable that the striking decrease in labor force participation rates for nonmetro areas relative to large metro areas is highly concentrated among adults with no more than a high school education, who comprise a larger share of the prime-age population in nonmetro areas. The labor force participation rate for adults with no more than a high school education has fallen to 72 percent in nonmetro areas--about 3-1/2 percent below larger metro areas.23 Although the precise causes of this decline are still not fully settled, one contributing factor is advancing automation and computerization.24Another contributor is globalization. For example, a growing body of research has identified a steeper decline in the employment and labor force attachment of prime-age men in areas of the country that specialized in the industries that were most negatively affected by increased imports from China.25 Research suggests that some of the decline in prime-age labor force participation relates to some individuals' reduced ability or desire to work, in some cases resulting directly from the ongoing decline in job opportunities. There are many reasons why some prime-age men may be less willing or able to work. One possibility is that the unusually long spells of nonemployment associated with the Great Recession may have eroded job skills and informal employment networks. Another possibility that is increasingly in focus is that physical disabilities, as well as sharp increases in opioid use, have increasingly inhibited some individuals from participating in the labor force. The fraction of prime-age men receiving disability insurance benefits has increased from 1 percent in the late 1970s to 3 percent more recently.26Recent research also finds that among all prime-age men who are not in the labor force, about one-third reported having at least one disability, and nearly one-half reported taking pain medications daily.27These supply-side explanations may be related to the drop in labor demand: the despair related to diminished prospects of a stable and quality job may lead to substance abuse and related health or mortality concerns.28 At least some of these explanations potentially relate to the growing divide between large metro areas and other areas of the country. As noted earlier, the opioid epidemic appears to be particularly acute in smaller cities and rural areas. In addition, employment in non-metro areas tends to be more concentrated in manufacturing, which is the sector that has experienced the largest decline in employment from automation and globalization.29Similarly, research suggests that workers in less populous areas have been more likely to be directly affected by increased import competition from China due to the geographical distribution of industries.30And for many less populous areas, job opportunities are less diverse than in bigger cities, so that when a plant shuts down, there are fewer local alternative job opportunities for unemployed workers, especially with comparable levels of employment security or benefits. These striking results naturally raise the question of whether we are seeing heightened migration from the less populous areas to the larger metros with greater economic opportunity. A conventional assumption in economics is that regional differences should narrow over time as workers move toward areas where jobs are more plentiful and wages are higher.31In reality, Americans' propensity to move is currently at its lowest level in many decades. In 2016, the fraction of the population that had moved within the United States in the past year was 11 percent, down from 17 percent or more in the early 1980s, with the steepest decline in the fraction of people moving longer distances, across county or state lines.32The evidence suggests that the decline in geographic mobility cannot be fully explained by population aging, by the housing boom and bust, by changes in the composition of industries, by the increasing ease of telecommuting from longer distances, or by the rise in dual-earner households which may make work-related relocation more difficult. Some of the decline may be related to changes in the labor market, perhaps because workers are more likely to perceive that job opportunities are no better elsewhere, and consequently that the labor market returns to switching jobs or locations--in terms of better wages or higher job quality--have declined.33Also, zoning requirements may be boosting housing costs in cities where job opportunities are most abundant, such as San Francisco, pricing out many potential workers and inhibiting migration.34 Whatever the reason, the fact that families are less likely to move now than in the past suggests that many of those in less populous areas are not able to access the economic opportunity present in denser and more diversified large metropolitan areas at a time when the gap in labor market outcomes for larger metros relative to other areas continues to grow. Federal Reserve Work on Labor Market DisparitiesThe Federal Reserve is deeply engaged in understanding disparities through our data collection, research collaboration, and community development work. One way the Federal Reserve seeks to obtain a clearer picture is by collecting data ourselves. For instance, some of the data I have cited today come from the Federal Reserve's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances, which provides detailed information on income and wealth holdings by demographic groups. The Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking provides a portrait of household finances, employment, housing, and debt; the Survey of Young Workers provides insights into younger adults' employment experiences soon after entering the labor force; and the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities Survey provides information about income generating activities that are often outside the scope of other employment and income surveys.35 Across the Federal Reserve System, a variety of initiatives are aimed at understanding economic disparities and how to foster more-inclusive growth. The Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis brings together researchers from a variety of fields to analyze barriers to economic opportunity and advancement. The Economic Growth and Mobility Project at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia aims to bring together researchers with community stakeholders to focus on differences in poverty and economic mobility across demographic characteristics. The Investing in America's Workforce Initiative is a collaboration between the Federal Reserve System and academic research institutions to promote investment in workforce skills that better align with employers' needs.36 All of that brings me to today's conference, which I am confident will make an important contribution to this mission. I am heartened to see so many researchers and practitioners from a variety of backgrounds focused on these important issues. This conference is part of our efforts to hear from experts with diverse backgrounds and perspectives to better understand the nature and implications of labor market disparities. A deeper understanding of labor market disparities is central to the mission of the Federal Reserve because it may help us better assess full employment, where resources may be underutilized, and the likely evolution of the labor market and overall economic activity. We look forward to hearing what you have to say about these important questions and learning what other questions are in need of attention. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 197-255. Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price (2016). "Import Competition and the Great U.S. Employment Sag of the 2000s,"Journal of Labor Economics,vol. 34 (part 2, January), S141-98. Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo (2017). "Robots and Jobs: Evidence from U.S. Labor Markets (PDF)," unpublished paper, March 17. Adamy, Janet, and Paul Overberg (2017). "Rural America is the New 'Inner City',"Wall Street Journal,May 26. Alichi, Ali, Kory Kantenga, and Juan Solè (2016). "Income Polarization in the United States (PDF)," IMF Working Paper 16/121. Washington: International Monetary Fund. Autor, David (2010). "The Polarization of Job Opportunities in the U.S. Labor Market: Implications for Employment and Earnings (PDF)." Washington: Center for American Progress and Hamilton Project. Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson (2013). "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,"American Economic Review,vol. 103 (October), pp. 1553-97. Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson (2015). "Untangling Trade and Technology: Evidence from Local Labor Markets,"Economic Journal,vol. 125 (May), pp. 621-46. Bernstein, Jared (2013). "The Impact of Inequality on Growth." Washington: Center for American Progress. Blanchard, Olivier (2016). "The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief PB16-1. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, January. Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz (1992). "Regional Evolutions (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 1-75. Brainard, Lael (2015). "Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, October 12. Brainard, Lael (2017). "Why Opportunity and Inclusion Matter for America's Economic Strength," speech delivered at the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota, May 22. Bricker, Jesse, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, Sarah Pack, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A. Windle (forthcoming). "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,"Federal Reserve Bulletin. Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017). "Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Case, Anne and Angus Deaton (2015). "Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among White Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century,"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,vol. 112 (December), pp. 15078-83. -------- (2017). "Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 397-452. Council of Economic Advisors (2014). "The Labor Force Participation Rate since 2007: Causes and Policy Implications (PDF)." Washington: Council of Economic Advisors, Executive Office of the President of the United States. -------- (2016). "The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation (PDF)." Washington: Council of Economic Advisors, Executive Office of the President of the United States. Economic Innovation Group (2016).The New Map of Economic Growth and Recovery(PDF). Washington: EIG, May. Fryer, Jr., Roland G. (2011). "Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimination," in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds.,Handbook of Labor Economics,vol. 4b. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 855‑971. Ganong, Peter, and Daniel W. Shoag (2017). "Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S. Declined?" National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23609. Goetz, Stephen, Mark Partridge, and Heather Stephens (2017). "The Economic Status of Rural America in the Trump Era," MPRA Paper 77830. Munich: Munich Personal RePEc Archive, March. Guy, Jr., Gery P., Kun Zhang Kun, Michele K. Bohm, Jan Losby, Brian Lewis, Randall Young, Louise B. Murphy, and Deborah Dowell (2017). "Vital Signs: Changes in Opioid Prescribing in the United States, 2006–2015 (PDF),"Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,vol. 66 (July 7), pp. 697-704. Herkenhoff, Kyle F., Lee E. Ohanian, and Edward C. Prescott (2017). "Tarnishing the Golden and Empire States: Land-Use Regulations and the U.S. Economic Slowdown." NBER Working Paper No. 23790. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September. Kaplan, Greg, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl (2017). "Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate Migration,"International Economic Review,vol. 58 (February) pp. 57-94. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Krueger, Alan (forthcoming). "Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate."Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. (The conference draft is available athttps://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/where-have-all-the-workers-gone-an-inquiry-into-the-decline-of-the-u-s-labor-force-participation-rate.) Marrero, Gustavo, and Juan Rodrìguez (2013). "Inequality of Opportunity and Growth,"Journal of Development Economics,vol. 104 (September), pp. 107-22. Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith and Abigail Wozniak (2011). "Internal Migration in the United States,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 25 (Summer), pp. 173-96. -------- (2017). "Job Changing and the Decline in Long-Distance Migration in the United States,"Demography,vol. 54 (April), pp. 631-53. Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott (2016a). "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment,"American Economic Review,vol. 106 (July), pp. 1632-62. -------- (2016b). "Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from U.S. Counties (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-094. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Ritter, Joseph A., and Lowell J. Taylor (2011). "Racial Disparity in Unemployment,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 93 (February), pp. 30-42. Sampson, Robert J. (2016). "Individual and Community Economic Mobility in the Great Recession Era: The Spatial Foundations of Persistent Inequality (PDF)," in Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, eds.,Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy.St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, pp. 259-87. Semega, Jessica L., Kayla R. Fontenot, and Melissa A. Kollar (2017). "Income and Poverty in the United States: 2016 (PDF),"Current Population Reports,pp. 60-259. Washington: U.S. Census Bureau, September, . Weingarden, Alison (2017). "Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "So We All Can Succeed: 125 Years of Women's Participation in the Economy," speech delivered at "125 Years of Women at Brown," a conference sponsored by Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, May 5. 1. I am grateful to Christopher Smith for his assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals.pdf.Return to text 3. For more on the Phillips curve and its ability to provide information on labor-market slack, see Brainard (2015), Blanchard (2016), and Kiley (2015).Return to text 4. For more on inequality of opportunity see Marrero and Rodriquez (2013).Return to text 5. Staff calculations from forthcoming SCF data (to be released on September 27); for additional analysis of these data, see Bricker and others (forthcoming).Return to text 6. See Bernstein (2013) and Alichi, Kantenga, and Solè (2016) for more on the potential link between income and wealth inequality and consumer spending.Return to text 7. For a discussion of gender disparities, see Yellen (2015).Return to text 8. See Cajner and others (2017) for more on racial gaps and the labor market.Return to text 9. Data on recent estimates of unemployment rates for adult men (20 years and older) by race and ethnicity are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Historical gaps are provided by Cajner and others (2017).Return to text 10. Staff calculations from forthcoming SCF data. Recent estimates of household income from Current Population Survey data and reported by the Census in Semega, Fontenot, and Kollar (2017) are qualitatively similar, in that between 2013 and 2016 for both sets of data, family income has increased for whites, blacks, and Hispanics (with greater increases, in percentage terms, for black and Hispanic families).Return to text 11. Racial and ethnic differences in median income and wealth are somewhat smaller. For example, in 2016 median income for white families was about $61,000, compared with $35,000 for black families and $39,000 for Hispanic families. Median wealth was about $171,000 for white families, compared with about $20,000 for black and Hispanic families. The larger gap in average income and wealth than median income and wealth reflects a greater concentration of income and wealth among the wealthiest white families than for other races and ethnicities.Return to text 12. For example, see Fryer (2011) and Ritter and Taylor (2011).Return to text 13. See Ganong and Shoag (2017) and references therein for more on the decline in income convergence.Return to text 14. See Goetz, Partridge, and Stephens (2017) and Economic Innovation Group (2016) for details on growing regional differences during the recovery.Return to text 15. See Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2016b).Return to text 16. Larger metro areas are defined as metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) with a population of 500,000 or larger, while smaller metro areas are MSAs with population between 100,000 and 500,000, and nonmetro areas are the remainder; see Weingarden (2017).Return to text 17. This gap appears to be a post-crisis phenomenon for women, while for men the gap began to widen in the 1990s.Return to text 18. Staff estimates from forthcoming SCF data. Although the difference inaverageincome and wealth has grown, there has been little change in differences inmedianfamily income and wealth in larger metros relative to other areas. The widening gap for average income and wealth, but not for median income and wealth, is because in larger metro areas income and wealth has become increasingly held by wealthier families.Return to text 19. These statistics are provided in Adamy and Overberg (2017).Return to text 20. See Guy, Jr., and others (2017).Return to text 21. See the Brainard (2017) speech on opportunity and inclusion.Return to text 22. Most analysis suggests that at least half of the decline in the aggregate labor force participation rate since 2007 is attributable to the aging of the population, with a significant portion of the decline that is not related to aging attributable to a longer-run decline in participation for younger individuals and prime-age men; for example, see Aaronson and others (2014) and the Council of Economic Advisors (2014). For an overview of factors potentially attributable to the decline in labor force participation of prime-age men, see the Council of Economic Advisors (2016).Return to text 23. These estimates are based on data from Weingarden (2017).Return to text 24. For an overview of factors that have potentially impacted job opportunities for this group, see Autor (2010). For examples of research on the recent labor market effects of technology and automation, see Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2015) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017).Return to text 25. For national-level estimates of the labor market effects from cheaper Chinese imports, see Pierce and Schott (2016a) and Acemoglu and others (2016). For evidence related to cross-country differences in these effects, see Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013), and Pierce and Schott (2016b).Return to text 26. See Council of Economic Advisors (2016).Return to text 27. Krueger (forthcoming) describes evidence from a variety of surveys showing that a significant fraction of prime-age men who are out of the labor force report having pain, being in poor health, or taking medication related to this pain, and that these behaviors are far more common among prime-age men than prime-age women.Return to text 28. See Case and Deaton (2015, 2017).Return to text 29. Based on staff analysis of publically available data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis on metropolitan and nonmetropolitan employment by industry.Return to text 30. This observation reflects unpublished calculations from Pierce and Schott (2016b).Return to text 31. See Blanchard and Katz (1992).Return to text 32. Data on internal migration rates come from the Current Population Survey and are published annually by the Census Bureau; see "Table A-1. Annual Geographic Mobility Rates, by Type of Movement: 1948-2016."Return to text 33. For a discussion of the multidecade decline in internal migration and its potential causes, see Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak (2011, 2017) and Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017).Return to text 34. See Ganong and Shoag (2017) and Herkenhoff, Ohanian, and Prescott (2017).Return to text 35. Further information on these surveys are found on the Board's website; see theSurvey of Consumer Finances; theSurvey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking; theSurvey of Young Workers; and theSurvey of Enterprising and Informal Work Activities (PDF).Return to text 36. For information about the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, seehttps://www.minneapolisfed.org/institute, for information about the Economic Growth and Mobility Project, seehttps://www.philadelphiafed.org/egmp, and for information about the America's Workforce Initiative, seehttps://www.investinwork.org.Return to text i. Note. On September 27, 2017, a typo was corrected to change $25,000 to $54,000 in the following sentence on page 9: "Based on forthcoming SCF data, for example, the average annual income for families in metro areas was about $54,000 higher than for families in nonmetro areas, and the average wealth holdings for families in metro areas exceeded average wealth for families in nonmetro areas by nearly $500,000--and these gaps have more than doubled over the past three decades." The original number incorrectly stated the median instead of the mean.Return to text Accessible Version