Chair Janet L. Yellen At "Creating a Just Economy," the 2017 annual conference of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C. Thank you for this opportunity to be part of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition's annual conference. It is a pleasure to address a group of organizations committed to improving the lives of low- and moderate-income Americans and strengthening communities. I am especially pleased to be with you in 2017, which marks the 40th anniversary of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). As you know, the CRA requires banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. Since its enactment, the CRA has helped channel capital into communities and, in the process, supported innovative and effective approaches to community development. We at the Federal Reserve take our CRA responsibilities seriously. We evaluate the CRA performance of the state-chartered banks we supervise and make the ratings and written evaluations public.1We currently are improving our examination procedures and examiner training. We also work with our fellow bank regulators to continually improve our implementation of the law. And, as many of you know, we recently revised our interagency guidance to clarify how various community development activities are considered in assessing CRA performance, among them workforce development, which is my topic today.2 Workforce Development Initiatives and ChallengesWorkforce development is a bit of a catchall phrase encompassing different types of initiatives that help prepare people for jobs by providing them with training, placement assistance, and other support. Organizations dedicated to providing workforce development are interested not just in helping people secure any jobs, but jobs that pay well, provide benefits, offer opportunities for advancement, and are less likely to be eliminated during economic downturns. Significant job market changes in recent years, brought about by global competition and technological advances--and the new and shifting skills that these changes demand--make workforce development more important than ever before. As community development practitioners, you know that good-paying, stable jobs are not only important to workers and their families, but also are the foundation of strong neighborhoods. As part of our CRA responsibilities, the Federal Reserve, together with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, has made it clear that banks will receive CRA recognition for lending to, investing in, and providing services to workforce development initiatives. In fact, two Federal Reserve Banks recently published a framework describing how workforce development initiatives can fit within a bank's broader CRA strategy.3 While the job market for the United States as a whole has improved markedly since the depths of the financial crisis, the persistently higher unemployment rates in lower-income and minority communities show why workforce development is so essential. For instance, unemployment rates averaged 13 percent in low- and moderate-income communities from 2011 through 2015, compared with 7.3 percent in higher-income communities.4 The challenges for workers in minority communities are even greater. The average unemployment rate across all census tracts where minorities made up a majority of the population averaged 14.3 percent from 2011 through 2015. Also, a much smaller share of the prime working-age population in these areas is employed--67.7 percent during this period, which is nearly 9 percentage points lower than in communities with smaller minority populations.5These elevated unemployment rates and depressed employment-to-population ratios underscore the strong need for effective workforce development options for these communities. Education as a Workforce Development StrategyProbably the most important workforce development strategy is improving the quality of general education. The rapid rise in U.S. education levels in the 20th century, facilitated by the growing availability of high school education in the first part of the century and the rapid expansion of public universities after World War II, contributed enormously to the broad-based economic gains associated with that period.6But, unfortunately, for a wide variety of reasons that are beyond the scope of this talk, education levels have historically lagged in low- and moderate-income communities, particularly communities of color. Between 2011 and 2015, the average proportion of adults in low- and moderate-income communities who had dropped out of high school was 23.5 percent, which is more than double the 10.9 percent rate in higher-income communities during that period.7 When students from low- and moderate-income families do complete high school, they are less likely to pursue a college degree. And when they do attend college, those students are less likely to graduate.8Among the reasons for the disparity are a lack of money to pay for college and the burden of family responsibilities.9As a result, the proportion of adults in low- and moderate-income communities from 2011 through 2015 who had a four-year college degree or graduate degree was about half the share in higher-income communities--17.6 percent versus 34 percent.10 This educational disparity matters because, among many reasons, people with less education experience both higher unemployment and lower average earnings. In December 2016, for example, the unemployment rate for people aged 25 and older with a bachelor's or higher degree was only 2.6 percent. However, the rate was nearly double, 5.1 percent, for workers in this age group with only a high school diploma and about triple, 7.9 percent, for those without a high school degree.11 While high school graduates earn somewhat more than people who did not finish high school, the big payoff comes with a four-year college or advanced degree.12The advantages of higher education, evidenced by lower unemployment rates and higher earnings, are clear across the spectrum but are greater for non-Hispanic whites than for African Americans and Hispanics. Improving educational levels in low- and moderate-income communities is a long-term task. At least partially because of a lack of early childhood education and the sometimes lower quality of schools, children in these neighborhoods score substantially lower on standardized tests and drop out of high school at higher rates.13Thus, a starting point is to improve access to quality education in early childhood and improve the quality of primary and secondary schooling. We must also recognize and address the barriers faced by low- and moderate-income students trying to attain higher levels of education--barriers not typically faced by their more well-off peers. First, these students often do not have friends or family who have achieved higher educational levels, which matters because students whose parents did not attend college are much less likely to pursue a college degree themselves.14Even so, these students can benefit from high school counselors or other mentors who can assist them in choosing schools that provide the financial and counseling support that will help them complete their degrees. And they can benefit from help in picking majors and degrees that lead to higher earnings.15 Second, lower-income students often pursue their education while working to support themselves and family members. Educational programs that help students balance these competing responsibilities go a long way to improving completion rates. In recognition of this fact, the U.S. Department of Education is offering competitive grants to postsecondary institutions to support or establish campus-based childcare programs primarily serving the needs of low-income students.16 I want to reiterate that addressing the particular barriers standing in the way of lower-income students attending college and earning a degree requires a long-term strategy. However, not every student wants a two- or four-year degree or will have the financial wherewithal to pursue and complete a postsecondary degree. To support programs aimed at students not bound for college, in 2015, the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Atlanta identified occupations with above-average wages for workers without a bachelor's degree in the country's 100 largest metropolitan areas.17The Reserve Banks made this information available to workforce development providers online and in workshops. Educational programs and training that lead to better paying and more steady work are crucial for people without college degrees, particularly lower-income workers. Workforce Development Programs in ActionIn the rest of my remarks, I would like to highlight some examples of successful initiatives that illustrate key features of effective workforce development.18As you know, within our community affairs offices, the Federal Reserve devotes considerable effort to studying and promoting effective workforce development, so I am able to draw on the knowledge and experience of our staff. In discussing the examples, I would like to make five points. First, it is crucial for younger workers to establish a solid connection to employment early in their work lives. The Federal Reserve's 2013 Survey of Young Workers found that 18- to 30-year-olds with early work experience were more likely to emerge from the recent recession with a permanent job.19Other studies have found that students who worked 20 hours per week in their senior year of high school earned higher wages later in life than those who did not, and that summer youth employment programs improved participants' attitudes toward their communities, raised their academic aspirations, and boosted their job readiness skills.20The findings point to some of the reasons that the Boston Fed decided to lend technical support to a pilot program called Pocket Change, which aims to reduce unemployment among low-income 18- to 24-year-olds in Somerville, Massachusetts, through internships, training in job skills, and reinforcement of important soft skills such as punctuality and effective communication. In its first two years, the initiative trained 53 low-income young people and placed 20 of them in jobs. The results of this modest program indicate the promise of efforts that focus on first-time work experiences, and Somerville is now seeking to expand the initiative.21 My second observation is that career and technical education (CTE) programs, which have seen a revival in recent years, have considerable potential. For some time, vocational education had fallen out of favor or was in decline in the United States, as it was associated with the deleterious practice of "tracking" less advantaged students that denied them the opportunity for the best education. But more recently, CTE has been refined and has made a comeback as an effective way to help non-college-bound workers gain valuable skills and obtain a foothold in a labor market that increasingly requires technical proficiency. These programs teach the skills needed to pursue careers in fields such as construction, manufacturing, health care, information technology, hospitality, and financial services. This point brings me to my third observation, which is that effective CTE programs and other workforce development initiatives are able to match education and training to good-paying jobs when they actively engage employers in the training process. WorkAdvance, a regional sector-specific program, is a good example. It delivers an array of aligned services to meet local business needs and provide jobs for unemployed and low-income adults in multiple cities.22An evaluation of the program last year in Tulsa, New York City, and northeast Ohio found it was especially effective because it offered training for in-demand skills and industry-recognized certifications, and it focused on jobs that have clear paths for advancement.23 A fourth observation is that apprenticeships, which are more common in other countries, could play a larger role for low- and moderate-income individuals in our country as part of broader career and technical education efforts. For instance, a state-run program in South Carolina, Apprenticeship Carolina, helps employers develop apprenticeships at no cost to them. Businesses receive a $1,000 annual tax credit per apprenticeship, and the program assists them with information and technical needs, paperwork, and the integration of classroom learning at local technical colleges. The program has led to sizable job gains at a modest cost to the state.24Similarly, Washington State registered apprenticeship programs contributed to substantial long-term increases in employment rates and hourly wages.25 My fifth and final observation is that promoting entrepreneurship could play a greater role in workforce development. Entrepreneurship is a fundamental strength of the American economy, and owning your own business or working for yourself can offer income, a means of building wealth, and, sometimes, greater flexibility for balancing job and family commitments. Yet we see less self-employment in low- and moderate-income communities.26Moreover, when businesses are owned by minorities, they are less likely to have paid employees.27These findings speak to the opportunities that could be realized by helping people start their own businesses and then helping them grow their businesses. Programs that equip people with the management skills and knowledge they need to start and operate a successful small business can help. Relevant and effective training can reduce the failure rate of businesses by helping owners make better decisions and avoid costly mistakes.28These programs are especially critical in low-income and rural communities where other resources to support small business development may be scarce. As part of their community affairs work, several Federal Reserve Banks have small business development initiatives. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York organized a small business protection and education series last year in partnership with the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce and a local development corporation. Participants learned about capital resources available to small businesses, online credit alternatives for small businesses, and the risks of handling large volumes of cash. In another example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City developed a guide to help rural and smaller metropolitan communities promote conditions favorable to growing local businesses rather than relying only on efforts to attract large companies.29 Of course, in addition to training, small business owners need financing. But, as many of you know, factors such as lack of a credit history or a poor credit history and limited collateral--for example, home equity--make it difficult for the owners of small enterprises to access traditional business credit. This situation is true for many minority, women, and low-income borrowers.30Nontraditional lenders, including more than 1,000 Community Development Financial Institutions around the country, help fill the gap.31 ConclusionTo conclude, while the economy overall is recovering and the job market has improved substantially since the recession, pockets of persistently high unemployment, as well as other challenges, remain. Fortunately, programs such as the ones I have highlighted today can help address these challenges in more targeted ways than the Federal Reserve is equipped to do through monetary policy. I want you to know that we applaud your work, and we thank you for doing all that you do to serve the needs of lower-income communities across the country. Whether you work to provide affordable housing, homeownership counseling, small business credit and technical support, or workforce development, I hope you know that you have a partner in the Federal Reserve. In the ways we can, with the different tools we each have, our aim is the same: to make the economy work for the benefit of all Americans. This goal is of utmost importance, and I am glad to work alongside you in striving to achieve it. 1. CRA information is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/crape/BankRating.aspx.Return to text 2. See the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council's CRA webpage "Interagency Questions and Answers" available athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm.Return to text 3. See Elizabeth Sobel Blum and Steven Shepelwich (2017),Engaging Workforce Development: A Framework for Meeting CRA Obligations (PDF),Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Kansas City (Dallas: FRB Dallas, January).Return to text 4. Low- and moderate-income communities are census tracts with a family median income under 80 percent of the area median income. Higher-income communities are census tracts with median incomes of 80 percent of the area median income or greater. Statistics represent the average of census tract unemployment rates rather than the unemployment rate across all individuals in these tracts combined.Return to text 5. Prime-age workers are those who are aged 25 to 54. Statistics are from the American Community Survey (ACS) data releases from 2011 through 2015, available on the U.S. Census Bureau's website athttps://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs.Return to text 6. See Claudia Goldin (2001), "The Human-Capital Century and American Leadership: Virtues of the Past,"Journal of Economic History,vol. 61 (June), pp. 263-92.Return to text 7. Adults are defined here as individuals aged 25 and older. Statistics are from the ACS data releases from 2011 through 2015; see note 5.Return to text 8. Following a cohort of high school sophomores in 2002, 96 percent of students from a high socioeconomic-status family pursued at least some higher education and 60 percent completed a bachelor's degree. Among students from a low socioeconomic-status family, 72 percent pursued higher education and 14 percent completed a bachelor's degree. Socioeconomic status is based on family income and parents' education. See National Center for Education Statistics (2015), "Postsecondary Attainment: Differences by Socioeconomic Status (PDF)," inThe Condition of Education 2015(Washington: NCES).Return to text 9. Many people who did not enroll for or did not complete a degree also gave as a reason that they wanted to work, which may also reflect budget constraints that made pursuing or completing a higher education difficult. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016),Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Families in 2015 (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May).Return to text 10. See note 7.Return to text 11. Moreover, "over 95 percent of jobs created during the recovery have gone to workers with at least some college education, while those with a high school diploma or less are being left behind" (as quoted from the introduction on the webpage for Anthony P. Carnevale, Tamara Jayasundera, and Artem Gulish (2016),America's Divided Recovery: College Haves and Have-Nots(Washington: Georgetown University Center for Education and the Workforce),https://cew.georgetown.edu/cew-reports/americas-divided-recovery). Also see Bureau of Labor Statistics (2017), "The Employment Situation--February 2017," news release, March 10, Table A-4: Employment Status of the Civilian Population 25 Years and over by Educational Attainment; and BLS (2017), "Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey," March 10, Table A-10: Unemployment Rates by Age, Sex, and Marital Status, Seasonally Adjusted.Return to text 12. The median weekly earnings for men with a high school degree but no college was $779, and for women it was $603. These amounts compare with median weekly earnings of $1,501 for men and $1,117 for women with a bachelor's or higher degree.Return to text 13. See Sean F. Reardon (2016),School District Socioeconomic Status, Race, and Academic Achievement, paper, Stanford Center for Education Policy Analysis (Stanford: Stanford CEPA); Motoko Rich, Amanda Cox, and Matthew Bloch (2016), "Money, Race and Success: How Your School District Compares,"New York Times,April 29, http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/04/29/upshot/money-race-and-success-how-your-school-district-compares.html; and Geoffrey T. Wodtke, David J. Harding, and Felix Elwert (2011), "Neighborhood Effects in Temporal Perspective,"American Sociological Review,vol.76 (October), pp. 713-36.Return to text 14. For example, 65 percent of young adults (aged 25 to 34) with a parent who received a bachelor's degree completed one themselves, compared with 16 percent of young adults whose parents completed no education beyond high school. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016),Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S Households in 2015 (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May).Return to text 15. See Brad Hershbein and Melissa S. Kearney (2014),Major Decisions: What Graduates Earn over Their Lifetimes,Hamilton Project (Washington: Brookings Institution), figure 2; and Anthony P. Carnevale, Ban Cheah, and Andrew R Hanson (2015),The Economic Value of College Majors (PDF)(Washington: Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce).Return to text 16. For more information, see the Department of Education's webpage on its Child Care Access Means Parents in School Program athttps://www2.ed.gov/programs/campisp/index.html.Return to text 17. Top occupations noted across all MSAs included the following: registered nurses; first-line supervisors of office and administrative support workers; sales representatives, wholesale and manufacturing; business operations specialists, sales representative services; general and operations managers; computer system analysts; automotive service technicians and mechanics; first-line supervisors of construction trades and extraction work; plumbers, pipefitters, and steamfitters; first-line supervisors of mechanics, installers; and construction laborers. See Keith Wardrip, Kyle Fee, Lisa Nelson, and Stuart Andreason,Identifying Opportunity Occupations in the Nation's Largest Metropolitan Economies,Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Ohio (Cleveland: FSB of Cleveland), available athttps://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/special-reports/sr-20150909-identifying-opportunity-occupations.aspx.Return to text 18. For a broad summary of recent research and policy issues related to workforce development, see the 2015 publicationTransforming U.S. Workforce Development Policies for the 21st Century(available athttps://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/community/transformworkforce) developed by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Kansas City in partnership with the John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University. In addition, all Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors are currently engaged in a System workforce development initiative that will gather up-to-date perspectives from employers and organizations engaged in worker training and education. This initiative will include a series of regional Reserve Bank meetings, a publication on effective investments and outcomes, and a capstone conference in October in Austin, Texas.Return to text 19. The survey found that 82 percent of workers who had worked for pay during high school had a permanent job--4 percentage points higher than for all workers combined. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014),In the Shadow of the Great Recession: Experiences and Perspectives of Young Workers (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November).Return to text 20. Baum and Ruhm (2016) do observe, however, that these gains from employment during the senior year of high school have diminished substantially relative to earlier cohorts. See Charles L. Baum and Christopher J. Ruhm (2016), "The Changing Benefits of Early Work Experience,"Southern Economic Journal,vol. 83 (October), pp. 343-63.Return to text 21. For more information on Pocket Change, see the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's Working Cities Challenge webpage athttps://www.bostonfed.org/workingcities/massachusetts/round1/cities/somerville.html.Return to text 22. Aligned services may include intensive screening, occupational skills training, job development and placement services, and retention and advancement services.Return to text 23. For more on the WorkAdvance program, see the MDRC website atwww.mdrc.org/project/workadvance#overview, and for information on that program in Northeast Ohio, see the Towards Employment website athttp://towardsemployment.org/strategic-initiatives/workadvance.Return to text 24. See Harry J. Holzer and Robert I. Lerman (2014),Work-Based Learning to Expand Jobs and Occupational Qualifications for Youth (PDF)(Washington: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, April).Return to text 25. Kevin Hollenbeck and Wei-Jang Huang (2014), "Net Impact and Benefit-Cost Estimates of the Workforce Development System in Washington State," Upjohn Institute Technical Report 13-029 (Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research).Return to text 26. From 2011 through 2015, only 8 percent of households in low- and moderate-income communities reported self-employment income, compared with 11 percent of all households (see ACS data releases in note 5).Return to text 27. Only 4 percent of African American-owned firms and 9 percent of Hispanic-owned firms have paid employees, compared with 22 percent of non-minority-owned firms; see U.S. Department of Commerce, Minority Business Development Agency (2016), "U.S. Minority-Owned Firms (PDF)," fact sheet (Washington: MBDA, January).Return to text 28. See Glenn Muske and Nancy Stanforth (2000), "The Educational Needs of Small Business Owners: A Look into the Future,"Journal of Extension,vol. 38 (December).Return to text 29.Grow Your Own Guide: Entrepreneurship-Based Economic Developmentis available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's website athttps://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/community/gyo/gyo-guide.pdf.Return to text 30. See Joyce A. Klein (2017),Bridging the Divide: How Business Ownership Can Help Close the Racial Wealth Gap(Washington: Aspen Institute, January).Return to text 31. To find certified Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) in different geographies, see a list on the CDFI Fund's website available athttps://www.cdfifund.gov/programs-training/certification/cdfi/Pages/default.aspx.Return to text
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Reserve Board on Friday jointly announced that they had completed their evaluation of the 2015 resolution plans of 16 domestic banks and separately issued guidance to four foreign banks. Resolution plans, required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. For foreign banking organizations, resolution plans are focused on their U.S. operations. The domestic banks evaluated were: American Express Company, Ally Financial Inc., BB&T Corporation, Capital One Financial Corporation, Comerica Incorporated, Discover Financial Services, Fifth Third Bancorp, Huntington Bancshares Incorporated, KeyCorp, M&T Bank Corporation, Northern Trust Corporation, Regions Financial Corporation, SunTrust Banks, Inc., The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., U.S. Bancorp, and Zions Bancorporation. The agencies did not find that any of the resolution plans submitted in December 2015 by these firms were not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, the statutory standard established in the Dodd-Frank Act. The agencies did identify shortcomings in Northern Trust Corporation's resolution plan, which must be satisfactorily addressed in the firm's 2017 plan due by December 31. For the 15 firms without shortcomings, the agencies are tailoring their expectations for the firms' 2017 resolution plans to reflect the size and complexity of the firms. As a result, the agencies will limit the amount of information the firms are required to submit by December 31, 2017. The agencies issued guidance to four foreign firms--Barclays PLC, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank AG, and UBS AG--to help them improve their resolution plans and to reflect the significant restructuring that they have undertaken to form intermediate holding companies. The guidance is organized around a number of key vulnerabilities, such as capital, liquidity, and governance mechanisms. Consistent with the time provided to the largest domestic filers in April 2016, the agencies are also providing a one-year extension to these foreign firms; their next resolution plans are now due on July 1, 2018. Each of these four foreign firms is expected to satisfactorily address the vulnerabilities identified in the guidance in its 2018 plan as well as any other vulnerabilities or obstacles that may arise from a firm's particular structure, operations, or resolution strategy. The agencies will review each of the plans under the statutory standard. If the agencies jointly decide that the vulnerabilities identified in the guidance are not satisfactorily addressed, the agencies may determine jointly that the plan is not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. The Federal Reserve Board is releasing the extension letters for the foreign firms as well as the individual feedback letters for the domestic firms, which contain firm-specific guidance on areas in need of improvement. The decisions announced today received unanimous support from the FDIC and Federal Reserve boards. Extension letters for foreign banking organizations Barclays Bank PLC (PDF)Credit Suisse Group, A.G. (PDF)Deutsche Bank AG (PDF)UBS Group AG (PDF) Feedback letters for domestic firms Ally Financial Inc. (PDF)American Express Company (PDF)BB&T Corporation (PDF)Capital One Financial Corporation (PDF)Comerica Incorporated (PDF)Discover Financial Services (PDF)Fifth Third Bancorp (PDF)Huntington Bancshares Incorporated (PDF)KeyCorp (PDF)M&T Bank Corporation (PDF)Northern Trust Corporation (PDF)The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc. (PDF)Regions Financial Corporation (PDF)SunTrust Banks, Inc. (PDF)U.S. Bancorp (PDF)Zions Bancorporation (PDF)
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the West Virginia University College of Business and Economics Distinguished Speaker Series, Morgantown, West Virginia I am delighted to have this opportunity to speak at West Virginia University. Thanks to Brian Cushing for inviting me here today.1 Gathered in this part of West Virginia, we are located in the Fifth Federal Reserve District, which stretches down from here to South Carolina and east to the Atlantic Ocean (figure 1). More than 100 years ago, the organizers of the Federal Reserve System divided the country into 12 of these Districts, each with its own Federal Reserve Bank. Together, the Board of Governors in Washington and the 12 Reserve Banks are the key elements of the Federal Reserve System. Today I will discuss how the Federal Reserve came to have this unique structure. The Fed's organization reflects a long-standing desire in American history to ensure that power over our nation's monetary policy and financial system is not concentrated in a few hands, whether in Washington or in high finance or in any single group or constituency. Rather, Americans have long desired that decisions about these matters be influenced by a diverse set of voices from all parts of the country and the economy. The structure of the Federal Reserve was designed to achieve this broad representation and promote a stronger financial system to build resiliency against the sort of periodic financial crises that had repeatedly damaged the country in the 19th and early 20th centuries. This structure was forged from compromise; the result of that compromise was a vitally needed central bank whose decisions take into account a broad range of perspectives. Before the Federal ReserveThe question of how to structure our nation's financial system arose in the early years of the republic. In 1791, Congress created an institution known as the Bank of the United States, often considered a forerunner of the Federal Reserve. The Bank was created in part to assist the federal government in its financial transactions, a typical responsibility of central banks at that time. It was also designed to help America's financial system meet the needs of a growing economy--the same purpose behind the founding of the Federal Reserve more than 100 years later. The most famous proponent of the Bank was Alexander Hamilton, who has recently achieved the central banker's dream of being the subject of a hit Broadway musical (figure 2). Congress gave the Bank of the United States unique powers--its notes were accepted for making payments to the federal government and it was the only bank able to branch across state lines (figure 3). The Bank could affect the ebb and flow of credit around the country.2People in different regions of the country came to have distinct views about the Bank. Borrowers in the western areas--in those times, the West meant places like Ohio--desired cheap and abundant loans but were also wary of lenders. These borrowers grew opposed to the power of the Bank in the credit market. Northern business interests favored the Bank's contribution to the country's industrial development, but at times disagreed with actions taken by the Bank to constrain credit. Southern agriculturalists viewed the Bank with suspicion but supported its occasional actions to constrain credit to non-agricultural businesses.3The Bank's private ownership, intended to give it independence from government control, was a source of unpopularity. Ultimately, these disagreements undermined the Bank's political support. After 20 years, Congress chose not to renew the Bank's charter. A second Bank of the United States met a similar fate in 1836 when President Andrew Jackson vetoed a bill to extend its life (figure 4). These two short-lived experiments illustrate a theme in American history--of Americans from different regions holding distinct views about the structure and development of the financial system. People in the newer western parts of the country saw themselves as starved of access to credit and viewed higher interest rates in their areas as reflecting the scarcity of funds. Regional interest rate differentials persisted until around the time of World War I and helped shape the attitudes of Americans living in western areas toward the nation's financial system.4 These regional differences gave rise to a major political movement in the latter part of the 19th century, as western farm borrowers increasingly demanded a reform of the U.S. monetary system. Their chief complaints included the high interest rates they faced as well as the burdens placed on them by deflation that increased the real value of their debts. Indeed, the economy experienced 1 to 2 percent deflation annually in the years leading up to the 1890s. The country's currency was linked to gold, and deflation reflected the growing scarcity of gold relative to the amount of economic activity. The "free silver" movement grew in response to these economic forces. Its most famous advocate, William Jennings Bryan, the Democratic presidential nominee in 1896, sought an increase in the money supply--by the coining of silver in addition to gold--as a solution to reversing this deflation (figure 5).5 The Founding of the FedBy the beginning of the 20th century, the debate about monetary policy and the nation's financial system had been going on for over a century. Increasingly, the shortcomings of the existing system were causing too much harm to ignore. Like a drumbeat, the country experienced one serious financial crisis after another, with major crises in 1839, 1857, 1873, 1893, and finally in 1907.6These panics paralyzed the financial system and led to deep and extended contractions in the economy. These episodes exposed the weakness of our 19th century financial system, which repeatedly failed to supply the money and credit needed to meet the economy's demands. The financial system came under severe stress when the demand for liquidity surged.7A financial system strained in such a manner is like dry kindling in danger of being exposed to a spark. That spark could come from losses at a well-known bank, from a disappointing harvest, or from mere rumors. In response, depositors or other investors would seek the return of their funds, which would force financial institutions to sell assets quickly to generate the necessary cash (figure 6). That liquidation could lead banks to cut credit and force borrowers to repay debt sooner than expected. Simply put, the monetary system did not meet the country's needs. It was a system in crisis, boiling over repeatedly, harming the country. Central banks are designed in part to help the financial system meet occasional liquidity strains. When demands for liquidity rise, central banks can respond by increasing the supply of money and thus adding liquidity to the system. Central banks have a particularly important role in avoiding or mitigating extreme demands for liquidity during financial crises. They do this by making loans to solvent financial institutions so they can meet their liquidity demands and avoid forced sales of their assets. These ideas about central banks' lending role were developed over the course of the 19th century but not yet implemented in the United States, which at the time remained without a central bank.8By the beginning of the 20th century, the United States was behind the game. The final catalyst leading to the creation of the Federal Reserve was the severe Panic of 1907, which caused inflation-adjusted gross national product to decline by 12 percent, more than two times the decline recorded during the Great Recession of 2007 to 2009.9After the panic ended, there was a broad sense that reform was needed, although consensus on the exact nature of that reform was elusive. Some called for an institution similar in structure to the Bank of England at the time, with centralized power, owned and operated by the banking system. Some wanted control to be lodged with the federal government in Washington instead. Others proposed that power be distributed to regional bodies with no central or coordinating board. Still others resisted any sort of central bank.10This debate reflected the many and diverse interests in the United States--farmers, laborers, businessmen, small-town bankers, big-city bankers, technocrats, populists, and more--that experienced different conditions across a large geographic expanse. The resulting institution was a compromise, created by the Federal Reserve Act in 1913. The Federal Reserve wasnotstructured to be entirely private in its ownership and operation. It was alsonotstructured to have a single headquarters in Washington or New York with branches across the country, a structure that was proposed but failed to attract enough political support. Instead, a morefederatedsystem was created, establishing the Federal Reserve Board in Washington and the 12 Reserve Banks located around the country. The Board was the part of the System intended to be most directly accountable to the public (figure 7). The Board is an independent agency within the federal government, and members of the Board--now called Governors--are appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate.11Governors serve 14 year terms that expire at 2-year intervals and are not linked to election cycles. The Federal Reserve Board is charged with general oversight of the Reserve Banks. The Reserve Banks combine both public and private elements in their makeup and organization (figure 8). Like the Board of Governors, the Reserve Banks operate with the public interest in mind. Commercial banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System are required to purchase stock in their District's Reserve Bank.12These shares are nontransferable and yield only limited powers and benefits. Dividends are set by federal law. The commercial bank shareholders elect two-thirds of the directors that oversee the Reserve Banks; the Board in Washington appoints the remaining one-third. Only three bankers can serve on a Reserve Bank's board of directors, and only one of those can be from a large commercial bank in the District. The remaining six directors represent the interests of the public. The Federal Reserve System benefits enormously from the insights and support of the boards of directors of the Reserve Banks and their Branches. Directors include prominent private-sector leaders who represent a wide and growing diversity of backgrounds and views about the economy.13 The federated structure of the Federal Reserve System earned the endorsement of even the populist hero of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, William Jennings Bryan. The compromise created an institution that could address the shortcomings of the American financial system while assuring that control of the Federal Reserve would be shared widely.14The structure was different from those of the first and second Banks of the United States, and from those of foreign central banks at the time. Congressman Carter Glass, who worked to win passage of the Federal Reserve Act in Congress, called the Federal Reserve's uniquely American design "an adventure in constructive finance" (figure 9).15 The Modern Federal ReserveIn the System's early years, the decentralized structure gave the Reserve Banks considerable scope to make independent decisions that applied to their own Districts, which made it difficult to effect policy. For example, one Bank's purchases of securities could be offset by another Bank's sale, given that the market for securities was national in scope. As a result, the Reserve Banks created a committee to coordinate these "open market operations." But in these years, the Reserve Banks were not bound by that committee's decisions and could derail any attempt at coordinated action. This decentralization was thought by some to have undermined the Federal Reserve's response to the Great Depression.16With that experience in mind, the 1935 Banking Act modified the distribution of power within the Federal Reserve System, giving the Board of Governors 7 of the 12 seats on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) (figure 10).17The other 5 seats are held by the Reserve Banks. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York has a permanent seat, and the other Reserve Banks share the remaining 4 seats on a rotating basis.18While FOMC members are free to dissent from the majority decision about open market operations, the Reserve Banks are nevertheless required to adhere to that decision in conducting open market operations. The structure set out in 1935 has been essentially unchanged to this day and has served the country well. As intended by the framers, the federal nature of the system has ensured a diversity of views and promotes a healthy debate over policy. My strong view is that this institutionalized diversity of thinking is a strength of our System. In my experience, the best outcomes are reached when opposing viewpoints are clearly and strongly presented before decisions are made. Members of the Board of Governors and Presidents of the Reserve Banks arrive at their own independent viewpoints about the economy and the appropriate path for monetary policy. Congress has assigned the FOMC the task of achieving stable prices and maximum employment; however, policymakers may disagree on the best way to achieve those goals.19The System's structure encourages exploration of a diverse range of views and promotes a healthy policy debate.20In the modern Federal Reserve System, each Reserve Bank has an independent research department, with its own external publications. In addition, while the members of the Board tend to focus on developments in the nation as a whole, the Reserve Bank Presidents bring specialized information about their regional economies to the FOMC discussion. Before each FOMC meeting, Reserve Bank Presidents consult with their staff of economists as well as their boards of directors, business contacts in their Districts, and market experts to develop their independent views of appropriate monetary policy. The FOMC works to achieve a consensus policy by blending inputs from the members of the Board of Governors and from the Reserve Bank Presidents under the leadership of its Chair. By tradition, the Chair of the Board has been chosen as the Chair of the FOMC and has had a central role in setting the agenda for the FOMC and developing consensus among the Committee's members. In addition, the Chair is the most visible public face of the Federal Reserve System. The Fed is accountable to Congress and the public for its activities and decisions. Historically, the activities of central banks were shrouded in mystery. Montagu Norman, the famously secretive Governor of the Bank of England from 1920 to 1944, reportedly took as his personal motto, "Never explain, never excuse" (figure 11).21 In the modern era, all that has changed, as central banks have come to see transparency both as a requirement of democratic accountability and as a way of supporting the efficacy of their policies. Over recent decades the Fed has significantly augmented its public communications, as have other major central banks. The Chair testifies before Congress twice each year about the U.S. economy and the FOMC's monetary policy in pursuit of its statutory goals of stable prices and maximum employment (figure 12).22The Federal Reserve Board prepares aMonetary Policy Reportto accompany that testimony.23The Chair also holds press conferences after four FOMC meetings each year. The FOMC releases statements after its meetings that explain the economic outlook and the rationale for its policy decision. Detailed minutes of the Committee's meetings are published three weeks later.24Since 2007, FOMC participants have submitted quarterly macroeconomic projections that are published in the Summary of Economic Projections.25In 2012, the FOMC issued a Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which is reaffirmed every January. This statement discusses the Committee's interpretation of its statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability; it indicates that the Committee judges inflation of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, to be most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate.26Transcripts of FOMC meetings are released to the public after a delay of about five years. Federal Reserve Board Governors and Reserve Bank Presidents contribute to the Federal Reserve's transparency with frequent public speeches and other communications. I believe that support for the Federal Reserve as a public institution is sustained by the public expression of our diverse views.27 These communications with Congress and the public are critical parts of the Federal Reserve's institutional accountability and transparency, and are essential complements to its independence. It is important that Federal Reserve officials regularly demonstrate that the Fed has been appropriately pursuing its mandated goals. Transparency can also make monetary policy more effective by helping to guide the public's expectations and clarify the Committee's policy intentions. Recent Changes in Federal Reserve System GovernanceIn recent years, the governance of the Federal Reserve System has continued to evolve. The 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act provided that directors representing financial institutions--the class A directors, of which there are three on each Reserve Bank board--may not participate in the appointment of Reserve Bank presidents and first vice presidents. The Federal Reserve Board has long had policies preventing Reserve Bank directors from participating in supervisory matters or in determining the appointment of any Reserve Bank officer whose primary duties involve supervisory matters. These directors continue to provide highly valuable information about developments in their markets, and take part fully in other roles with the other six directors. Another aspect of governance involves the better representation of women and minorities in the Federal Reserve System. Indeed, while I have focused my remarks on the history of geographical diversity in the Federal Reserve System, we also strive to have diversity in gender and race both at the Board and at the Reserve Banks. In recent years, the Reserve Banks' boards of directors have made significant progress along these lines. Women now account for 34 percent of the directors, up from 24 percent five years ago. In addition, minorities now account for 29 percent of directors, up from 19 percent five years ago. ConclusionThe long history of political discourse in the United States helps explain the Federal Reserve's unique structure, in which the Board of Governors in Washington and the 12 regional Reserve Banks share power over monetary policy (as shown in figure 1). Throughout our history, Americans have questioned the structure and even, at times, the need for a central bank. Current discussions of Fed reforms echo these past debates. But it is important to understand that history in both advanced and emerging economies across the world has consistently demonstrated the need for a central bank, and both the existence and the structure of the Federal Reserve are products of that historical experience. Our structure is fundamentally a compromise, shaped by American history stretching back to the first Bank of the United States and, later, by the lessons of the Great Depression. It is designed to deliver the United States a vitally needed central bank in a country that has had a long-standing aversion to centralized power over monetary and financial affairs. It preserves diverse regional voices while ensuring that policy can be implemented through a cooperative consensus. The balance between national and regional interests is critical to the spirit of the original compromise that created the Federal Reserve, and to its democratic legitimacy. The structure achieves a practical balance that should not be changed lightly, as it continues to serve the country well. 1. My remarks today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The Bank of the United States became a net creditor to state banks by holding the notes issued by those banks. When it presented those notes for redemption, it could affect the funding position of state banks and effectively constrain credit in this manner.Return to text 3. See John H. Wood (2005),A History of Central Banking in Great Britain and the United States(New York: Cambridge University Press).Return to text 4. See Lance E. Davis (1965), "The Investment Market, 1870-1914: The Evolution of a National Market,"Journal of Economic History,vol. 25 (September), pp. 355-93. Economic historians have debated the extent to which interest rate differentials reflected market segmentation and supply versus demand in each market. Other factors include higher risk premiums, reflecting higher expected default rates in some areas of the country, and varying levels of monopoly power.Return to text 5. For a sense of the regionalism of this debate, believe it or not,The Wonderful Wizard of Ozhas been interpreted as an allegory for 19th century regional monetary problems, though there is little evidence about the intentions of its author, L. Frank Baum, in conveying this allegory. Dorothy was from Kansas, a farm state, but after a cyclone, she found herself in a world dominated by gold, with a yellow brick road and the Land of Oz--the abbreviation for an ounce. The story has four witches--from the West, East, North, and South. Remember that the Wicked Witch of the West ultimately met her demise when she melted on contact with water, a symbol for the end of a drought that contributed to the economic hardships of western farmers. But the most powerful change was brought about by Dorothy's shoes, which were originally owned by the Wicked Witch of the East. Importantly, these shoes were silver in the original book, not red as in the movie, symbolizing the power of bimetallism as a solution to western problems. See Hugh Rockoff (1990), "The 'Wizard of Oz' as a Monetary Allegory,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 98 (August), pp. 739-60.Return to text 6. See Andrew J. Jalil (2015), "A New History of Banking Panics in the United States, 1825-1929: Construction and Implications,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 7 (July), pp. 295-330.Return to text 7. Contemporaries blamed these crises on the seasonality in demand for currency and credit related to planting and harvesting of crops in the spring and fall. Modern scholars place more weight on other sources of financial tightness. Some point to poor harvests that depressed net exports, particularly failed cotton harvests. Net exports were an important source of increases in the money supply in this period. In the context of the gold standard, poor money supply growth in the United States triggered certain expectations by international capital market participants that interest rates in the United States would rise relative to the rest of the world. As a result, interest rates on American commercial paper (a key rate affected by international financial conditions) rose following poor harvests, stock and bond prices fell, and deposits flowed out of the New York banking system. Industrial production decreased as well, with a lag. This set of effects created tight financial conditions of the sort that could lead to financial crises. (See Christopher Hanes and Paul W. Rhode (2013), "Harvests and Financial Crises in Gold Standard America,"Journal of Economic History,vol. 73 (March), pp. 201-46.) Other scholars focus on business cycle downturns as creating conditions favorable to financial crises, as depositors viewed the downturns as affecting the solvency prospects of their banks, leading to withdrawals and panics. (See Gary Gorton (1988), "Banking Panics and Business Cycles,"Oxford Economic Papers,vol. 40 (December), pp. 751-81.)Return to text 8. See Walter Bagehot ([1873] 1897),Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market(New York: Charles Scribner's Sons).Return to text 9. See Nathan S. Balke and Robert J. Gordon (1989), "Appendix B: Historical Data," in Robert J. Gordon, ed.,The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 781-850. See also Jon R. Moen and Ellis W. Tallman (2015), "The Panic of 1907,"Federal Reserve History.Return to text 10. See Roger Lowenstein (2015),America's Bank: The Epic Struggle to Create the Federal Reserve(New York: Penguin Press); and Allan H. Meltzer (2003),A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913-1951(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).Return to text 11. As originally enacted, Section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act required that the President, in nominating Board members, "have due regard to a fair representation of the different commercial, industrial and geographical divisions of the country" (see Federal Reserve Act, ch. 6,  10, 38 Stat. 260 (1913), p. 12,www.federalreservehistory.org/Media/Material/Event/10-58). In 1922, this representational requirement was expanded to its current form, which provides, in Section 10(1), that the President "have due regard to a fair representation of the financial, agricultural, industrial, and commercial interests, and geographical divisions of the country" (see Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C.  241 as amended by an act of June 3, 1922 (42 Stat. 620), paragraph on appointment and qualification of members,https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section%2010.htm). In addition, Section 10(1) provides that no two members of the Board may be from the same Reserve Bank District.Return to text 12. All national banks chartered by the Comptroller of the Currency are required to be members of the Federal Reserve System, and state-chartered banks may choose to become members.Return to text 13. Directors are chosen, according to Sections 4(11) and 4(12) of the Federal Reserve Act, "with due but not exclusive consideration to the interests of agriculture, commerce, industry, services, labor and consumers" (see Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C.  302 as amended by an act of Nov. 16, 1977 (91 Stat. 1388), paragraphs on class B and class C directors,https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section4.htm).Return to text 14. Authors Jeremy Atack and Peter Passell write, "Throughout much of American history there has been a deep and abiding mistrust of bankers and a widespread fear of a 'money monopoly'--a fear that those needing to borrow would be taken advantage of by those able to lend. Such questions had figured prominently in the debates over the fates of the First Bank and Second Bank of the United States, and they played a role in the popular support of free banking legislation. They had also led to the almost universal adoption of usury ceilings on interest rates (typically 6 percent) that were more honored in name than reality. These concerns were the subject of congressional inquiries, the most famous of which were the Pujo hearings into the Money Trust in the wake of the 1907 panic." See Jeremy Atack and Peter Passell (1994),A New Economic View of American History: From Colonial Times to 1940,2nd ed. (New York: Norton), p. 510. See also Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz (1963),A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press), p. 48.Return to text 15. See Carter Glass (1927),An Adventure in Constructive Finance(Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Page).Return to text 16. For a discussion of these issues, see David C. Wheelock (2000), "National Monetary Policy by Regional Design: The Evolving Role of the Federal Reserve Banks in Federal Reserve System Policy," in Jrgen von Hagen and Christopher J. Waller, eds.,Regional Aspects of Monetary Policy in Europe(Boston: Kluwer Academic), pp. 24174.Return to text 17. The FOMC was created by the Banking Act of 1933 but was restructured in 1935 to include members of the Board of Governors.Return to text 18. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York was made a permanent member of the FOMC in 1942. From 1935 to 1942, it alternated annually with the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston as a member.Return to text 19. For a discussion of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate, see the FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which the Committee first issued in January 2012 and reaffirms annually, in note 26. In addition, for a discussion of how the FOMC prepares for its meetings, see Elizabeth A. Duke (2010), "Come with Me to the FOMC," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, October 19.Return to text 20. For a discussion of these issues, see Marvin Goodfriend (1999), "The Role of a Regional Bank in a System of Central Banks,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 51 (December), pp. 51-71.Return to text 21. Ben Bernanke, former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, referenced the motto in a 2007 speech. See Ben S. Bernanke (2007), "Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.Return to text 22. The statutory mandate was added in the Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977.Return to text 23. TheMonetary Policy Reportis available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/mpr_default.htm.Return to text 24. FOMC statements and the minutes of FOMC meetings are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 25. Since 2012, the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) has included each individual FOMC participant's assessment of appropriate monetary policy in the form of an interest rate "dot plot." The SEP is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 26. The most recent statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals.pdf.Return to text 27. See Jon Faust (1996), "Whom Can We Trust to Run the Fed? Theoretical Support for the Founders' Views,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 37 (April), pp. 267-83; Jon Faust (2016), "Oh, What a Tangled Web We Weave: Monetary Policy Transparency in Divisive Times," Hutchins Center Working Paper 25 (Washington: Brookings Institution, November); and Jerome H. Powell (2016), "A View from the Fed," speech delivered at "Understanding Fedspeak," an event cosponsored by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution and the Center for Financial Economics at Johns Hopkins University, Washington, November 30.Return to text Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the appointment of Ann Misback as its Secretary, effective April 2, 2017. The Office of the Secretary supports the Board by providing essential corporate secretary services, including the planning and execution of Board meetings. It also provides related support services, such as records management, to Board members, Board and System staffs, and the public. Ms. Misback began her career at the Board in 1992 as a senior attorney in the Legal Division's international section and was appointed to the official staff in 2000. From 2013 to the present, she has served as associate director of the Board's Division of Supervision and Regulation. Prior to joining the Board, she was an attorney in the Washington, D.C., offices of Arnold & Porter. Ms. Misback succeeds Robert deV. Frierson, who has served as Secretary since July 2012 and held the position of Deputy Secretary from 2001 to 2012. Mr. Frierson is retiring after a 30-year career with the Board that began in 1987 as an attorney in the Board's Legal Division. Ms. Misback received an A.B. from Princeton University and a J.D. from Georgetown University Law Center. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Continuing their efforts to reduce regulatory burdens while ensuring the safety and soundness of the nation's financial institutions, member agencies of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) today issued a joint report to Congress detailing their review of rules affecting financial institutions. The review was conducted as part of the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and in conjunction with the National Credit Union Administration. EGRPRA requires the federal banking agencies, along with the FFIEC, to conduct a review of their rules at least every 10 years to identify outdated or unnecessary regulations. While NCUA is not required to participate in the EGRPRA review, the agency's Board chose to participate to enhance its own regulatory review process. In particular, the agencies' review focused on the effect of regulations on smaller institutions, such as community banks and savings associations. The federal banking agencies published four requests for written comment in theFederal Registerand hosted six public outreach meetings across the country. NCUA, which regulates credit unions, routinely conducts town-hall meetings, listening sessions, and other outreach activities to hear and discuss stakeholders' views. Altogether, the agencies received more than 250 comment letters from financial institutions, trade associations, and consumer and community groups, as well as numerous comments obtained at the outreach meetings. The report describes several joint actions planned or taken by the federal financial institutions regulators, including: The report also describes the individual actions taken by each agency to update its own rules, eliminate unnecessary requirements, and streamline supervisory procedures. The federal financial institutions regulators will continue their efforts to tailor regulations to the size and risks posed by financial institutions while ensuring the safety and soundness of the nation's financial institutions and banking system. Joint Report to Congress: Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (PDF)
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the March 14-15 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the March 14-15 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Cathay General Bancorp to acquire SinoPac Bancorp and thereby indirectly acquire Far East National Bank, all of Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by People's United Financial, Inc., Bridgeport, Connecticut, to merge with Suffolk Bancorp and thereby indirectly acquire The Suffolk County National Bank of Riverhead, both of Riverhead, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to these actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Community Shores Bank Corporation, Muskegon, MichiganWritten Agreement dated December 16, 2010Terminated March 13, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that it will not object to a resubmitted capital plan from Morgan Stanley, as a result of progress made by the firm in addressing deficiencies identified by the Board in last year's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). Last June, following its review of the firm's capital plan, the Board required Morgan Stanley to resubmit its capital plan to address certain qualitative deficiencies in its capital planning processes. Those deficiencies included weaknesses in the way the firm identifies and incorporates its material risks into its capital planning scenarios, key modeling practices, and the firm's governance and controls related to both of those areas. The Board will continue to review and assess Morgan Stanley's progress in addressing those deficiencies in its evaluation of this year's CCAR submission. The quantitative results of Morgan Stanley's resubmission are not comparable to the CCAR results released in June 2016. The severely adverse scenario for Morgan Stanley's resubmission was updated according to the Board's policy and was more stringent than the severely adverse scenario used in June 2016. The Board's scenarios are hypothetical and not forecasts. CCAR evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest U.S.-based bank holding companies, including the firms' planned capital actions such as dividend payments and share buybacks and issuances. Strong capital levels act as a cushion to absorb losses and help ensure that banking organizations have the ability to lend to households and businesses even in times of stress. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved action on Thursday by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Bank from 1-1/4 percent to 1-1/2 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Wednesday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and St. Louis, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 1-1/4 percent to 1-1/2 percent, effective March 16, 2017.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Bank of Star City, Star City, ArkansasOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated March 27, 2017 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Heritage Bank, Topeka, KansasWritten Agreement issued April 22, 2009Terminated March 22, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Platte Valley Bank, Scottsbluff, NebraskaOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated March 6, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Santander Holdings USA, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts and Santander Consumer USA, Inc., Dallas, TexasWritten Agreement dated March 21, 2017 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: HCSB Financial Corporation, Loris, South CarolinaWritten Agreement issued May 9, 2011Terminated March 21, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Friday it will seek to fine and prohibit Fang Fang and Timothy Fletcher, two former managing directors at J.P. Morgan Securities (Asia Pacific) Limited, from working in the banking industry for their participation in a referral hiring program that violated anti-bribery law. Fang and Fletcher are alleged to have offered internships and other employment opportunities to individuals referred by foreign officials, clients, and prospective clients in order to obtain improper business advantages in violation of firm policies and U.S. anti-bribery law. In addition to permanently prohibiting them from the banking industry, the Board seeks to impose a $1 million fine against Fang and a $500,000 fine against Fletcher. The enforcement proceedings against Fang and Fletcher follow the Board's November 2016 enforcement actions against JPMorgan Chase & Co. for unsafe and unsound practices related to the firm's referral hiring program. The Board required JPMorgan Chase & Co. to pay $61.9 million in penalties for control deficiencies related to the firm's referral hiring practices and anti-bribery policies. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board's website (www.federalreserve.gov) has a new design and additional features to improve the experience of visitors seeking information about the Federal Reserve and its actions. Visitors will now find the site easier to view on mobile devices, and restructured navigation menus make information easier to find. TheNews & Eventssection now includes a comprehensive events and publicationscalendarand filters to search press releases, speeches, and testimony. TheAbout the Fedsection has been restructured to include updated information from the Board'sPurposes & Functionspublication. The Board's website is its primary channel of communication and is complemented by Board accounts onFacebook,Twitter,LinkedIn, andYouTube. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in February indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace. Job gains remained solid and the unemployment rate was little changed in recent months. Household spending has continued to rise moderately while business fixed investment appears to have firmed somewhat. Inflation has increased in recent quarters, moving close to the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective; excluding energy and food prices, inflation was little changed and continued to run somewhat below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further, and inflation will stabilize around 2 percent over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. The Committee continues to closely monitor inflation indicators and global economic and financial developments. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 3/4 to 1 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Charles L. Evans; Stanley Fischer; Patrick Harker; Robert S. Kaplan; Jerome H. Powell; and Daniel K. Tarullo. Voting against the action was Neel Kashkari, who preferred at this meeting to maintain the existing target range for the federal funds rate. Implementation Note issued March 15, 2017
The Federal Reserve on Friday released examples of new charts (sometimes called "fan charts") and related materials that illustrate and describe the uncertainty that attends Federal Open Market Committee participants' macroeconomic and interest rate projections. As indicated in the minutes of the Committee's January-February 2017 meeting, the fan charts will be included in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) beginning with the minutes of the March 14-15, 2017, meeting, scheduled for release at 2 p.m. EDT April 5. The examples and related materials, based on previously published SEP data from September and December 2016, are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve System on Friday released the 2016 combined annual audited financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as statements for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. An independent auditing firm engaged by the Board has issued unqualified opinions on the financial statements and on the Board's and the Bank's internal controls over financial reporting. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2016 earnings were approximately $92 billion. The Reserve Banks provided for remittances to the U.S. Treasury of $91.5 billion in 2016. Interest income on securities acquired through open market operations totaled $111.1 billion, a decrease of $2.5 billion from the previous year and attributable to changes in the composition of securities held in the Federal Reserve System Open Market Account (SOMA). Interest expense on depository institutions' reserve balances and term deposits during the year was $12 billion, an increase of $5.1 billion. Interest expense on securities sold under agreements to repurchase was $1.1 billion, an increase of $874 million from the previous year. Reserve Bank operating expenses were $6.7 billion, including assessments of $2 billion for Board expenses, currency costs, and the operations of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. The audited financial statements provide a significant amount of information about the assets, liabilities, and earnings of the Reserve Banks and the Board as of December 31, 2016, including information about the composition, fair value, and earnings related to the $4.4 trillion of U.S. Treasury securities, government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) debt securities, and federal agency and GSE mortgage-backed securities (MBS) acquired through open market operations. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York provides additional detailed information about open market operations and securities holdings on an ongoing basis on its website atwww.newyorkfed.org/markets/pomo_landing.html. Total Reserve Bank assets as of December 31, 2016, were $4.5 trillion, which was similar to the balance on December 31, 2015. The Board engages an independent auditing firm to conduct annual audits of these financial statements in accordance with auditing standards issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, and, for the Board of Governors audit only, the Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards. The auditors also conduct audits of internal controls over financial reporting for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. The Federal Reserve is unique among large central banks in requesting an audit of its internal controls over financial reporting. KPMG LLP conducted the 2016 Federal Reserve System audits. The Federal Reserve System financial statements are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/audited-annual-financial-statements.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve System's 10th biennial Community Development Research Conference convenes on March 23 in Washington, D.C. The conference theme,Strong Foundations: The Economic Futures of Kids and Communities, will explore the relationship between the development of children and community conditions and the effect of early childhood investments on the economy. Federal Reserve Chair Janet L. Yellen will deliver opening remarks at the two-day conference. Neel Kashkari, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, and Charles Evans, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, will address plenary sessions. The conference will close with a keynote address and conversation with Geoffrey Canada, author, youth and education advocate, and founder of Harlem Children's Zone, Inc. Research from the conference will focus on three key areas: early childhood development; education and workforce; and community conditions. Research will be presented in the form of a dialogue between the researchers, policymakers, community practitioners, and business leaders. "The conference will feature research that underscores the benefits of investing in our youth and providing them with the critical community supports needed to set them up to thrive in the workforce as adults," said Eric Belsky, director of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. "Early childhood and teenage experiences--including their health, education, and home and neighborhood supports--are key building blocks for future economic and financial success." The conference will be co-hosted by the Community Development Offices of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks and the Federal Reserve Board. An agenda and other details about the conference are available on the conference website:www.minneapolisfed.org/community/tenth-biennial-federal-reserve-system-community-development-research-conference. Keynote speeches and plenary sessions will be broadcast live at:www.youtube.com/user/FedReserveBoard. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Chair Janet L. Yellen At The Executives' Club of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois I am pleased to join you today to discuss the U.S. economy and the Federal Reserve's monetary policy. I strongly believe that my colleagues and I should explain, as clearly as we can, both the reasons for our decisions and the fundamental principles that underlie our strategy. Today I will review the conduct of monetary policy during the nearly 10 years since the onset of the financial crisis. Although the Federal Reserve's policy strategy for systematically pursuing its congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability has not changed during this period, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has made significant tactical adjustments along the way. I will spend most of my time today discussing the rationale for the adjustments the Committee has made since 2014, a year that I see as a turning point, when the FOMC began to transition from providing increasing amounts of accommodation to gradually scaling it back. The process of scaling back accommodation has so far proceeded at a slower pace than most FOMC participants anticipated in 2014. Both unexpected economic developments and deeper reevaluations of structural trends affecting the U.S. and global economies prompted us to reassess our views on the outlook and associated risks and, consequently, the appropriate stance of monetary policy, both in the near term and the longer run. Looking ahead, we continue to expect the evolution of the economy to warrant further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate. However, given how close we are to meeting our statutory goals, and in the absence of new developments that might materially worsen the economic outlook, the process of scaling back accommodation likely will not be as slow as it was in 2015 and 2016. I should note that I will discuss the process of scaling back accommodation mostly from the perspective of our interest rate decisions, which my FOMC colleagues and I see as our primary tool for actively adjusting the stance of monetary policy when our actions are not constrained by the zero lower bound on short-term interest rates.1 Assessing the Degree of Monetary Policy AccommodationIn our monetary policy deliberations, the FOMC always faces two fundamental questions: First, how do we assess thecurrentstance of monetary policy? Second, what are the strategic and tactical considerations that underpin our decisions about theappropriatestance of monetary policy going forward? These questions are difficult because the interactions between monetary policy and the economy are complex. Policy affects the economy through many different channels, and, in turn, many factors influence the appropriate course of policy. Gauging the current stance of monetary policy requires arriving at a judgment of what would constitute a neutral policy stance at a given time. A useful concept in this regard is the neutral "real" federal funds rate, defined as the level of the federal funds rate that, when adjusted for inflation, is neither expansionary nor contractionary when the economy is operating near its potential. In effect, a "neutral" policy stance is one where monetary policy neither has its foot on the brake nor is pressing down on the accelerator. Although the concept of the neutral real federal funds rate is exceptionally useful in assessing policy, it is difficult in practical terms to know with precision where that rate stands. As a result, and as I described in a recent speech, my colleagues and I consider a wide range of information when assessing that rate.2As I will discuss, our assessments of the neutral rate have significantly shifted down over the past few years. In the Committee's most recent projections last December, most FOMC participants assessed thelonger-runvalue of the neutral real federal funds rate to be in the vicinity of 1 percent.3This level is quite low by historical standards, reflecting, in part, slow productivity growth and an aging population not only in the United States, but also in many advanced economies. Moreover, thecurrentvalue of the neutral real federal funds rate appears to be even lower than this longer-run value because of several additional headwinds to the U.S. economy in the aftermath of the financial crisis, such as subdued economic growth abroad and perhaps a lingering sense of caution on the part of households and businesses in the wake of the trauma of the Great Recession. It is difficult to say just how low the current neutral rate is because assessments of the effect of post-recession headwinds on the current level of the neutral real rate are subject to a great deal of uncertainty. Some recent estimates of the current value of the neutral real federal funds rate stand close to zero percent.4With the actual value of the real federal funds rate currently near minus 1 percent, a near-zero estimate of the neutral real rate means that the stance of monetary policy remains moderately accommodative, an assessment that is consistent with the fact that employment has been growing at a pace--around 180,000 net new jobs per month--that is notably above the level estimated to be consistent with the longer-run trend in labor force growth--between 75,000 and 125,000 per month.5As I will explain, this policy stance seems appropriate given that the underlying trend in inflation appears to be still running somewhat below 2 percent. But as that gap closes, with labor market conditions now in the vicinity of our maximum employment objective, the Committee considers it appropriate to move toward a neutral policy stance. My colleagues and I generally anticipate that the neutral real federal funds rate will rise to its longer-run level over the next few years. This expectation partly underlies our view that gradual increases in the federal funds rate will likely be appropriate in the months and years ahead: Those increases would keep the economy from significantly overheating, thereby sustaining the expansion and maintaining price stability. Post-Crisis Period: Same Strategy, New TacticsI will now examine the strategic and tactical considerations that go into FOMC deliberations by discussing past monetary policy decisions in the context of our mandate from the Congress to pursue maximum employment and price stability. The FOMC's monetary policy strategy is based on three basic principles. First, our monetary policy must be goal driven. We must take care to ensure that our decisions over time are consistent with our commitment to achieve the Federal Reserve's congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability, and that the public understands and has confidence in that commitment. Second, our monetary policy must be forward looking because our decisions tend to influence economic activity and inflation with a substantial lag. Among other things, this implies looking through short-term and transitory developments and focusing on the medium-term outlook--roughly two or three years out--when making policy decisions. Third, our monetary policy must be risk sensitive. Because the outlook is uncertain, we must assess appropriate policy with an eye toward the risk that our expectations about the economy turn out to be significantly wrong. We have followed this basic strategy for decades and, in 2012, the FOMC formalized it in our "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy."6The Committee has reaffirmed this commitment annually. But the challenges brought about by the financial crisis, and the very deep recession and painfully slow recovery that followed, compelled us to adjust our tactics for carrying out our policy strategy. In particular, once the Committee had cut the federal funds rate to near zero in late 2008, it became necessary to deploy new tools to supply the considerable monetary accommodation required by the extremely weak state of the job market and persistently low inflation.7Those tools--especially our large-scale securities purchases and increasingly explicit forward guidance pertaining to the likely future path of the federal funds rate--enabled the Federal Reserve to provide necessary additional support to the U.S. economy by pushing down longer-term interest rates and easing financial conditions more generally. Much has been written and said already about the provision of additional accommodation between 2008 and 2014, when the FOMC completed its latest round of large-scale securities purchases, so I will turn now to our policy stance since 2014, when the FOMC's main focus started to shift from providing additional accommodation to scaling it back.8 2014: A Turning Point for Monetary PolicyBy late 2013, the FOMC concluded that the economy had made sufficient progress, and the outlook was sufficiently favorable, that it should reduce the pace of its large-scale securities purchases. But we reiterated that these purchases would continue until the outlook for the labor market had improved substantially. The U.S. economy made notable progress toward the FOMC's statutory goals during 2014, with the unemployment rate dropping to close to 6 percent by mid-year--well below its Great-Recession peak of 10 percent--and other measures of labor market conditions also showing improvement: Payroll gains were solid; job openings had risen significantly; and the number of workers voluntarily quitting their jobs--a sign of confidence in the labor market--was rising back toward pre-crisis levels. We were also seeing progress on achieving our price stability goal: Total inflation as measured by changes in the headline personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index reached about 1-3/4 percent by mid-2014 after hovering around 1 percent in the fall of 2013. Inflation seemed to be moving toward the FOMC's 2 percent objective, a level that the FOMC judges to be consistent with price stability because it is low enough that it does not need to figure prominently into people's and businesses' economic decisions but high enough to serve as a buffer against deflation and provide greater scope for monetary policy to address economic weakness. The progress seen during 2014 indicated to the FOMC that it was no longer necessary to provide increasing amounts of support to the U.S. economy by continuing to add to the Federal Reserve's holdings of longer-term securities. Accordingly, the Committee continued to reduce the pace of asset purchases over the course of the year, ending its purchases in October. That step, however, did not mark an immediate shift toward tighter monetary policy because we also indicated then that we did not expect to raise interest rates for a considerable time after the end of our securities purchases. Moreover, as the Committee explained in a set of "normalization principles" issued that September, the intention was to maintain the overall size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet at an elevated level until sometime after the FOMC had begun to raise its target for the federal funds rate.9We decided that maintaining a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy remained appropriate because, while the U.S. economy was stronger and closer to meeting our statutory goals, we saw significant room for improvement. In particular, the unemployment rate still stood above our assessment of its longer-run normal level--that is, the unemployment rate that we expect to prevail when the economy is operating at maximum employment--and inflation remained below the 2 percent objective. Because my colleagues and I expected that labor market conditions would continue to improve and that inflation would move back to 2 percent over the medium term, we anticipated that the time was approaching when the economy would be strong enough that we should start to scale back our support. Indeed, the FOMC's June 2014 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) reported that nearly all FOMC participants saw a higher federal funds rate as appropriate in the next calendar year. In contrast, only two participants in December 2013 thought that it would be appropriate to start raising that rate in the next calendar year. Uneven Progress in 2015 and into 2016In 2015, the unemployment rate fell significantly faster than we generally had anticipated in 2014. However, a series of unanticipated global developments beginning in the second half of 2014--including a prolonged decline in oil prices, a sizable appreciation of the dollar, and financial market turbulence emanating from abroad--ended up having adverse implications for theoutlookfor inflation and economic activity in the United States, prompting the FOMC to remove monetary policy accommodation at a slower pace than we had anticipated in mid-2014. U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) growth generally surprised to the downside in 2015, reflecting, in part, weak economic activity abroad, the earlier appreciation of the dollar, and the effect of falling oil prices on business fixed investment. This unanticipated slowing in the pace of the economic recovery caused us to worry about the sustainability of ongoing improvements in employment and, thus, of likely progress toward our maximum employment goal. Our worry was reinforced by our assessment that, with the federal funds rate still near zero, there would likely be only limited scope for us to respond by lowering short-term rates if the weakening in economic activity turned out to be persistent. In contrast, if the weakening proved transitory and the economy instead began to overheat, threatening to push inflation to an undesirably high level, the FOMC would have ample scope to respond through tighter monetary policy. Inflation also was lower than expected, with headline PCE prices rising less than 1 percent over the course of 2015, instead of around 1-3/4 percent as we had anticipated in June 2014. Much of this shortfall reflected the effects of falling oil prices and the appreciation of the dollar. My colleagues and I typically look through the effects on inflation of fluctuations in oil prices and the dollar because these effects tend to be transitory. However, we became concerned in 2015 about the risk that part of the decline in inflation could prove to be longer lasting, especially given that inflation had already been running below our 2 percent objective for quite some time.10These various considerations, along with our reassessment of longer-run economic conditions--which I will discuss shortly--explain why the Committee ended up raising the target range for the federal funds rate only 1/4 percentage point in 2015, substantially less than the full percentage point increase suggested by the median projection of FOMC participants reported in June 2014. 2016 also brought some unexpected economic developments that led us to proceed cautiously. During the first half of the year, mixed readings on the job market, along with additional disappointing data on real GDP growth, suggested again that progress toward the achievement of our maximum employment goal could be slowing markedly. Meanwhile, inflation hovered just below 1 percent as dollar appreciation continued to exert downward pressure on import prices, and financial market turbulence emanating from abroad--associated with concerns about the Chinese economy and the Brexit referendum--posed new risks to U.S. economic activity and inflation. Moreover, even as payroll gains turned solid again in the second half of 2016, the unemployment rate remained relatively flat, suggesting that perhaps there was more room for improvement in the job market than we had previously thought. Those unanticipated developments were part of the reason why the Committee again opted to proceed more slowly in removing accommodation than had been anticipated at the start of the year. We ended up increasing the target range for the federal funds rate by only 1/4 percentage point over the course of 2016, rather than the full percentage point suggested by our December 2015 projections. Reassessing Longer-Run ConditionsThe slower-than-anticipated increase in our federal funds rate target in 2015 and 2016 reflected more than just the inflation, job market, and foreign developments I mentioned. During that period, the FOMC and most private forecasters generally lowered their assessments of the longer-run neutral level of the real federal funds rate. Indeed, at our October 2015 meeting, the FOMC had a comprehensive discussion of neutral real interest rates and was impressed by the breadth of evidence suggesting that those rates had declined both here and abroad, and that the decline had been going on for some time. In response to this growing evidence, the median assessment by FOMC participants of the longer-run level of the real federal funds rate fell from 1-3/4 percent in June 2014 to 1-1/2 percent in December 2015 and then to 1 percent in December 2016. These reassessments reflected, in part, the persistence of surprisingly sluggish productivity growth--both in the United States and abroad--and suggested that fewer federal funds rate increases would be necessary than previously thought to scale back accommodation. Partly in response to persistently slow wage growth, FOMC participants and private forecasters have in recent years lowered their estimates of the normal longer-run rate of unemployment. The median projection of FOMC participants of the longer-run level of the unemployment rate fell from about 5-1/4 percent in June 2014 to approximately 4-3/4 percent in December 2016. Other things being equal, a lower longer-run level of the unemployment rate suggests that the economy has greater scope to create jobs without generating too much inflation.11Thus, the downward revisions to FOMC participants' views on the unemployment rate over the longer run contributed to our assessment that monetary policy could stay accommodative longer than we had anticipated in 2014. Further Progress since Mid-2016The U.S. economy has exhibited remarkable resilience in the face of adverse shocks in recent years, and economic developments since mid-2016 have reinforced the Committee's confidence that the economy is on track to achieve our statutory goals. Job gains have remained quite solid, and the unemployment rate, at 4.8 percent in January, is now in line with the median of FOMC participants' estimates of its longer-run normal level. On the whole, the prospects for further moderate economic growth look encouraging, particularly as risks emanating from abroad appear to have receded somewhat. The Committee currently assesses that the risks to the outlook are roughly balanced. Moreover, after remaining disappointingly low through mid-2016, inflation moved up during the second half of 2016, mainly because of the diminishing effects of the earlier declines in energy prices and import prices. More recently, higher energy prices appear to have temporarily boosted inflation, with the total PCE price index rising nearly 2 percent in the 12 months ending in January. Core PCE inflation--which excludes volatile energy and food prices and, therefore, tends to be a better indicator of future inflation--has been running near 1-3/4 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up, on net, in recent months, although they remain low. With the job market strengthening and inflation rising toward our target, the median assessment of FOMC participants as of last December was that a cumulative 3/4 percentage point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate would likely be appropriate over the course of this year. In light of current economic conditions, such an increase would be consistent with the Committee's expectation that it will raise the target range for the federal funds rate at a gradual pace and would bring the real federal funds rate close to some estimates of its current neutral level. However, partly because my colleagues and I expect the neutral real federal funds rate to rise somewhat over the longer run, we projected additional gradual rate hikes in 2018 and 2019. Our individual projections for the appropriate path for the federal funds rate reflect economic forecasts that generally envision that economic activity will expand at a moderate pace in coming years, labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further, and inflation will be at or near 2 percent over the medium term. In short, we currently judge that it will be appropriate to gradually increase the federal funds rate if the economic data continue to come in about as we expect. Indeed, at our meeting later this month, the Committee will evaluate whether employment and inflation are continuing to evolve in line with our expectations, in which case a further adjustment of the federal funds rate would likely be appropriate. Nonetheless, as we have said many times--and as my discussion today demonstrates--monetary policy cannot be and is not on a preset course. As in 2015 and 2016, the Committee stands ready to adjust its assessment of the appropriate path for monetary policy if unanticipated developments materially change the economic outlook. Monetary Policy Is Not a PanaceaThe U.S. economy has shown great improvement and is close to meeting our congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability, but we of course recognize that important challenges remain. For instance, as we noted in our latestMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress, the ongoing expansion has been the slowest since World War II, with real GDP growth averaging only about 2 percent per year.12This subdued pace reflects, in part, slower growth in the labor force in recent years--compared with much of the post-World War II period--and disappointing productivity growth both in the United States and abroad. Our report also noted that, despite a notable pickup in 2015, real incomes for the median family were still a bit lower than they were prior to the Great Recession, and the gains during this economic recovery have been skewed toward the top of the income distribution, as has been the case for quite some time. Families at the 10th percentile of the income distribution earned about 4 percent less in 2015 than they did in 2007, whereas families at the 90th percentile earned about 4 percent more. In addition, the economic circumstances of blacks and Hispanics, while improved since the depths of the recession, remain worse, on average, that those of whites or Asians. These unwelcome developments unfortunately reflect structural challenges that lie substantially beyond the reach of monetary policy. Monetary policy cannot, for instance, generate technological breakthroughs or affect demographic factors that would boost real GDP growth over the longer run or address the root causes of income inequality. And monetary policy cannot improve the productivity of American workers. Fiscal and regulatory policies--which are of course the responsibility of the Administration and the Congress--are best suited to address such adverse structural trends. ConclusionTo conclude, we at the Federal Reserve must remain squarely focused on our congressionally mandated goals. The economy has essentially met the employment portion of our mandate and inflation is moving closer to our 2 percent objective. This outcome suggests that our goal-focused, outlook-dependent approach to scaling back accommodation over the past couple of years has served the U.S. economy well. This same approach will continue to drive our policy decisions in the months and years ahead. With that in mind, our policy aims to support continued growth of the American economy in pursuit of our congressionally mandated objectives. We do that, as I have noted, with an eye always on the risks. To that end, we realize that waiting too long to scale back some of our support could potentially require us to raise rates rapidly sometime down the road, which in turn could risk disrupting financial markets and pushing the economy into recession. Having said that, I currently see no evidence that the Federal Reserve has fallen behind the curve, and I therefore continue to have confidence in our judgment that a gradual removal of accommodation is likely to be appropriate. However, as I have noted, unless unanticipated developments adversely affect the economic outlook, the process of scaling back accommodation likely will not be as slow as it was during the past couple of years. ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017).Monetary Policy Report (PDF).Washington: Board of Governors, February. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David Lopez-Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects,"Economic Journal, vol. 122 (November), pp. F415-46. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2016). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-073. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Yellen, Janet (2016). "The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26. -------- (2017). "The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19. 1. When the federal funds rate was near zero and we felt the economy still needed more support, the FOMC acted, beginning in 2008, to purchase longer-term securities. Although we stopped increasing the size of our securities portfolio in 2014, we have been reinvesting principal payments from our securities holdings ever since. We have said that we expect to maintain this policy until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. We have also said that, when it becomes appropriate to reduce the size of our balance sheet, we will do so primarily by letting maturing assets run off our balance sheet.Return to text 2. See Yellen (2017).Return to text 3. This estimate of the neutral real federal funds rate is based on the difference between the medians of the longer-run projections for the federal funds rate and inflation submitted by individual FOMC participants for the December 2016 FOMC meeting. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections, an addendum to the minutes of that meeting, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20161214ep.htm.Return to text 4. See, for instance, Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2016).Return to text 5. The estimate of the actual value of the real federal funds rate (around minus 1 percent) is based on the difference between the current value of the effective federal funds rate (close to 0.66 percent) and the latest reading on inflation as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding energy and food items (1-3/4 percent).Return to text 6. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf (PDF).Return to text 7. See Yellen (2016).Return to text 8. For a discussion of our monetary policy during the 2008-14 period, see, for instance, Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015).Return to text 9. The FOMC's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm. Several studies support the notion that maintaining the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet at an elevated level is consistent with keeping a highly accommodative policy stance, particularly when short-term interest rates are close to zero, as it was the case in 2014--see, for instance, D'Amico and others (2012) and many of the references in Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015). Large Federal Reserve holdings of longer-term securities reduce the total amount of such securities available for purchase by the public, exerting upward pressure on their prices and, thus, depressing their yields and contributing to lower borrowing costs for American families and businesses.Return to text 10. These concerns were reinforced somewhat by a decline in market-based measures of inflation compensation.Return to text 11. The assessment that there was perhaps more room for improvement in the labor market than previously thought was reinforced by data showing that the labor force participation rate remained relatively stable in 2016, rather than declining as many had expected.Return to text 12. See Board of Governors (2017).Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At Blockchain: The Future of Finance and Capital Markets? The Yale Law School Center for the Study of Corporate Law, New Haven, Connecticut New technology and innovative businesses increasingly affect our daily financial lives. Mobile devices, high-speed data communication, and online commerce are creating expectations that convenient, secure, real-time payment and banking capabilities should be available whenever and wherever they are needed. At the same time, disruptive new technologies suggest that traditional financial service providers must innovate and adapt or be left behind. Against this backdrop of technological change and heightened expectations, it is worth remembering our broad public policy objectives, which are driven by the fundamental importance of the payments system in our society. Today, I will lay out those objectives as we see them at the Federal Reserve, and focus in particular on their application in three specific areas where technological innovation is driving change: creating a real-time retail payments system, using distributed ledger technology to develop new clearing and settlement services, and the issuance of digital currencies by central banks. Public Policy Objectives for the Payments SystemWe trust financial intermediaries to hold and transfer funds in a safe and secure manner to meet the needs of commerce. The payments system provides financial institutions and their customers a variety of ways to transfer funds, but the goal is essentially the same in all cases: to move money from one individual or business to another in a reliable, secure, low-cost, and convenient manner. The Federal Reserve and other central banks have adopted broad public policy objectives to guide the development and oversight of the payments system. At the Fed, we have identified efficiency and safety as our most fundamental objectives, as set forth in our Policy on Payment System Risk.1 An efficient payments system provides the infrastructure needed to transfer money in low-cost and convenient ways. Efficient systems are innovative in improving the quality of services in response to changing technology and changing demand. Efficient systems are also broadly accessible through means that are convenient for consumers, businesses, and financial institutions around the country. Safe payment systems are built from proven technology and operate reliably and with integrity. Safe systems address a range of well-known risks, including legal, operational, security, and financial risks. Information security and privacy have become particularly important in recent years. Overall, the payments system must be innovative, while also addressing risks, supporting financial stability, and maintaining public confidence. Faster and More Secure Retail Payment SystemsThe development of real-time retail payments has been gaining momentum globally. The UK has had a system in place since 2008. Australia is actively developing a new nationwide system. The European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and several other central banks have also been acting as catalysts to promote real-time payments initiatives. The broad emergence of real-time systems throughout the world reflects the growing demand for such systems, and the need for the payments system to keep up with evolving technology.2 In the United States, our traditional bank-centric payments system, sometimes operating on decades-old infrastructure, has adjusted slowly to the evolving demands for greater speed and safety. Innovators have built new systems and services that ride on top of the old rails but with mixed results, and over time, our system has grown more fragmented. Our payments system is large and diverse, with a wide array of financial institutions, systems, and service providers; it will take coordinated action to make fundamental and successful nationwide improvements. The Federal Reserve has often helped address problems of this nature by convening stakeholders in the payments system and encouraging them to identify key issues and to work together to make fundamental improvements. With this in mind, the Federal Reserve has in recent years been working with a wide range of stakeholders to improve the speed, efficiency, and safety of the U.S. payments system. Significant dialogue and public responses to a consultation paper in 2013 indicated that stakeholders would welcome a broad initiative to work for change. In response, in 2015, the Federal Reserve launched several initiatives including a Faster Payments Task Force and a Secure Payments Task Force. I spoke about the payments security initiative on another occasion.3The Secure Payments Task Force has been advancing important work, including outlining ways for the industry to improve payment identity management practices, crafting guidance on standardizing fraud and risk data, and developing a framework for protecting sensitive payment data. You can expect to see the results of these efforts later this year. Today, however, I will focus on the Faster Payments Task Force. In forming the task force, we committed to an inclusive and transparent approach that would ensure representation of diverse stakeholder interests. The group is comprised of over 300 representatives from financial institutions, technology companies, consumer advocates, and others.4The role of the task force is to identify and assess alternative approaches for implementing safe, ubiquitous, faster payment capabilities in the United States. To support that mission, the task force developed a framework, called the "Faster Payments Effectiveness Criteria," to provide guidance to the wider payments community on the desired attributes of a future payments system. The framework identified 36 "effectiveness criteria" that a faster payments system should meet, covering six broad areas: ubiquity, efficiency, safety and security, speed, legal framework, and governance. Task force members and others have widely embraced the effectiveness criteria. Our hope is that the criteria will serve as a lasting blueprint for payments service providers in designing innovative future products. The task force also established a process through which its members could submit proposals for faster payments capabilities and have them assessed against the effectiveness criteria by a qualified independent assessment team. The task force encouraged members to submit proposals reflecting both products under development and conceptual designs. There was overwhelming enthusiasm around the process, and the task force ultimately completed reviews of 19 faster payments proposals. Collectively, the proposals represent a broad range of creative and innovative ways to deliver real-time payments. Some are based on current designs and established technology. Others leverage the latest innovative ideas and technologies. In 2017, the task force has been working on a final report. Part 1 of the report--the background and motivation for pursuing faster payments--was published in January.5Part 2 will include the proposals themselves and their assessments, along with task force recommendations for moving the U.S. payments system forward in implementing faster payments. Part 2 will be released around the middle of this year. Until then, the proposals remain confidential to the task force. The role of the task force is not to select one or more proposals for implementation, but rather to assess the proposals against the task force criteria. It will be the job of the financial industry to take these proposals forward as they see fit. I strongly encourage the industry and other stakeholders to continue the work of bringing ubiquitous real-time payments systems and services to the U.S. market. It will be important that we keep end users in mind as the new real-time environment evolves, emphasizing inclusion, safety and trust, and consumer education and protections. End users will ultimately determine the success of new payment services and the future direction of faster payments in this country. Distributed Ledger TechnologiesLet's turn to another type of new technology that may have important implications for the payments and financial systems: distributed ledger technology, or DLT. Bitcoin helped bring this technology to public attention. Using blockchain technology--which employs a form of DLT--and an open architecture, Bitcoin allows for the transfer of value (bitcoins) between participants connected to its ecosystem without reliance on banks or other trusted intermediaries. This feature has led some to predict that DLT will in the long run render parts of the banking and payments system obsolete, as the intermediation of funds through the banking system will become unnecessary. Faced with these dramatic predictions, we have seen banks and market infrastructures collaborate with technology firms to explore the use and further development of DLT. In 2016, there was widespread experimentation. Efforts by financial institutions often focused on evaluating the technology, identifying potential uses, and conducting proofs of concept. Prominent examples included the use of distributed ledgers to store transactional data and records in tamper-proof ways, as well as the use of the technology as a primary means to hold and transfer money or assets. By the end of 2016, a few major U.S. clearing organizations had announced plans to use distributed ledger technology in limited ways. As we have followed developments over the past year, a few lessons have come into better focus.6First, in contrast to Bitcoin's open architecture, work by the financial industry has focused on the development of "permissioned" systems, which establish criteria to determine who is permitted access to particular systems, ledgers, functions, or information. In the near term, this approach seems more likely than fully open systems to provide the needed governance and management to address operational, security, and financial risks. Indeed, access is typically permissioned in situations that require the protection of systems and information in the financial and other industries. Even in permissioned systems, some key issues will remain, including whether finality of settlement is to be determined by a central trusted party or by a majority of participants, and whether participants are able to view information on other parties' transactions. Some argue that movement away from open systems undermines the potential efficiency and the spirit of DLT. At least for now, in payment, clearing, and settlement, safety and confidence must also weigh in the balance. Second, firms are still grappling with the business case for upgrading and streamlining payment, clearing, settlement, and related functions with DLT. Promoters of DLT offer a vision of streamlined processes that lead to faster processing, reduced reconciliation, and lower long-run operating costs. Some argue that in certain markets, faster and more predictable processing will also reduce the capital and liquidity costs of operations. But upgrades are often costly, lengthy, and risky, particularly if the technology is still being proven, as is the case for DLT. Network effects can also affect adoption, since multiple firms may all need to adopt a particular implementation of DLT in order to justify its use in a specific market. Third, technical issues remain. Practical issues such as whether a particular version of DLT will work for the intended purpose are still being explored. Issues of reliability, scalability, and security remain very important. Beyond these issues, standardization and interoperability across different versions of DLT will need to be addressed to allow technology integration and avoid market fragmentation. In general, industry members and technology providers recognize these important issues and have taken initial steps to address problems. It will be important to keep these challenges firmly in mind as we move beyond experimentation and into the development and deployment of new products and processes. Fourth, governance and risk management will be critical. For individual firms or clearing houses that adopt DLT as an internal technology upgrade, the governance and risk-management processes are likely to be internalized within existing organizations and be akin to other technology upgrades. However, if new networks of bilateral payment, clearing, and settlement are established, the new technology may involve tightly coupled protocols and operations. The safety of the overall design will depend on a highly interdependent framework. If automated risk management, smart contracts, and similar tools are deployed across a network, cascades of rapid and hard-to-control obligations and liquidity flows could propagate across a network and the financial system in response to events. This interdependence will likely call for creative organizational thinking to address the need for governance and strong risk management. Finally, the legal foundations supporting DLT will need attention. Deployments of DLT will involve firms, perhaps in different jurisdictions, with systems that record and transfer information and assets under existing legal frameworks. Which bodies of law apply to the particular firms, assets, and activities will determine the associated rights and responsibilities when transfers are made, cleared, and settled. For example, whether and how banking, payments, securities, or commodities laws apply in a given context are likely to be important in designing systems and services and understanding their properties. And, as with any new technology, things may go wrong. We will need a thorough analysis of how DLT fits into current legal frameworks and what gaps need to be filled by contractual agreements or new laws and regulations. A robust legal basis that provides certainty across relevant jurisdictions is essential for building strong governance, risk management, and operations. Digital Currencies Issued by Central Banks to the General PublicMy last topic is the potential use of DLT or other technologies by central banks to issue a digital currency to the general public. In a sense, the idea of a digital currency is merely a 21st century analog of paper currency. While this is a fascinating idea, there are significant policy issues that need to be analyzed.7 First, there are meaningful technical challenges. We should have serious reservations about our ability to keep a generally circulating digital currency safe and secure over the long run. A digital currency issued by a central bank would be a global target for cyber attacks, cyber counterfeiting, and cyber theft. The threats could significantly exceed historical experience with paper currency. A digital currency would also be a prime target as a potential vehicle for global criminal activities, including money laundering. Central banks could face difficult trade-offs between strengthening security and enabling illegal activity. Advanced cryptography could reduce vulnerability to cyber attacks but make it easier to hide illegal activity. To the extent we relax strong cryptography to make it easier for authorities to monitor illegal activity, we could simultaneously weaken security. Growing computer power over time could be used to increase security but could also increase threats. Second, privacy issues must be seriously considered. Central banks would have to maintain records of digital currency issuance and might need to maintain records of individual transactions in order to authenticate those transactions and to combat cyber risks and illegal activity. In today's environment, commercial banks maintain extensive records for individual debit and credit card transactions and increasingly monitor patterns of behavior for fraud. Such records in the hands of a central bank or government entity, however, could raise serious privacy concerns by users and might limit public appeal. Again, there may be important trade-offs between privacy and risk. Any central bank actively considering issuing its own digital currency would need to carefully consider the full range of the payments system and other policy issues, which do seem substantial, as well as the potential societal benefits. To my mind, they should also consider whether the private sector can substantially meet the same needs. Private-sector products and systems already exist or are being developed that will fulfill demands that central-bank-issued digital currencies might otherwise seek to meet. Prepaid cards grew out of the wave of retail payments innovation in the mid-1990s and are now in widespread use. And as I mentioned earlier, new private-sector-led faster payments initiatives are coming. In the United States, a faster payments system that operates around the clock and provides the capability to hold and transfer deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in real time would go a long way toward providing the low-risk and flexible payment arrangements that paper currency historically provided. Indeed, I would expect private-sector systems to be more forward leaning than central banks in providing new features to the public through faster payments systems as they compete to attract retail customers. A central bank issued digital currency would compete with these and other innovative private-sector products and may stifle innovation over the long run. ConclusionWe live in a time of extraordinary technological change. We should be open to the new ideas and innovations that will drive economic growth and improvements in our financial system. At the same time, the public rightfully expects that authorities will do whatever it takes to keep their money safe. Those of us in the public sector will insist on safety and security, while also working to assure that our citizens benefit from payments system innovation. 1. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "The Federal Reserve Policy on Payment System Risk (PDF)" (Washington: Board of Governors, 2016). See also Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,The Federal Reserve System Purposes & Functions, 10th edition (Washington: Board of Governors, 2016), and Federal Reserve System, "Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System (PDF)" (Washington: Board of Governors and Federal Reserve System, 2015).Return to text 2. For a broad discussion of international developments and issues in faster payments, see Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, "Fast Payments--Enhancing the Speed and Availability of Retail Payments (PDF)" (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, November 2016).Return to text 3. See Jerome H. Powell, "Building a Safer Payment System" (speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Conference, "The Puzzle of Payments Security: Fitting the Pieces Together to Protect the Retail Payments System," Kansas City, Missouri, June 25, 2015).Return to text 4. Information about the Faster Payments Task Force and the companion Secure Payments Task Force is available athttps://fedpaymentsimprovement.org/.Return to text 5. See "The U.S. Path to Faster Payments, Final Report Part One: The Faster Payments Task Force Approach (PDF)," Faster Payments Task Force (2017).Return to text 6. See David Mills, Kathy Wang, Brendan Malone, Anjana Ravi, Jeff Marquardt, Clinton Chen, Anton Badev, Timothy Brezinski, Linda Fahy, Kimberley Liao, Vanessa Kargenian, Max Ellithorpe, Wendy Ng, and Maria Baird, "Distributed Ledger Technology in Payments, Clearing, and Settlement (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-095 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 2016).Return to text 7. Several of these and additional issues relating to the issuance of digital currencies by central banks are touched on briefly in Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure, "Digital Currencies (PDF)" (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, November 2015).Return to text
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York In recent years, reforms in the monetary policy decisionmaking process in central banks have been in the direction of an increasing number of monetary policy committees and fewer single decisionmakersthe lone governor model.1We are only a few months away from the 20th anniversary of the introduction of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee, just a few years after the 300th birthday of the venerable Old Lady of Threadneedle Street. The Bank of Israel moved from a single policymaker to a monetary policy committee in 2010, while I was governor there; more recently, central banks in India and New Zealand have handed over monetary policy to committees. The Federal Reserve is not part of this recent shift, however. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has been responsible for monetary policy decisions in the United States since it was established by the Banking Act of 1935, two decades after the founding of the Fed itself.2 The movement toward committees reflects the advantages of committees in aggregating a wide range of information, perspectives, and models. Despite the prevalence and importance of committees in modern central banking, the role of committees in the formulation of policy has not attracted nearly as much academic attention as has the research on monetary policy rules.3 The literature on monetary policy rules stretches back to at least Adam Smith and includes important contributions from David Ricardo, Knut Wicksell, and Milton Friedman.More recently, John Taylor has moved the research agenda forward with his eponymous rule, and a large number of academic papers have been written examining the effectiveness and robustness of policy rules.4In contrast, as noted, study of the role of committees in making monetary policy has been fairly light, notwithstanding the insightful work of Alan Blinder and others.5 Committees and rules may appear to be in opposition as approaches to policymaking. One might even argue that if a central bank ever converged on a single monetary rule, there would be no need for a monetary policy committee. In practice, the Fed operates through a committee structure and considers the recommendations of a variety of monetary rules as we make monetary policy decisions. Our decision is typically whether to raise or reduce the federal funds rate or to leave it unchanged. Committees can aggregate large amounts of diverse information--not just data, but also anecdotes and impressions that would be hard to quantify numerically. Good committees also offer a variety of perspectives and underlying economic models for interpreting the economy. In contrast, a policy rule, strictly defined, is numerical and constrained to a single perspective on the economy. Committees and rules each have their advantages. Committees embody a wider range of information and have a capacity for innovation. Rules can simplify central bank communications, a particularly important feature in forward-looking models of the economy. In contrast, the diversity of views that makes a committee work can sometimes pose a communications challenge, as the frequent complaints about the cacophony of messages coming out of the FOMC illustrate.6 In the remainder of my discussion, I would like to elaborate on some of the features of committees that have contributed to their prevalence in monetary policymaking. I will then discuss monetary policy rules and some of the difficulties in developing robust rules for policy. Why Do Almost All Central Banks Make Their Monetary Policy Decisions in a Committee?Let us turn to central bank decisionmaking. One of the striking facts about the Fed is that it is the third central bank of the United States. Whereas the long-lived central banks of Europethe Riksbank and the Bank of Englandhave survived for more than three centuries, the Fed has only recently become a centenarian. Roger Lowenstein's bookAmerica's Bankconvinces the reader that it was no easy matter to establish this third central bank. It also establishes for those coming to the issue for the first time that the major issues related to the Fed's structure were political. That is, underlying the disagreements about the establishment of the Federal Reserve was the concern that the central bank not upset the balance of economic power within the U.S. economy. Indeed, it was not until 1935 that the present structure of the FOMC was established, in which the 7 members of the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C., who are nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate, vote along with 5 of the 12 Reserve Bank presidents at any given meeting.7 So, why policy committees? What makes them so special? There are several reasons to prefer decisionmaking by committee: For one thing, each committee member brings to the table his or her own perspective or view of the world, as well as valuable information that others on the committee haven't heard. Moreover, committees are less likely to take extreme positionsdiscussion, deliberation, and voting tends to drive policy outcomes toward compromise. Committees also tend to be less volatile or activist, imparting an inertia to policymaking that could be desirableor perhaps undesirable when activism is required.8Finally, academic studies have shown that a combination of forecasts is more accurate, over time, than a single forecast.9Putting it all together, committees are, on average, likely to make better monetary policy decisions than individualsan assertion that has received support from academic experiments in which undergraduate students played a part. Notwithstanding the shift toward monetary policy committees, each central bank and its institutional structure reflects the politics and culture of the country that it serves (or "countries" in the case of the European Central Bank). The Federal Reserve is no exception, as Lowenstein's book demonstrates. In the years before 1913, the United States suffered through a series of financial crises culminating in the Panic of 1907. That panic convinced many important stakeholdersWilliam Jennings Bryan, the leader of the Populist movement; Paul Warburg, a prominent financier; Nelson Aldrich, a powerful Republican senator; and Carter Glass, the Democratic chair of the House Committee on Banking and Currencythat America needed a central bank. Our unique structure with the Board of Governors in Washington and the 12 Reserve Banks scattered around the country reflected a years-long struggle to balance a variety of competing interests: farmers in the heartlands and financiers on Wall Street; populists and federalists; and creditors and debtors. Our central bank and its policy committee importantly reflect the deal the Fed's founders struck to resolve those competing interests and create an institution representing America's economic and geographic diversity.10 I should add that I find the regional balance created by the membership of the FOMC to be a valuable feature of its structure. In the first round of policymaker discussion at a typical FOMC meeting, most of the presidents of the Reserve Banks start their presentations with a description of economic developments in their Federal Reserve District.11From these presentations, one understands what a massive and diverse economy the United States is and why the politicians who established the Fed were right to require its decisions to be made by a committee. Robust Rules for Monetary PolicyI turn now to economic models and monetary policy rules. I recently gave a lecture at the University of Warwick entitled "I'd Rather Have Bob Solow Than an Econometric Model, But...," with the punch line quote from Paul Samuelson saved for the end: "I'd rather have Bob Solow than an econometric model, but I would rather have Bob Solow with an econometric model than without one."12To summarize, the speech discussed the important role that models and policy rules play in FOMC discussions and decisionmaking. Shortly after the speech, I received an e-mail from an old and esteemed colleague, Professor Athanasios Orphanides, with the subject line "I'd rather have Bob Solow with a model and a rule (following a careful evaluation process)." What does a careful evaluation process entail? I will paraphrase my correspondent at length.13 Professor Orphanides's recommendation is that the FOMC adopt a reference rule, based on a rigorous evaluation and paying particular emphasis to (1) robustness to model uncertainty, (2) robustness to natural rate uncertainty, (3) robustness to expectations formation, (4) robustness to the size of shocks and the effective lower bound, and (5) whatever else the Fed staff has identified as a gap in our knowledge that may matter in evaluation. He suggested that, ultimately, the FOMC could arrive at a simple rule that would serve as a good benchmark to guide policy. My colleague certainly lays out an impressive work program for the Board's cadre of Ph.D. economists. However, I tend to agree with John Taylor and my Fed colleague John Williams when they write that "the search for better and more robust policy rules is never done."14 My take is that rules are extremely useful reference tools, but they are likely to work best as inputs into a committee decision. Why? Let me reiterate some points I made in Warwick. First, the economy is very complex, and models that attempt to approximate that complexity can sometimes let us down. A particular difficulty is that expectations of the future play a critical role in determining how the economy reacts to a policy change. Moreover, the economy changes over time-this means that policymakers need to be able to adapt their models promptly and accurately in real time. And, finally, no one model or policy rule can capture the varied experiences and views brought to policymaking by a committee. All of these factors and more recommend against accepting the prescriptions of any one model, policy rule, or policymaker. ReferencesBlinder, Alan S. (1998).Central Banking in Theory and Practice.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. -------- (2004).The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press. Blinder, Alan S., and John Morgan (2005). "Are Two Heads Better Than One? Monetary Policy by Committee,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 37 (October), pp. 789-811. Bordo, Michael D. (2016). "Some Historical Reflections on the Governance of the Federal Reserve," in John H. Cochrane and John B. Taylor, eds.,Central Bank Governance and Oversight Reform. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press. Chappell, Henry W. Jr, Rob Roy McGregor, and Todd Vermilyea (2005).Committee Decisions on Monetary Policy: Evidence from Historical Records of the Federal Open Market Committee.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Faust, Jon (2016). "Oh, What a Tangled Web We Weave: Monetary Policy Transparency in Divisive Times," paper prepared for "Understanding Fedspeak," an event cosponsored by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution and the Center for Financial Economics at Johns Hopkins University, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, November 30, available athttps://www.brookings.edu/research/oh-what-a-tangled-web-we-weave-monetary-policy-transparency-in-divisive-times. Fischer, Stanley (2017). "I'd Rather Have Bob Solow Than an Econometric Model, But . . .," speech delivered at the Warwick Economics Summit, Coventry, United Kingdom, February 11. Gerlach-Kristen, Petra (2004). "Is the MPC's Voting Record Informative about Future UK Monetary Policy?"Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 106 (June), pp. 299-313. Hendry, David F., and Michael P. Clements (2004). "Pooling of Forecasts,"Econometrics Journal, vol. 7 (1), pp. 1-31. Lombardelli, Clare, James Proudman, and James Talbot (2005). "Committees versus Individuals: An Experimental Analysis of Monetary Policy Decision Making,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 1 (May), pp. 181-205. Lowenstein, Roger (2015).America's Bank: The Epic Struggle to Create the Federal Reserve. New York: Penguin Press. Meade, Ellen E., and David Stasavage (2008). "Publicity of Debate and the Incentive to Dissent: Evidence from the US Federal Reserve,"Economic Journal, vol. 118 (April), pp. 695717. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2002). "Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2, pp. 63-118. Powell, Jerome H. (2016). "A View from the Fed," speech delivered at "Understanding Fedspeak," an event cosponsored by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution and the Center for Financial Economics at Johns Hopkins University, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, November 30. Ruge-Murcia, Francisco, and Alessandro Riboni (2010). "Monetary Policy by Committee: Consensus, Chairman Dominance, or Simple Majority?"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 125 (February), pp. 363-416. -------- (forthcoming). "Collective versus Individual Decision-Making: A Case Study of the Bank of Israel Law,"European Economic Review. Taylor, John B. (1979). "Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational Expectations,"Econometrica, vol. 47 (September), pp. 1267-86. -------- (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. -------- (1999).Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Taylor, John B., and John C. Williams (2011). "Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 829-59. Walsh, Carl E. (2009). "Using Monetary Policy to Stabilize Economic Activity (PDF)," speech delivered at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 20-22, pp. 245-96. Warsh, Kevin M. (2016). "Institutional Design: Deliberations, Decisions, and Committee Dynamics," in John H. Cochrane and John B. Taylor, eds.,Central Bank Governance and Oversight Reform.Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press. Wheelock, David C. (2000). "National Monetary Policy by Regional Design: The Evolving Role of the Federal Reserve Banks in Federal Reserve System Policy," in Jrgen von Hagen and Christopher J. Waller, eds.,Regional Aspects of Monetary Policy in Europe.Boston: Kluwer Academic, pp. 241-74. Williams, John C. (2003). "Simple Rules for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,Economic Review,pp. 1-12. 1. I am grateful to Joseph Gruber and Ellen Meade of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance. The views expressed are mine and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Although the Federal Reserve was created in 1913, the institutional structure and governance that we have today date from 1935. See Bordo (2016) and Wheelock (2000).Return to text 3. It is true, though, that popular books on prominent central banks typically relate more frequently to the outstanding governors or presidents of the central banks than they do to the organizational structure of those banks.Return to text 4. See Taylor (1979), Taylor (1993), Taylor (1999). A few other notable papers from the vast literature on monetary policy rules include Orphanides and Williams (2002), Walsh (2009), and Williams (2003).Return to text 5. See Blinder (1998) and Blinder (2004). Other important contributions to the literature on monetary policy committees include Blinder and Morgan (2005); Chappell, McGregor, and Vermilyea (2005); Gerlach-Kristin (2004); Meade and Stasavage (2008); Ruge-Murcia and Riboni (2010); and Warsh (2016).Return to text 6. For a discussion of the cacophony issue, see Faust (2016) and Powell (2016).Return to text 7. The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is a permanent member of the FOMC. Four votes rotate annually among the remaining 11 Reserve Bank presidents.Return to text 8. In an experimental study in which undergraduates played a monetary policy game by themselves and in groups of five, Lombardelli, Proudman, and Talbot (2005) found group decisions to be more inertial than individual decisions but closer to that of a policy rule, although Blinder and Morgan (2005) found that groups were no different from individuals in terms of policy activism. A recent study by Ruge-Murcia and Riboni (forthcoming) of Bank of Israel policy before and after its change from a single governor to a committee found that committee decisions were more inertial than individual ones.Return to text 9. See, for example, Hendry and Clements (2004).Return to text 10. In addition, in more recent times, the Federal Reserve System has placed greater emphasis on other aspects of diversity.Return to text 11. While only a subset of Reserve Bank presidents vote at any given FOMC meeting, all of them offer their views in our discussions of the economy and of monetary policy.Return to text 12. See Fischer (2017).Return to text 13. The direct quotation from Professor Orphanides is as follows: "My recommendation had been that the FOMC should adopt a reference rule, based on rigorous evaluation, using the technology the Fed staff has developed over the past couple of decades and paying particular emphasis on various aspects of robustness: (1) robustness to model uncertainty, (FRB/US (various vintages), EDO, SIGMA (again various vintages) and others), (2) robustness to natural rate uncertainty, u*, r*, Q*, fx* and so on, (3) robustness to expectations formation (mode[l] consistent, learning, partial learning by businesses/households, etc.), (4) robustness to the size of shocks and the ZLB [zero lower bound] (given that certainty equivalence does not hold), (5) whatever else the staff research has identified as a gap in our knowledge that may matter in evaluation. The evaluation should allow for forecast-based rules as well as outcome-based rules and could be updated on an annual basis to incorporate new information. But ultimately, the FOMC could arrive at a simple rule that would be, in the Committee's judgment, a good benchmark to guide policy."Return to text 14. See Taylor and Williams (2011), p. 855.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts The economy appears to be at a transition. We are closing in on full employment, inflation is moving gradually toward our target, foreign growth is on more solid footing, and risks to the outlook are as close to balanced as they have been in some time. Assuming continued progress, it will likely be appropriate soon to remove additional accommodation, continuing on a gradual path.1 As normalization of the federal funds rate gets further under way, monetary policy too is approaching a transition, prompting increased focus on the balance sheet. How the federal funds rate and the balance sheet should be adjusted individually and in combination depends on the degree to which they are substitutes, their relative precision, and the degree to which their effects on the economy are well understood. Let me start with the outlook and then turn to policy. Progress at Home and AbroadOver the past several quarters, we have seen improvement in inflation and activity both at home and abroad following a period when the drag on domestic activity from abroad was considerable. Between the middle of 2014 and 2016, a combination of notable fragilities and risks in large foreign economies, elevated sensitivity of the dollar to policy divergence, a sharp decline in oil prices, and financial markets' heightened sensitivity to these downside risks slowed progress in the U.S. economy and the adjustment of monetary policy to an extent few had anticipated. After being an important constraint in the past few years, the external environment currently appears more benign than it has been for some time, even though risks remain. Near-term risks to the United States from abroad appear to have diminished. Recoveries are gaining traction in China, Europe, and Japan in part reflecting greater confidence in their respective policy environments. The improvement in the global risk outlook was also helped by the continued economic progress and the gradual pace of monetary policy adjustment in the United States last year. In recent quarters, market participants appear more confident that China has the will and capacity to maintain its exchange rate regime, while achieving its growth targets, although there is a tension with high credit growth that will eventually need to be addressed. Early last year, China's gross domestic product (GDP) growth, which had averaged nearly 8 percent over the previous five years, was only a little above an annual rate of 5 percent in the first quarter, according to official data, and many observers believe that actual growth was weaker. Relatively large discrete declines in the renminbi against the dollar and a surge in private-sector investment outflows led to considerable volatility in foreign exchange markets and financial markets more broadly. In response, Chinese authorities boosted the supply of credit, ramped up fiscal stimulus, initiated new communications regarding the exchange rate, and clamped down on capital outflows. These actions appear to have stabilized growth and calmed fears of financial instability stemming from a sudden large devaluation in the renminbi. GDP growth rebounded to an average annual pace of over 7 percent in the final three quarters of the year. The exchange value of the renminbi has remained relatively constant against the central bank's designated basket of currencies, and it has depreciated against the dollar at a more gradual pace. Capital outflows, while still significant, have moderated. In Europe, the recovery has proven to be increasingly resilient. Monetary policy has continued to provide crucial support. As a result, several challenges--including referendums in the United Kingdom and Italy and liquidity and capital stresses faced by German and Italian banks--have so far been navigated without significant damage to growth, financial stability, or inflation expectations. Fiscal policy has ceased being a drag on demand growth and, in some cases, has turned moderately expansionary. Overall euro-area GDP increased at an annual rate of 1-3/4 percent last year, sufficiently in excess of potential output growth to bring the unemployment rate down nearly 1 percentage point. Despite some instances of heightened volatility, financial markets have functioned reasonably well, and risk spreads have stayed contained, although uncertainty about upcoming elections has likely led to some increase in French and Italian sovereign spreads in recent months. Fears of disinflation also appear to have abated: Measures of inflation compensation based on 5-to-10-year-ahead inflation swaps, which fell to 1-1/4 percent in the middle of last year, have recently moved up to 1-3/4 percent. Activity in Japan has also picked up recently, with GDP increasing 1-1/2 percent last year--noticeably above the estimated rate of potential growth--and the unemployment rate declining 1/4 percentage point to 3 percent, as monetary policy has remained supportive. Of course, concerns regarding the medium to longer run remain. In China, the price of near-term stability has been an increase in leverage, particularly in the corporate sector. China's overall debt-GDP ratio is elevated for an emerging market economy, especially considering that Chinese growth is likely to slow noticeably in coming years. In Japan, core consumer price inflation is close to zero--well below the central bank's 2 percent target--and scope for additional monetary policy accommodation is limited, leaving the economy vulnerable to adverse demand shocks. In the euro area, growth and inflation may remain low for some time, which could pose challenges for banks with low capital or high amounts of nonperforming loans and for highly-indebted sovereigns. Political events in Europe also raise some uncertainty. Going forward, it will be important to continue to monitor these and other foreign developments carefully. Here at home, the economy is at a transition. The past few months have seen continued progress in the labor market. Monthly gains in payroll employment have maintained a pace sufficient to continue eroding labor market slack, and wage growth appears to be moving higher on balance. Compensation per hour in the business sector, the most comprehensive measure of wages, increased at a 3 percent pace the past two years, noticeably above the pace earlier in the recovery. We appear to be closing in on full employment. The unemployment rate--after remaining relatively flat from the third quarter of 2015 to the third quarter of 2016--fell 1/4 percentage point last quarter to 4-3/4 percent. In addition, the labor force participation rate has been about flat, on net, over the past 2-1/2 years, which indicates considerable ongoing cyclical improvement, given the declining demographic trend. Even so, there may be some room for further improvement. The prime-age employment-to-population ratio remains depressed relative to pre-crisis levels; the share of employees working part time who would prefer full-time work remains elevated; and some measures of wage growth, such as the employment cost index, have increased relatively little in recent years. Most recently, we are also seeing welcome signs of progress on the second leg of our dual mandate after a protracted period of shortfalls from the FOMC target of 2 percent inflation. Recent months have seen a step-up in longer-run inflation compensation, which had dropped to worrisomely low levels last year raising concerns about a softening of inflation expectations to the downside. Both market- and some survey-based measures of inflation expectations remain somewhat low, but there has been some movement in the right direction in the past few months. Inflation has moved up lately as the effect of past increases in the dollar and declines in energy prices have faded. The 12-month change in headline personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices was 1.9 percent in January, although this partly reflects a temporary boost from energy prices. Core PCE inflation--which strips out volatile food and energy prices and is a good gauge of future inflation--has also increased. At 1.7 percent in January, the 12-month change is 0.1 percentage point higher than a year ago. Still, core inflation has been below our 2 percent target for almost all of the past eight years, and further progress is necessary to reach and sustain our symmetric inflation goal. Recent indicators of aggregate spending suggest we will continue to edge closer to our goals in the months ahead. Consumption growth has been encouraging, supported by continued job gains, rising wealth, and greater confidence. Business investment changed little the past two years, but there are currently signs of renewed growth. The contrast with the situation a year ago is sharp. Then, risk spreads on corporate bonds had risen noticeably--often a precursor to downturns--measures of business sentiment were relatively depressed, and corporate profits had declined over 10 percent. In recent quarters, the environment has become more favorable. Risk spreads have moved back down to more normal levels, business sentiment has rebounded, economic profits look to have turned up, and new orders for capital goods are moving higher. The partial rebound in oil prices has also given a boost to drilling activity. However, some crosscurrents could weigh on aggregate demand this year. The recent increases in longer-term interest rates could restrain housing activity as well as other interest-sensitive areas of demand, and some further pickup in the dollar could weigh on net exports and business investment. Recent months have seen an increase in the upside risks to domestic demand. Sentiment has increased along with equity prices, which are up around 10 percent since October. Increased optimism could lead to faster growth in consumption and business investment, although the spending data, thus far, do not suggest a noticeable acceleration. Some of the increase in sentiment and changes in asset prices could be tied to expectations of more expansive fiscal policy, another upside risk. In addition, the progress that we have made over the past year, with the economy closer to meeting full employment and inflation objectives, has contributed to the favorable shift in the balance of risks. The increase in upside risks to domestic demand and the diminution of foreign risks together suggest that risks to the outlook are more balanced today than they had been for the preceding two years. Nonetheless, the neutral real rate of interest--or the level of the real federal funds rate that is consistent with output growing close to its potential rate with full employment and stable inflation--is expected to remain low both in the near term and in the longer run, and inflation is only slowly recovering from a protracted period of low levels. The nominal neutral interest rate--which adjusts the real neutral rate for the level of inflation--is likely to remain below its historical average even once it reaches its new longer-run normal level. The lower rate environment means there will be less room to cut the federal funds rate, so that if the economy experiences adverse shocks similar in severity and frequency to those in the past the likelihood of returning to and operating near the effective lower bound will remain elevated relative to historical experience. Prudent risk management suggests that policy should take into account the asymmetry in risks posed by the greater likelihood of the economy being at the effective lower bound, where conventional policy is constrained. What about the Balance Sheet?Given the progress we have seen and the positive momentum in the incoming data, continued gradual removal of accommodation is likely to be appropriate. But unlike in previous tightening cycles, the Federal Open Market Committee currently has two tools to remove accommodation: the balance sheet as well as the federal funds rate. In December 2015, the Committee indicated that it would continue to reinvest principal payments until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is "well under way."2The decision to rely solely on the federal funds rate to remove accommodation initially until normalization is well under way serves an important purpose, in my view.3With asymmetry in the scope for conventional monetary policy to respond to shocks, there is a benefit to enabling the federal funds rate to rise more quickly than would be possible with a shrinking balance sheet and sooner reach a level that allows for significant reductions if economic conditions deteriorate.4 Even so, recognizing that the median of the Committee projections places the long-run value of the federal funds rate around 3 percent--a very low level by historical standards--some could judge normalization to be well under way before too long. Thus, monetary policy too may be approaching a transition. Once the short-term rate is comfortably distant from its effective lower bound, there are broadly two types of policy strategies that could be contemplated. Many central banks around the world may contemplate similar choices in the coming years, while the Bank of Japan has already grappled with these issues in the past.5One type of "complementarity" strategy might actively deploy the balance sheet as an independent second tool, complementary to the short-term rate. Under this strategy, both tools would be actively used to help achieve the Committee's goals. This strategy would seek to take advantage of the ways in which the balance sheet might affect certain aspects of the economy or financial markets differently than the short-term rate. Any differences in effects might derive from the fact that the balance sheet more directly, though not necessarily more precisely, affects term premiums on longer-term securities, while the short-term rate more directly affects money-market rates. Although it may be tempting, in theory, to operate with the balance sheet as a complementary, additional tool to the federal funds rate, we have virtually no experience with how such an approach would work in practice away from the effective lower bound. For that reason, one might instead prefer a "subordination" strategy that would prioritize the federal funds rate as the sole active tool away from the effective lower bound, effectively subordinating the balance sheet. Once federal funds normalization meets the test of being well under way, triggering an end to the current reinvestment policy, the balance sheet would be set on autopilot, shrinking in a gradual, predictable way until a "new normal" has been reached, and then increasing in line with trend increases in the demand for currency thereafter.6Under this strategy, the balance sheet might be used as an active tool only if adverse shocks push the economy back to the effective lower bound. The case for the subordination strategy is straightforward and compelling. This strategy recognizes that the two policy tools are broadly similar in the ways they affect the economy by indirectly changing the level of interest rates used to finance purchases by households and businesses. These interest rate changes also have effects on asset prices, and thereby on household wealth, as well as on the exchange value of the dollar and, thereby, on net exports and core import prices.7However, relative to balance sheet policies, the influence of the short-term rate is far better understood and extensively tested: There have been several decades and many business cycles over which to measure and analyze how the federal funds rate affects financial markets and real activity. In contrast, experience using the balance sheet as an active tool has been very limited and largely confined to a highly unusual period around the Global Financial Crisis, when short-term interest rates were constrained by the zero lower bound. Predictability, parsimony, precision, and clarity of communications all would seem to argue in favor of focusing policy on a single active tool that is most familiar. In short, it makes sense to focus policy on the tool whose effects are better understood by both policymakers and the public in circumstances where the tools are largely substitutes for one another. Even with this subordination strategy, however, there may be limited circumstances in which the balance sheet might be employed in a manner that is supportive of the short-term rate. Most obviously, during the period when the balance sheet is running down, if the economy encounters adverse shocks, it may be appropriate to commence the reinvestment of principal payments again in order to preserve conventional policy space if the federal funds rate were to drop below some threshold level, perhaps similar to the "well under way" threshold. More broadly, although the two tools can achieve roughly similar effects, they are different, and we cannot rule out that there may be special circumstances in which these differences may be particularly valuable. In particular, these differences may be an important consideration in circumstances when the transmission of changes in the short-term rate to long-term rates and other financial market variables and the real economy is impeded. In addition to directly affecting longer-term interest rates, changes to the balance sheet could serve to reinforce policy communication associated with the short-term rate. Some observers believe that such signaling was an important contributor to the effect of the balance sheet on the economy during and after the Global Financial Crisis.8Thus, the subordination strategy will likely be appropriate in most circumstances, but we cannot completely rule out special circumstances in which the complementary use of both tools may prove compelling. Assuming that a subordination strategy is adopted, and the balance sheet is set to shrink passively and predictably once reinvestment ceases or is phased out, there is some uncertainty around the size of the balance sheet when it returns to normal, which the Committee has described as "no larger than necessary for the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy." There are good reasons to expect a normalized balance sheet to be considerably smaller than its current size but larger than its pre-crisis level. Most obviously, trend growth in the demand for currency gradually pushes up the size of the balance sheet over time, but there are also other reasons to expect the post-crisis new normal to be larger than pre-crisis levels. The structural demand for reserves may be considerably larger now than prior to the financial crisis because of a number of changes, including new regulations that favor safe liquid assets and changes in financial institutions' attitudes toward risk.9If the demand curve for reserve balances has shifted out, then a greater supply of reserves will be needed to attain a given interest rate target. Moreover, the supply of reserves will need to be set far enough above the structural level of demand to accommodate unexpected shocks to the demand and supply of reserves. To accomplish this, the Committee could choose to implement policy by adjusting the supply of reserves to offset such shocks. Or, the Committee could decide to maintain the current floor system, in which a buffer of reserves, sufficient to accommodate any sizable shocks to reserves demand and supply, is maintained, thereby obviating the need for high-frequency adjustments to the supply of reserves. The Committee's normalization principles suggest that any buffer would be the minimum amount needed to efficiently and effectively implement policy.10 Because of changes in structural and short-term factors since the crisis, it is difficult to know with any precision how low reserves can be allowed to drop while still maintaining effective interest rate control. Thus, as the balance sheet gradually declines, it will be important to carefully monitor money markets for indications that any further reduction in the supply of reserves will begin to put upward pressure on money market rates. At that point, the amount of reserves will likely be close to the minimum amount necessary to satisfy demand at the target rate.11 ConclusionTo conclude, recent developments suggest that the macro economy may be at a transition. With full employment within reach, signs of progress on our inflation mandate, and a favorable shift in the balance of risks at home and abroad, it will likely be appropriate for the Committee to continue gradually removing monetary accommodation. As the federal funds rate continues to move higher toward its expected longer-run level, a transition in balance sheet policy will also be warranted. These transitions in the economy and monetary policy are positive reflections of the fact that the economy is gradually drawing closer to our policy goals. How the Committee should adjust the size and composition of the balance sheet to accomplish its goals and what level the balance sheet should be in normal times are important subjects that I look forward to discussing with my colleagues. I am grateful to Jim Clouse and Andrew Figura for their assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See, for example, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, February 1. This approach is consistent with the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm.Return to text 3. This is the rationale in Lael Brainard (2015), "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.Return to text 4. The Bank of England has stated that it is unlikely that it will reduce the size of its balance sheet until the Bank Rate has reached a level of around 2 percent; see Bank of England (2015),Inflation Report (PDF)(London: BOE, November), p. 34.Return to text 5. In 2006, the Bank of Japan reduced the size of its balance sheet by allowing short-term security holdings to run off and without relying on asset sales; see Kazuo Ueda (2010), "The Bank of Japan's Experience with Non-Traditional Monetary Policy (PDF)," paper presented at "Revisiting Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Environment," a conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 16.Return to text 6. The Committee has indicated that it intends to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings in a gradual and predictable manner primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal on securities held in the System Open Market Account; see Federal Open Market Committee, Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, in note 2.Return to text 7. There may be differences in the specific ways changes in short-term rates and the balance sheet transmit to different asset prices and the exchange rate, although estimates are limited and lack precision.Return to text 8. See, for example, Michael Woodford (2012), "Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1.Return to text 9. In addition, the Federal Reserve now remunerates reserve balances held by depository institutions.Return to text 10. For a discussion of floor systems and other frameworks for implementing monetary policy, see the November FOMC minutes, available at Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, November 1-2, 2016," press release, November 23.Return to text 11. Some experts have made financial stability arguments in favor of maintaining a level of reserves that is somewhat larger than needed for monetary control alone. In the past, the demand for safe short-term assets has sometimes been met by an increased supply of private-sector short-term debt, which has been associated with increased leverage and maturity and liquidity transformation. Some argue that a greater supply of safe short-term public debt could help prevent these potentially destabilizing developments from occurring. See Robin Greenwood, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein (2016), "The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet as a Financial-Stability Tool (PDF)," paper presented at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 25-27, and Ben S. Bernanke (2017), "Shrinking the Fed's Balance Sheet,"Ben Bernanke's Blog, January 26.Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At "Strong Foundations: The Economic Futures of Kids and Communities," the 10th Biennial Federal Reserve System Community Development Research Conference, Washington, D.C. I would like to welcome all of you and thank you for joining us to discuss a set of topics of considerable importance to our country. This is the Federal Reserve's 10th biennial community development research conference, dedicated as always to issues of significance to people and communities around the country. The conference is cosponsored by, and includes substantive contributions from, the community development offices of all 12 Federal Reserve Banks as well as the Board of Governors. That united effort and level of commitment reflects how consequential we consider these issues to be. This conference is intended to present and highlight rigorous research that I am confident will inform how you think about your own work, whether from the perspective of policymaking, community development practice, or research. Our last conference, two years ago, explored various aspects of economic mobility, largely among adults. This year, we gather to discuss "The Economic Futures of Kids and Communities," and, in part, I see this topic as an extension of that earlier conversation about mobility. Today and tomorrow, we focus on research about the foundation or building blocks for economic success that are laid even before young people enter the workforce and assume responsibility for their own finances. We will hear from leading experts on a range of issues related to how children, youths, and young adults are shaped in ways that may ultimately affect their ability later to productively contribute to the economy and manage their finances. We can learn from what the data and analysis tell us, and our hope is that making use of this information will lead to more effective programs and policies and thus better outcomes. Considerable evidence shows that growing up poor makes it harder to succeed as an adult, and new research by the Fed likewise shows the strong connection between the typical experiences of poverty in childhood and economic challenges later as an adult. The data come from the Board's latest Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), which will be published later this spring.1In the most recent survey, we asked some of the younger respondents--aged 25 to 39--to think about their childhoods. We asked those young adults whether, during their childhoods, they found themselves worrying about having enough food to eat, having a stable caregiver, or about their personal safety. About 10 percent said they regularly worried about one or more of these concerns, and an additional 19 percent said they sometimes worried about them. We were then able to compare responses about their experiences in childhood to what these young adults told us about their current circumstances. Some pretty clear patterns emerged. Of those young adults who regularly had one or more of these childhood concerns growing up, more than one-half say that they are currently facing challenges in getting by financially. This fraction compares to just over one-fourth of those who said they never, or only rarely, worried about these concerns as children that now experience this level of financial challenge. Young adults who regularly or sometimes worried when they were children about their care, safety, or having enough to eat are also less likely to be employed, less likely to have consistent income month-to-month, and less likely to be able to pay all of their current monthly bills in full, compared with those who never or rarely worried about these concerns as children.2 Broadly speaking, children who grow up in insecure circumstances, those often experienced in poverty, seem disproportionately likely to experience financial insecurity as adults. This conference is about understanding what kinds of environments and resources can best help children meet with economic success after they reach adulthood. There has been a lot of discussion in the aftermath of the Great Recession about how to best connect people with steady jobs. But research presented over the next two days makes a compelling case that there is a need to also think longer term about how to prepare people for success in the labor market. In fact, this research underscores the value of starting young to develop basic work habits and skills, like literacy, numeracy, and interpersonal and organizational skills. These habits and skills help prepare people for work, help them enter the labor market sooner, meet with more success over time, and be in a position to develop the more specialized skills and obtain the academic credentials that are strongly correlated with higher and steadier earnings. Indeed, a growing body of economic and education literature has focused on the relative efficiency of addressing workforce development challenges through investments in early childhood development and education compared with interventions later in life. I believe that data, evidence, and research can help policymakers and practitioners think more clearly about the implications for improving economic and life outcomes for everyone. To this end, the speakers at this conference will focus on three broad issues. I would like to briefly mention each, highlighting some of the questions that I believe can be informed by the research that will be presented here. First, this morning's panel will address early childhood development and education. In recent years, medicine and social science has revealed more than we ever have known before about which factors and experiences in childhood can make a difference later in life. However, many questions demand further attention. A fundamental one is how positive developmental outcomes can be promoted among those who were not born into families with socioeconomic advantages. While we do know there are advantages to good quality early childhood education, we should strive to better understand what kind of returns on investment this education provides and how to maximize these returns. The answers to these questions may influence thinking about how programs and interventions meant to assist kids and their families should be structured for maximum effectiveness to help put kids on the road to economic success. Second, researchers have explored the effects of neighborhoods and community conditions on the development of young people. Some presenters at this conference will share their understanding of how physical surroundings influence personal development. For instance, how do the form and quality of community institutions such as schools, community centers, and libraries play a role? What other kinds of community characteristics--such as public safety, transportation, and environmental quality--might help or hinder general education and financial skill development? A particularly important question is how kids' home environments affect them in ways that matter for their future economic success. It is also critically important to ask, what kinds of interventions have proven track records, and are these programs scalable? Third, and finally, other presenters will explore issues around skill development of youths and young adults, workforce outcomes, and the implications for the broader economy. They will ask how we understand which formative experiences most affect the ability of young people to successfully move to the next chapter in their lives, whether that means college, a job, or other paths such as self-employment. What role does a range of programs--starting with early childhood education all the way through youth vocational or apprenticeship training--play in affecting job readiness? How effective are different approaches, and what are the returns on investment? We should also pay attention to how well young people form the sorts of "soft skills"--things like teamwork, communication, and the ability to handle conflict--that are so valued by employers. And, for young people whose paths become difficult, such as those who get caught up in the juvenile justice system, what effect do such experiences have on their futures as workers and consumers, and what are the most promising approaches to foster a course correction? I hope that the data and other evidence presented today and tomorrow are of use to you in your work. Community development professionals attending this conference may consider how the design and implementation of their programs may be improved. Policymakers may look more closely at how kids are affected--purposefully or unintentionally--by public policies. And researchers may encounter ideas that spark new work that can shed further light on these important topics. I think it is important that we better understand these issues, and I applaud you for taking the time to be here to share your knowledge and to learn. Our young people are the future, and we all want them to have the support they need for successful and fulfilling lives. As a central banker, I recognize the benefits to the broader economy when more people are better prepared for work and for managing their finances. In short, ensuring that all of our kids have "strong foundations" will help build a similarly strong foundation for the U.S. economy. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (forthcoming),2016 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking(Washington: Board of Governors). Past SHED surveys are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/shed.htm, which is also where the 2016 survey will be posted when completed.Return to text 2. See note 1.Return to text