Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation Reflecting the significant progress made in recent years, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that the resolution plans of the eight largest and most complex domestic banking organizations did not have "deficiencies," which are weaknesses severe enough to trigger a resubmission process that could result in more stringent requirements. The agencies also jointly determined that the plans of four firms have "shortcomings," which are less-severe weaknesses that require additional work in their next plan: Bank of America, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and Wells Fargo. The agencies did not identify specific shortcomings in the resolution plans from Bank of New York Mellon, Citigroup, J.P. Morgan Chase, and State Street. Resolution plans, required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. While significant progress has been made--such as firms modifying their corporate structures so that losses can be borne by investors in an orderly way--there are inherent challenges and uncertainties associated with the resolution of a systemically important financial institution. Toward that end, the agencies identified four areas in which more work needs to be done by all firms to continue to improve their resolvability: intra-group liquidity; internal loss-absorbing capacity; derivatives; and payment, clearing, and settlement activities. Moreover, the resolvability of firms will change as markets change and as firms' activities, structures, and risk profiles change. As noted in the feedback letters that were issued to each firm and released Tuesday, the agencies expect the firms to remain vigilant in considering the resolution consequences of their day-to-day management decisions. For all eight firms, their next resolution plans are required by July 1, 2019. The agencies continue to explore ways to improve the resolution planning process and are considering extending the cycle for resolution plan submissions from annual to once every two years, reflecting the agencies' experience regarding the time needed to prepare and review the plans. Living Wills (or Resolution Plans) Board Votes
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of Comptroller of the Currency To adjust for inflation and changes in average loan size, the federal banking agencies on Thursday announced that, effective January 1, 2018, the aggregate loan commitment threshold for inclusion in the Shared National Credit (SNC) program will increase from $20 million to $100 million. This change will reduce reporting burden for a substantial number of banking institutions, with no material impact on the size of the portfolio evaluated. The reporting change provides regulatory relief to 82 financial institutions while reducing the dollar amount of loans identified as SNCs by 2 percent. As a result, the SNC program will continue to reflect a portfolio of more than $4.2 trillion in credit commitments. The table below provides details for the planned change. The SNC program is an interagency review and assessment of risk in the largest and most complex credits shared by multiple financial institutions. The interagency program began in 1977. This is the first increase in the dollar threshold for inclusion as a SNC since the program's inception. Further, the agencies announced that, starting in 2018, annual SNC results will be reported after the third quarter examination, reflecting data as of June 30. Previously the annual report was issued after the first quarter examination, reflecting data as of December 31.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of Comptroller of the Currency To adjust for inflation and changes in average loan size, the federal banking agencies on Thursday announced that, effective January 1, 2018, the aggregate loan commitment threshold for inclusion in the Shared National Credit (SNC) program will increase from $20 million to $100 million. This change will reduce reporting burden for a substantial number of banking institutions, with no material impact on the size of the portfolio evaluated. The reporting change provides regulatory relief to 82 financial institutions while reducing the dollar amount of loans identified as SNCs by 2 percent. As a result, the SNC program will continue to reflect a portfolio of more than $4.2 trillion in credit commitments. The table below provides details for the planned change. The SNC program is an interagency review and assessment of risk in the largest and most complex credits shared by multiple financial institutions. The interagency program began in 1977. This is the first increase in the dollar threshold for inclusion as a SNC since the program's inception. Further, the agencies announced that, starting in 2018, annual SNC results will be reported after the third quarter examination, reflecting data as of June 30. Previously the annual report was issued after the first quarter examination, reflecting data as of December 31.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of Comptroller of the Currency To adjust for inflation and changes in average loan size, the federal banking agencies on Thursday announced that, effective January 1, 2018, the aggregate loan commitment threshold for inclusion in the Shared National Credit (SNC) program will increase from $20 million to $100 million. This change will reduce reporting burden for a substantial number of banking institutions, with no material impact on the size of the portfolio evaluated. The reporting change provides regulatory relief to 82 financial institutions while reducing the dollar amount of loans identified as SNCs by 2 percent. As a result, the SNC program will continue to reflect a portfolio of more than $4.2 trillion in credit commitments. The table below provides details for the planned change. The SNC program is an interagency review and assessment of risk in the largest and most complex credits shared by multiple financial institutions. The interagency program began in 1977. This is the first increase in the dollar threshold for inclusion as a SNC since the program's inception. Further, the agencies announced that, starting in 2018, annual SNC results will be reported after the third quarter examination, reflecting data as of June 30. Previously the annual report was issued after the first quarter examination, reflecting data as of December 31.
Federal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Reserve Board of GovernorsOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examination procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small institution asset-size thresholds are not subject to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks and savings associations unless they choose to be evaluated as a large institution. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 2.11 percent increase in the CPI-W for the period ending in November 2017, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2018. The agencies will publish the adjustments in the Federal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (https://www.ffiec.gov/cra).
Pace University won the 14th annual national College Fed Challenge. Pace University won the 14th annual national College Fed Challenge on Friday, a competition that encourages students to learn about the U.S. economy, monetary policymaking, and the role of the Federal Reserve System. The team, from New York, N.Y., represented the New York Federal Reserve District and included Carly Aznavorian, Salil Ahuja, Scarlett Bekus, Klejdja Qosja, and Marina Testani. Gregory Colman and Mark Weinstock were the team's faculty advisers. The finals were held in the Board Room at the Board of Governors as the capstone to five district competitions held around the country. The other national finalists were second place: Harvard University, with honorable mentions for Princeton University, Virginia Commonwealth University, and the University of Wisconsin--Whitewater. College Fed Challenge is a team competition for undergraduate students. Teams analyze economic and financial conditions and formulate a monetary policy recommendation, modeling the Federal Open Market Committee. "For someone who has spent her career as an educator and economist, it's wonderful to see bright young people motivated to learn about the role monetary policy plays in fostering a healthy economy," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Janet L. Yellen. "I am hopeful that this experience will spur some of the students to pursue further study of economics and finance." Teams competing in the College Fed Challenge finals gave 15-minute presentations and answered questions for a panel of judges. Teams were evaluated on economic analysis, responses to judges' questions, teamwork, and presentation. The judges were Dr. Ellen Meade, senior adviser in the Division of Monetary Affairs at the Federal Reserve Board; Dr. Thomas Lubik, senior research advisor at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond; and Dr. Andrea Tambalotti, assistant vice president and function head of the Macroeconomic and Monetary Studies Function at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The teams competed in their local Reserve Bank Districts, and the top teams moved on to the finals in Washington, D.C. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the December 12-13 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the December 12-13 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by CenterState Bank Corporation, Winter Haven, Florida, to merge with HCBF Holding Company, Inc. ("HCBF"), and thereby indirectly acquire HCBF's subsidiary bank, Harbor Community Bank, both of Fort Pierce, Florida. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Commercial Bancgroup, Inc., and its parent companies, Robertson Holding Company, L.P., and Unified Shares, LLC, all of Harrogate, Tennessee, to acquire Citizens Bancorp, Inc. ("Citizens"), and thereby indirectly acquire Citizens' subsidiary bank, Citizens Bank, both of New Tazewell, Tennessee. The Board also approved the applications, under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act, by Commercial Bank, Harrogate, Tennessee, to merge with Citizens Bank and establish and operate branches at locations of the main office and branches of Citizens Bank. Attached is the Board's order relating to these actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by NATCOM Bancshares, Inc., Superior, Wisconsin, to acquire 49.0 percent of the voting shares of Republic Bancshares, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire control of Republic Bank, Inc., both of Duluth, Minnesota. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced final plans for the production of three new reference rates based on overnight repurchase agreement (repo) transactions secured by Treasury securities. The three reference rates will be produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY), in cooperation with the U.S. Office of Financial Research. The Federal Reserve Board had previously sought public comment on the proposed production of these rates. In response to comments received, the FRBNY has adjusted its expected daily publication time and now plans to publish the rates no later than 8 a.m. ET. As previously indicated by the FRBNY, publication of the rates is expected to begin in the second quarter of 2018. The attached Federal Register Notice also clarifies details related to the governance and calculation of the rates. As in the original proposal, each rate will be calculated as a volume-weighted median of transacted rates. The most comprehensive of the rates, the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), will be a broad measure of overnight Treasury financing transactions and wasselected by the Alternative Reference Rates Committeeas its recommended alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR. SOFR will include triparty repo data from Bank of New York Mellon (BNYM) and cleared bilateral and GCF Repo data from the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation (DTCC). Another rate, the Triparty General Collateral Rate (TGCR) will be based solely on triparty repo data from BNYM. The final rate, the Broad General Collateral Rate (BGCR) will be based on the triparty repo data from BNYM and GCF Repo data from DTCC. The three interest rates will be constructed to reflect the cost of short-term secured borrowing in highly liquid and robust markets. Because these rates are based on transactions secured by Treasury securities, they are essentially risk-free rates, providing a valuable benchmark for market participants to use in financial transactions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Register notice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Friday it has voted to affirm the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) at the current level of 0 percent. In making this determination, the Board followed the framework detailed in the Board's policy statement for setting the CCyB for private-sector credit exposures located in the United States. The buffer is a macroprudential tool that can be used to increase the resilience of the financial system by raising capital requirements on internationally active banking organizations when there is an elevated risk of above-normal future losses and when the banking organizations for which capital requirements would be raised by the buffer are exposed to or are contributing to this elevated risk--either directly or indirectly. The CCyB would then be available to help banking organizations absorb higher losses associated with declining credit conditions. Implementation of the buffer could also help moderate fluctuations in the supply of credit. The Board consulted with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in making this determination. Should the Board decide to modify the CCyB amount in the future, banking organizations would have 12 months before the increase became effective, unless the Board establishes an earlier effective date. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First Baird Bancshares, Inc., Weatherford, Texas,Cease and Desist Order dated June 22, 2006Terminated December 15, 2017 The enforcement action from June 2006 can be foundhereand other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Citizens Commerce Bancshares, Inc., Versailles, KentuckyWritten Agreement dated May 28, 2010Terminated December 1, 2017 The enforcement action from May 2010 can be foundhere (PDF)and other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Thursday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, St. Louis, and Minneapolis, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 1-3/4 percent to 2 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Société Générale S.A. (PDF), Paris, France, and Société Générale New York Branch, New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated December 14, 2017 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Cecil Bank, Elkton, Maryland,PCA Directive dated August 7, 2015Terminated December 13, 2017 The enforcement action from August 2015 can be foundhereand other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday permanently barred Lowell W. McCoy, Angela Asbell, and Jacob Harrison from the banking industry for engaging in separate unsafe and unsound practices. McCoy, a former member of the board of directors of NBRS Financial, Rising Sun, Maryland, obtained loans from NBRS through a third-party borrower to circumvent applicable lending limits and did not disclose the true purpose of the loans. Asbell, a former cashier at First State Bank in Commerce, Oklahoma, permitted a bank customer to overdraw his account by approximately $1.2 million, and failed to properly process customer wire transfers and transactions affecting her personal account. Harrison, a former financial services specialist at Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, made false entries in the bank's records by originating extensions of credit with falsely inflated applicant income. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the repeal of one regulation and the revision of a second to reflect the transfer of certain consumer protection rulewriting authority to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). The Board is publishing a final rule to repeal Regulation C (Home Mortgage Disclosure), which has been superseded by final rules issued by the CFPB. The Board is also publishing a proposal to revise its Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) to reflect changes in the coverage of the Board's rule under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Prior to enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Consumer Leasing Act (CLA) was implemented solely by the Board's Regulation M, which applied to all types of lessors. Rulemaking authority for the CLA currently rests with the CFPB with the exception of rules applicable to certain motor vehicle dealers. The proposed amendments to the Board's Regulation M would clarify the scope of the Board's rule, which applies only to lessors that are excluded under the Dodd-Frank Act from coverage by the CFPB's leasing regulation. The Board'sFederal Registernotices are attached. Comments on the proposed revisions to Regulation M must be submitted within 60 days from the date of publication, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested comment on a package of proposals that would increase the transparency of its stress testing program while maintaining the Federal Reserve's ability to test the resilience of the nation's largest and most complex banks. In response to feedback, one of the proposals would release greater information about the models the Federal Reserve uses to estimate the hypothetical losses in the stress tests, including as applied in the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). In particular, the following information would be made public for the first time: Together, this information would provide significantly more detail as to how the Board's models treat different types of loans under stress, and provide insight into how the annual stress test results are determined. For example, a firm subject to CCAR could use this information to better understand and evaluate risks in its own portfolio or compare the losses from its own models to the losses from the Board's models. The information would be published prior to the start of CCAR each year. "This enhanced transparency will bolster the credibility of our stress tests and help the public better evaluate the results," Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles said. "The proposed changes will also generate valuable insight from stakeholders and we look forward to it." The Board is also seeking comment on a proposed "Stress Testing Policy Statement" describing the Board's approach to model development, implementation, use, and validation. This statement would elaborate on prior disclosures and would provide details on the principles and policies that guide the Board's development of its stress testing models. Additionally, the Board is proposing to modify its framework for the design of the annual hypothetical economic scenarios. The modifications aim to enhance transparency and to further promote the resilience of the banking system throughout the economic cycle. In particular, the revisions include more information on the hypothetical path of house prices as well as notice that the Board is exploring the addition of variables to test for funding risks in the hypothetical scenarios. Comments on the measures will be accepted through January 22, 2018. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Enhanced Disclosure of the Models Used in the Federal Reserve's Supervisory Stress Test:HTML|PDF Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing:HTML|PDF Stress Testing Policy Statement:HTML|PDF Typical (CSV) Lower Risk (CSV) Higher Risk (CSV) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday requested public comment on proposed policy changes to procedures governing the provision of intraday credit to U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banking organizations (FBOs). The changes are intended to refine the methods for determining the level of intraday credit that these branches and agencies can receive from the Federal Reserve Banks. Part II of the Board's Payment System Risk Policy (PSR policy) governs the provision of intraday credit (or daylight overdrafts) in accounts at the Reserve Banks. The PSR policy recognizes that the Federal Reserve has an important role in providing intraday balances and credit to foster the smooth functioning of the overall payment system and also seeks to control the risks assumed by the Reserve Banks in providing this intraday credit, which is made available to meet temporary needs at healthy depository institutions. Although the PSR policy's intraday credit provisions generally apply similarly to FBOs and U.S. institutions, certain procedures for determining the level of intraday credit that FBOs can receive from the Federal Reserve Banks differ. Where the procedures are different for FBOs, the PSR policy relies on an FBO's strength of support assessment (SOSA) ranking and its status as a financial holding company (FHC) to determine the level of intraday credit that U.S. branches and agencies of the FBO can receive from the Federal Reserve Banks. The Board has announced that the SOSA ranking will be eliminated; additionally, the Board believes that an FBO's status as an FHC should not affect the FBO's access to intraday credit. The Board proposes to adopt alternative methods for determining FBOs' level of intraday credit that do not rely on SOSA rankings or FHC status. The Board believes that FBOs' resulting net debit caps would be better tailored to FBOs' use of intraday credit and would not constrain FBOs' U.S. operations. Comments on the proposed changes to the PSR policy are requested within 60 days of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Register notice:HTML|PDF SR 17-13: Elimination of the Strength of Support Assessment (SOSA) for all Foreign Banking Organizations subject to the Interagency Program for Supervising the U.S. Operations of Foreign Banking Organizations
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday requested public comment on a proposal to amend its Regulation A, which governs extensions of credit by Federal Reserve Banks, to make certain technical adjustments including to reflect the expiration of the Term Asset Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) program. The proposed amendments would revise the provisions regarding the establishment of the primary credit rate at the discount window in a financial emergency, and would delete obsolete provisions relating to the use of credit ratings for collateral for extensions of credit under the former TALF program. Comments on the proposal are requested within 30 days of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a solid rate. Averaging through hurricane-related fluctuations, job gains have been solid, and the unemployment rate declined further. Household spending has been expanding at a moderate rate, and growth in business fixed investment has picked up in recent quarters. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have declined this year and are running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. Hurricane-related disruptions and rebuilding have affected economic activity, employment, and inflation in recent months but have not materially altered the outlook for the national economy. Consequently, the Committee continues to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions will remain strong. Inflation on a 12‑month basis is expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent in the near term but to stabilize around the Committee's 2 percent objective over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but the Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1-1/4 to 1‑1/2 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Patrick Harker; Robert S. Kaplan; Jerome H. Powell; and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against the action were Charles L. Evans and Neel Kashkari, who preferred at this meeting to maintain the existing target range for the federal funds rate. Implementation Note issued December 13, 2017
Financial Services Policy Committee Kansas City, Missouri, December 21, 2017 -- Growth in the number of credit card payments rose sharply from 2015 to 2016--eclipsing growth for other card types, according to new payments data collected by the Federal Reserve. A notable increase was also seen last year in the number of card payments made remotely versus in person. The number of credit card payments grew 10.2 percent in 2016 to 37.3 billion with a total value of $3.27 trillion. The increase in the number of payments compares with an 8.1 percent annual rate from 2012 to 2015 and was boosted by continued strong growth in the number of payments made remotely. Remote general-purpose credit card payments, including online shopping and bill pay, rose at a rate of 16.6 percent in 2016. More broadly, remote payments in 2016 represented 22.2 percent of all general-purpose credit and prepaid debit card payments, up 1.5 percentage points from an estimated 20.7 percent in 2015. By value, remote payments represented 44.0 percent of all general-purpose card payments, a slight increase from an estimated 42.9 percent in 2015. The 2016 data on trends in card payments, as well as Automated Clearing House (ACH) transactions and checks, are the product of a new annual collection effort that will supplement the Federal Reserve's triennial payments studies. Information released today compares the annual growth rates for noncash payments between 2015 and 2016 with estimates from previous studies. Key findings include: The 2017 Annual Supplement report is available at:www.FRBservices.org/news/research.html. A similar annual supplemental data collection, based on a targeted survey of depository and financial institutions, general-purpose card networks and processors, and issuers of various private-label payment instruments, will get underway in early 2018. The Federal Reserve will once again be partnering with McKinsey & Company and Blueflame Consulting, of Fort Myers, Florida, on this effort.
The Federal Reserve System today announced the appointment of its payments security strategy leader, Kenneth Montgomery, the first vice president and chief operating officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. In this role, Montgomery will lead the Federal Reserve's effort to reduce fraud risk and advance the safety, security and resiliency of the U.S. payment system. His responsibilities will include chairing the Secure Payments Task Force, which is comprised of more than 200 industry stakeholders. "Ken's extensive background in information technology and his collaborative leadership style will be critical to addressing a variety of important challenges as we continue to make improvements to the nation's payments infrastructure," said Esther George, president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and sponsor of the payments improvement initiatives. Federal Reserve Board Governor Jerome H. Powell, who co-chairs the initiative's oversight committee, said, "Ken's long and distinguished record of service to the Federal Reserve System, along with his business experience and technical expertise, are exactly what's needed to help maintain a strong partnership with the industry on improved payments security." Montgomery will retain his position as first vice president and chief operating officer at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, where he is responsible for financial and U.S. Treasury services, information technology, strategic planning, human resources, corporate support, and administrative activities. Montgomery also directs financial management strategies and operations in a national capacity for the Federal Reserve System's Financial Support Office. He serves on the Federal Reserve's Financial Services Policy Committee, which sets the strategic direction for the evolving U.S. payment system, and he serves as vice chairman of the Advanced Cyber Security Center, a nonprofit consortium made up of industry, university, and government. Prior to joining the Boston Fed in 2011, Montgomery was executive vice president and Federal Reserve System chief technology officer at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. In this role, he presided over a wide range of information technology functions that guided and supported technology groups at regional banks across the Federal Reserve System. Montgomery's Fed career began at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in 1983. Montgomery succeeds Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Senior Vice President Todd Aadland, who has served as payments security strategy leader since September of 2015 and will assume responsibility for multiple Treasury Services programs and Wholesale Operations at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. President George complimented Aadland for his role in overseeing the development of the Federal Reserve's strategy and coordinating the work of the Secure Payments Task Force. President George said, "Todd has done an extraordinary job shepherding the group through its first phase of work and has built a strong foundation for continued progress on payment system security." Additional information about the Federal Reserve's Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System, including the Secure Payments Task Force, is available at www.FedPaymentsImprovement.org. Dan WassmannFederal Reserve Bank of Chicago(312) 322-2374[email protected] Doug TillettFederal Reserve Bank of Chicago(312) 322-5201(office)(312) 493-8088 (mobile)[email protected]Susan StawickBoard of Governors(202) 452-2955[email protected]
The federal banking agencies on Thursday announced their support for the conclusion of efforts to reform the international bank capital standards initiated in response to the global financial crisis. The Governors and Heads of Supervision and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision Thursday announced the finalization of the reforms to the "Basel III" agreement on bank capital standards. With this agreement, the Basel Committee will bring to conclusion the international reforms initiated in response to the global financial crisis. The Basel III agreement, which was designed for internationally active banks, was introduced in 2010 and was instrumental in establishing revised minimum standards that increased both the quality and quantity of regulatory capital. The reforms finalized today are intended to improve risk sensitivity, reduce regulatory capital variability, and level the playing field among internationally active banks. The agencies will consider how to appropriately apply these revisions to the Basel III reform package in the United States and any proposed changes based on this agreement will be made through the standard notice-and-comment rulemaking process.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that Vice Chairman Randal K. Quarles will recuse himself from participating in matters specific to Wells Fargo & Company. While this action is voluntary and is not legally required, it is being taken to avoid even the potential appearance of a conflict of interest. Upon his confirmation as a Board Member, Vice Chairman Quarles divested all applicable stock holdings related to Wells Fargo. However, in light of his extended family's prior sale of their interest in a bank to Wells Fargo, he has chosen to recuse himself from matters specifically involving the firm. As a result, Vice Chairman Quarles will not vote on, or participate by decision or recommendation in, matters specifically involving Wells Fargo. He will continue to oversee the Board's supervision and regulation responsibilities as Vice Chairman for Supervision, including the development of supervisory policies and rules applicable to banking organizations generally. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lael Brainard At "Leading the Way: A Workforce Development Video Campaign" awards ceremony hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Pathways in Technology Early College High Schools in the Greater Rochester Area, Rochester, N.Y. I would like to thank the staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for inviting me to attend this awards ceremony.1As many of you may already know, the Leading the Way campaign is a joint effort between the Federal Reserve Bank and the P-TECH2schools of the Greater Rochester area. It is wonderful to be part of an event that celebrates collaboration between educational institutions, local government, the Federal Reserve, and employers as they work together to provide appropriate training for young workers to fill local jobs needs. Collaboration creates a more vibrant workforce that is connected to actual jobs. Today's Job MarketI have just come from a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The FOMC is one of the main policymaking committees of the Federal Reserve System. Our main job on the FOMC is to set interest rates to achieve the maximum level of employment in the country and sustain inflation at a moderate level. The nation's unemployment rate is currently around 4.1 percent, which is a relatively low level by historical standards. What that means for the young people participating in this program is that this is a great time to find a job. Moreover, not only is the national unemployment rate low, so are unemployment rates for young people and members of ethnic and racial groups that have traditionally faced greater challenges in the labor market. As many of you know, during the deep recession of 2008 and 2009, many Americans were so discouraged by poor job prospects that they stopped even looking for work. That meant that too many Americans were sitting on the sidelines. In the past few years, the job market has gotten so strong that many of these people have come off the sidelines--and many are now back at work. The Rochester area, like much of the country, has now recovered from the Great Recession. The education and health-care sectors continue to be the main drivers of job growth. And, the local community colleges have partnered with local employers to align their curriculums with the employers' job openings, to increase workers' connections to jobs, and to become a resource for regional job information. Finally, the local government has worked to contend with a long-term loss of jobs in manufacturing and a more recent loss of jobs in professional services by attracting investment in a world-class photonics hub in Rochester. I often meet with people who run large companies to get their take on the strength of the economy. Whereas a few years ago, they might not have been engaged in a lot of hiring, today they tell me that it is becoming more challenging to find well-qualified workers for the job openings they want to fill. That's good news for those of you participating in the P-TECH program. It means employers are looking for graduates of programs just like yours, which are attuned to the job opportunities of employers. P‑TECH Rochester programs offer students professional mentors, job shadowing opportunities, and on-the-job experience to ensure that they are ready to contribute positively to the workplaces of local employers. I also understand that companies are investing more in on-the-job training and are strengthening efforts to retain more of the workers they attract, which means younger workers--such as P‑TECH graduates--have a better chance of securing jobs that lead to long-lasting careers. By any measure, the market for younger workers today looks much better than it did in the years just after the Great Recession, when unemployment rates for teenagers were above 20 percent.3 In fact, firms are turning more and more to programs like P-TECH to help them find and train the workers they need. So the skills you are gaining today are likely to provide pathways not only to the jobs of today but also the careers of the future. Workforce DevelopmentThe Federal Reserve Bank of New York is one of the facilitators of the Leading the Way campaign. The Federal Reserve System has a long-standing interest in understanding labor market dynamics and promoting workforce development opportunities. Programs like this help workers prepare for jobs and help firms invest in workforce development. Together, these efforts help make the economy more productive and help us achieve our goal of maximum employment. In addition to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's efforts, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston is learning about labor markets in small industrial cities through their Working Cities Challenge and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has focused on the importance of infrastructure including broadband for economic inclusion. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta has been a leader within the Federal Reserve System in establishing the Investing in America's Workforce Initiative, an effort across the Federal Reserve System to reframe training expenditures as investments in human capital rather than costs. In October, Atlanta established the Center for Workforce and Economic Opportunity to focus on employment policies and labor market issues that affect low- and moderate-income individuals. The System also recently hosted a national conference in Austin to promote the importance of investing in America's workforce.4 As employers' demand for specific education and training increase, collaborative initiatives, like those exhibited through the P-TECH programs of Greater Rochester, will help minimize the skills mismatch appearing in many communities with burgeoning job markets. Young WorkersSince 2013, the Federal Reserve Board has been administering the Survey of Young Workers to learn more about work experiences and future prospects for 18-to-30-year-olds nationwide. When I look at the survey findings, I am struck by how well the P-TECH program addresses many of the issues young people identified in the survey. As a first example, the survey findings highlight the important correlation between postsecondary education and labor market outcomes. The survey data indicate that higher levels of educational attainment are associated with higher earnings, greater job satisfaction, and increased optimism about one's job future. P-TECH focuses on providing students with postsecondary credentials, helping to address one of the survey's main concerns. Second, responses to the survey underscore the importance of young workers receiving appropriate information that enables them to select an educational program that provides better labor market outcomes. The survey found that more than 30 percent of young adults did not receive information about jobs and careers in high school and college. P-TECH is focused on providing information about educational opportunities and jobs to students before they enter high school. Third, the survey found that many young workers are not employed in fields aligned with their education. Fewer than half (45 percent) of the young workers surveyed said they were employed in a career field that is closely related to their educational and training background. P-TECH focuses on aligning education with actual jobs. Finally, the survey found that steady employment is very important to young workers. In 2015, young adults had a strong preference for steady employment (62 percent) over higher pay (36 percent). And, among the respondents who preferred steady employment, 80 percent would rather have one steady job than a stream of steady jobs for the next five years. The work that P‑TECH students do directly with employers helps steer them toward long-term, steady employment. ConclusionIn conclusion, I am proud that the Federal Reserve is contributing to the efforts of the P-TECH program in the Rochester area and I look forward to the video presentations we will have shortly. I want to congratulate in advance the winners of the video competition, who will also be announced shortly. I also want to congratulate all of you for being part of a 21st century education program that will help connect you to pathways of opportunity and help enable you to make important contributions to the vitality of your community. 1. I am grateful to Heidi Kaplan for her assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.P-TECHis short for Pathways in Technology Early College High.Return to text 3. See Lael Brainard, "Coming of Age in the Great Recession," speech given to the Federal Reserve's conference on "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy," April 2, 2015.Return to text 4. For more information on the Working Cities Challenge, seehttps://www.bostonfed.org/community-development/smaller-industrial-cities/working-cities-challenge.aspx. For the Dallas Fed's work on closing the digital divide, seewww.dallasfed.org/cd/pubs.aspx. For the Atlanta Fed's Center for Workforce and Economic Opportunity, seehttps://www.frbatlanta.org/cweo.aspx. And on the Investing in America's Workforce Initiative, seewww.investinwork.org.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At "Leading the Way: A Workforce Development Video Campaign" awards ceremony hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Pathways in Technology Early College High Schools in the Greater Rochester Area, Rochester, N.Y. I would like to thank the staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for inviting me to attend this awards ceremony.1As many of you may already know, the Leading the Way campaign is a joint effort between the Federal Reserve Bank and the P-TECH2schools of the Greater Rochester area. It is wonderful to be part of an event that celebrates collaboration between educational institutions, local government, the Federal Reserve, and employers as they work together to provide appropriate training for young workers to fill local jobs needs. Collaboration creates a more vibrant workforce that is connected to actual jobs. Today's Job MarketI have just come from a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The FOMC is one of the main policymaking committees of the Federal Reserve System. Our main job on the FOMC is to set interest rates to achieve the maximum level of employment in the country and sustain inflation at a moderate level. The nation's unemployment rate is currently around 4.1 percent, which is a relatively low level by historical standards. What that means for the young people participating in this program is that this is a great time to find a job. Moreover, not only is the national unemployment rate low, so are unemployment rates for young people and members of ethnic and racial groups that have traditionally faced greater challenges in the labor market. As many of you know, during the deep recession of 2008 and 2009, many Americans were so discouraged by poor job prospects that they stopped even looking for work. That meant that too many Americans were sitting on the sidelines. In the past few years, the job market has gotten so strong that many of these people have come off the sidelines--and many are now back at work. The Rochester area, like much of the country, has now recovered from the Great Recession. The education and health-care sectors continue to be the main drivers of job growth. And, the local community colleges have partnered with local employers to align their curriculums with the employers' job openings, to increase workers' connections to jobs, and to become a resource for regional job information. Finally, the local government has worked to contend with a long-term loss of jobs in manufacturing and a more recent loss of jobs in professional services by attracting investment in a world-class photonics hub in Rochester. I often meet with people who run large companies to get their take on the strength of the economy. Whereas a few years ago, they might not have been engaged in a lot of hiring, today they tell me that it is becoming more challenging to find well-qualified workers for the job openings they want to fill. That's good news for those of you participating in the P-TECH program. It means employers are looking for graduates of programs just like yours, which are attuned to the job opportunities of employers. P‑TECH Rochester programs offer students professional mentors, job shadowing opportunities, and on-the-job experience to ensure that they are ready to contribute positively to the workplaces of local employers. I also understand that companies are investing more in on-the-job training and are strengthening efforts to retain more of the workers they attract, which means younger workers--such as P‑TECH graduates--have a better chance of securing jobs that lead to long-lasting careers. By any measure, the market for younger workers today looks much better than it did in the years just after the Great Recession, when unemployment rates for teenagers were above 20 percent.3 In fact, firms are turning more and more to programs like P-TECH to help them find and train the workers they need. So the skills you are gaining today are likely to provide pathways not only to the jobs of today but also the careers of the future. Workforce DevelopmentThe Federal Reserve Bank of New York is one of the facilitators of the Leading the Way campaign. The Federal Reserve System has a long-standing interest in understanding labor market dynamics and promoting workforce development opportunities. Programs like this help workers prepare for jobs and help firms invest in workforce development. Together, these efforts help make the economy more productive and help us achieve our goal of maximum employment. In addition to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's efforts, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston is learning about labor markets in small industrial cities through their Working Cities Challenge and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has focused on the importance of infrastructure including broadband for economic inclusion. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta has been a leader within the Federal Reserve System in establishing the Investing in America's Workforce Initiative, an effort across the Federal Reserve System to reframe training expenditures as investments in human capital rather than costs. In October, Atlanta established the Center for Workforce and Economic Opportunity to focus on employment policies and labor market issues that affect low- and moderate-income individuals. The System also recently hosted a national conference in Austin to promote the importance of investing in America's workforce.4 As employers' demand for specific education and training increase, collaborative initiatives, like those exhibited through the P-TECH programs of Greater Rochester, will help minimize the skills mismatch appearing in many communities with burgeoning job markets. Young WorkersSince 2013, the Federal Reserve Board has been administering the Survey of Young Workers to learn more about work experiences and future prospects for 18-to-30-year-olds nationwide. When I look at the survey findings, I am struck by how well the P-TECH program addresses many of the issues young people identified in the survey. As a first example, the survey findings highlight the important correlation between postsecondary education and labor market outcomes. The survey data indicate that higher levels of educational attainment are associated with higher earnings, greater job satisfaction, and increased optimism about one's job future. P-TECH focuses on providing students with postsecondary credentials, helping to address one of the survey's main concerns. Second, responses to the survey underscore the importance of young workers receiving appropriate information that enables them to select an educational program that provides better labor market outcomes. The survey found that more than 30 percent of young adults did not receive information about jobs and careers in high school and college. P-TECH is focused on providing information about educational opportunities and jobs to students before they enter high school. Third, the survey found that many young workers are not employed in fields aligned with their education. Fewer than half (45 percent) of the young workers surveyed said they were employed in a career field that is closely related to their educational and training background. P-TECH focuses on aligning education with actual jobs. Finally, the survey found that steady employment is very important to young workers. In 2015, young adults had a strong preference for steady employment (62 percent) over higher pay (36 percent). And, among the respondents who preferred steady employment, 80 percent would rather have one steady job than a stream of steady jobs for the next five years. The work that P‑TECH students do directly with employers helps steer them toward long-term, steady employment. ConclusionIn conclusion, I am proud that the Federal Reserve is contributing to the efforts of the P-TECH program in the Rochester area and I look forward to the video presentations we will have shortly. I want to congratulate in advance the winners of the video competition, who will also be announced shortly. I also want to congratulate all of you for being part of a 21st century education program that will help connect you to pathways of opportunity and help enable you to make important contributions to the vitality of your community. 1. I am grateful to Heidi Kaplan for her assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.P-TECHis short for Pathways in Technology Early College High.Return to text 3. See Lael Brainard, "Coming of Age in the Great Recession," speech given to the Federal Reserve's conference on "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy," April 2, 2015.Return to text 4. For more information on the Working Cities Challenge, seehttps://www.bostonfed.org/community-development/smaller-industrial-cities/working-cities-challenge.aspx. For the Dallas Fed's work on closing the digital divide, seewww.dallasfed.org/cd/pubs.aspx. For the Atlanta Fed's Center for Workforce and Economic Opportunity, seehttps://www.frbatlanta.org/cweo.aspx. And on the Investing in America's Workforce Initiative, seewww.investinwork.org.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At "Leading the Way: A Workforce Development Video Campaign" awards ceremony hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Pathways in Technology Early College High Schools in the Greater Rochester Area, Rochester, N.Y. I would like to thank the staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for inviting me to attend this awards ceremony.1As many of you may already know, the Leading the Way campaign is a joint effort between the Federal Reserve Bank and the P-TECH2schools of the Greater Rochester area. It is wonderful to be part of an event that celebrates collaboration between educational institutions, local government, the Federal Reserve, and employers as they work together to provide appropriate training for young workers to fill local jobs needs. Collaboration creates a more vibrant workforce that is connected to actual jobs. Today's Job MarketI have just come from a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The FOMC is one of the main policymaking committees of the Federal Reserve System. Our main job on the FOMC is to set interest rates to achieve the maximum level of employment in the country and sustain inflation at a moderate level. The nation's unemployment rate is currently around 4.1 percent, which is a relatively low level by historical standards. What that means for the young people participating in this program is that this is a great time to find a job. Moreover, not only is the national unemployment rate low, so are unemployment rates for young people and members of ethnic and racial groups that have traditionally faced greater challenges in the labor market. As many of you know, during the deep recession of 2008 and 2009, many Americans were so discouraged by poor job prospects that they stopped even looking for work. That meant that too many Americans were sitting on the sidelines. In the past few years, the job market has gotten so strong that many of these people have come off the sidelines--and many are now back at work. The Rochester area, like much of the country, has now recovered from the Great Recession. The education and health-care sectors continue to be the main drivers of job growth. And, the local community colleges have partnered with local employers to align their curriculums with the employers' job openings, to increase workers' connections to jobs, and to become a resource for regional job information. Finally, the local government has worked to contend with a long-term loss of jobs in manufacturing and a more recent loss of jobs in professional services by attracting investment in a world-class photonics hub in Rochester. I often meet with people who run large companies to get their take on the strength of the economy. Whereas a few years ago, they might not have been engaged in a lot of hiring, today they tell me that it is becoming more challenging to find well-qualified workers for the job openings they want to fill. That's good news for those of you participating in the P-TECH program. It means employers are looking for graduates of programs just like yours, which are attuned to the job opportunities of employers. P‑TECH Rochester programs offer students professional mentors, job shadowing opportunities, and on-the-job experience to ensure that they are ready to contribute positively to the workplaces of local employers. I also understand that companies are investing more in on-the-job training and are strengthening efforts to retain more of the workers they attract, which means younger workers--such as P‑TECH graduates--have a better chance of securing jobs that lead to long-lasting careers. By any measure, the market for younger workers today looks much better than it did in the years just after the Great Recession, when unemployment rates for teenagers were above 20 percent.3 In fact, firms are turning more and more to programs like P-TECH to help them find and train the workers they need. So the skills you are gaining today are likely to provide pathways not only to the jobs of today but also the careers of the future. Workforce DevelopmentThe Federal Reserve Bank of New York is one of the facilitators of the Leading the Way campaign. The Federal Reserve System has a long-standing interest in understanding labor market dynamics and promoting workforce development opportunities. Programs like this help workers prepare for jobs and help firms invest in workforce development. Together, these efforts help make the economy more productive and help us achieve our goal of maximum employment. In addition to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's efforts, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston is learning about labor markets in small industrial cities through their Working Cities Challenge and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has focused on the importance of infrastructure including broadband for economic inclusion. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta has been a leader within the Federal Reserve System in establishing the Investing in America's Workforce Initiative, an effort across the Federal Reserve System to reframe training expenditures as investments in human capital rather than costs. In October, Atlanta established the Center for Workforce and Economic Opportunity to focus on employment policies and labor market issues that affect low- and moderate-income individuals. The System also recently hosted a national conference in Austin to promote the importance of investing in America's workforce.4 As employers' demand for specific education and training increase, collaborative initiatives, like those exhibited through the P-TECH programs of Greater Rochester, will help minimize the skills mismatch appearing in many communities with burgeoning job markets. Young WorkersSince 2013, the Federal Reserve Board has been administering the Survey of Young Workers to learn more about work experiences and future prospects for 18-to-30-year-olds nationwide. When I look at the survey findings, I am struck by how well the P-TECH program addresses many of the issues young people identified in the survey. As a first example, the survey findings highlight the important correlation between postsecondary education and labor market outcomes. The survey data indicate that higher levels of educational attainment are associated with higher earnings, greater job satisfaction, and increased optimism about one's job future. P-TECH focuses on providing students with postsecondary credentials, helping to address one of the survey's main concerns. Second, responses to the survey underscore the importance of young workers receiving appropriate information that enables them to select an educational program that provides better labor market outcomes. The survey found that more than 30 percent of young adults did not receive information about jobs and careers in high school and college. P-TECH is focused on providing information about educational opportunities and jobs to students before they enter high school. Third, the survey found that many young workers are not employed in fields aligned with their education. Fewer than half (45 percent) of the young workers surveyed said they were employed in a career field that is closely related to their educational and training background. P-TECH focuses on aligning education with actual jobs. Finally, the survey found that steady employment is very important to young workers. In 2015, young adults had a strong preference for steady employment (62 percent) over higher pay (36 percent). And, among the respondents who preferred steady employment, 80 percent would rather have one steady job than a stream of steady jobs for the next five years. The work that P‑TECH students do directly with employers helps steer them toward long-term, steady employment. ConclusionIn conclusion, I am proud that the Federal Reserve is contributing to the efforts of the P-TECH program in the Rochester area and I look forward to the video presentations we will have shortly. I want to congratulate in advance the winners of the video competition, who will also be announced shortly. I also want to congratulate all of you for being part of a 21st century education program that will help connect you to pathways of opportunity and help enable you to make important contributions to the vitality of your community. 1. I am grateful to Heidi Kaplan for her assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.P-TECHis short for Pathways in Technology Early College High.Return to text 3. See Lael Brainard, "Coming of Age in the Great Recession," speech given to the Federal Reserve's conference on "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy," April 2, 2015.Return to text 4. For more information on the Working Cities Challenge, seehttps://www.bostonfed.org/community-development/smaller-industrial-cities/working-cities-challenge.aspx. For the Dallas Fed's work on closing the digital divide, seewww.dallasfed.org/cd/pubs.aspx. For the Atlanta Fed's Center for Workforce and Economic Opportunity, seehttps://www.frbatlanta.org/cweo.aspx. And on the Investing in America's Workforce Initiative, seewww.investinwork.org.Return to text