The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that they will use to determine compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. These ratios replace the prior year's ratios, which were released on June 17, 2016. In general, section 109 prohibits a bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 also prohibits branches of banks controlled by out-of-state bank holding companies from operating primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 provides a process to test compliance with the statutory requirements. The first step in the process involves a loan-to-deposit ratio test that compares an out-of-state bank's loan-to-deposit ratio in a host state to the average loan-to-deposit ratio in the host state. A second step is conducted if a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio is less than one-half of the published ratio for that state or if data are not available at the bank to conduct the first step. The second step requires the appropriate agency to determine whether the bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the bank's interstate branches. A bank that fails both steps is in violation of section 109 and is subject to sanctions by the appropriate agency. The updated host state loan-to-deposit ratios are attached.
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced the availability of the 2017 list of distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies, where revitalization or stabilization activities are eligible to receive Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) consideration under the community development definition. Distressed nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies and underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies are designated by the agencies in accordance with their CRA regulations. The criteria for designating these areas are available on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) website (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). The designations continue to reflect local economic conditions, including unemployment, poverty, and population changes. As with past releases, the agencies apply a one-year lag period for geographies that were listed in 2016 but are no longer designated as distressed or underserved in the current release. Revitalization or stabilization activities in these geographies are eligible to receive CRA consideration under the community development definition for 12 months after publication of the current list. The current and previous years' lists can be found on the FFIEC website, along with information about the data sources used to generate those lists.
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the IMF Workshop on Financial Surveillance and Communication: Best Practices from Latin America, the Caribbean, and Advanced Economies, Washington, D.C. In the years since the start of the global financial crisis, an enormous amount of effort has gone into ensuring that we have a robust financial system that promotes responsible risk taking and an efficient allocation of resources. But despite these efforts, financial stability cannot be taken for granted, for financial decisions that benefit the people who make them can create systemic risk and harm society as a whole. Further, the phenomenon familiar from macroeconomics‑‑and for that matter from life‑‑of decisions that result in short-run happiness and long-run grief is visible also in the area of financial stability. For example, excessive leverage and reliance on short-term funding, which may reward risk takers whose bets pay off, may also increase the risk of fire sales and contagion, creating a fragile financial situation. The disruption in credit intermediation that typically accompanies such episodes can have lasting negative consequences for the real economy and welfare‑‑some of which we are still seeing today. The Federal Reserve's financial stability responsibilities therefore strongly complement its dual-mandate objectives of achieving price stability and full employment. Today I will review the monitoring framework we have implemented at the Federal Reserve, before providing an assessment of current U.S. financial stability conditions. I will conclude by arguing that while significant progress has been made in recent years toward making the financial system more stable and resilient, we should not ever be complacent.1We still lack sufficient information to understand some parts of the shadow banking system, and risks sometimes evolve outside the scope of prudential regulation, with potentially negative implications for financial stability. And sometimes we fail to understand the situation in which we find the financial system and the economy. Framework for Monitoring Financial StabilityParticipants in today's workshops have grappled with the question of what is the best framework to monitor financial stability. One approach is to focus on trends in, and interactions among,financial vulnerabilitiesacross financial institutions, markets, and instruments. Another approach is to trackthe resilience of institutions, either broad categories or individual systemically important institutions. Good monitoring frameworks combine elements of both. Let me start with the vulnerabilities-focused approach, as developed by Tobias Adrian, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang.2That approach defines financial vulnerabilities as a collection of factors that may amplify financial shocks and, when elevated, have the potential to generate systemic risk. The focus is on vulnerabilities rather than shocks, because the timing of shocks, such as sudden drops in asset prices, are inherently hard to predict. Vulnerabilities, in contrast, tend to build up over time, and policies can be designed to help contain these vulnerabilities, reducing the likelihood of systemic events. Some financial vulnerabilities are cyclical in nature, rising and falling over time, while others are structural, stemming from longer-term forces shaping the nature of credit intermediation. Informed by academic research, some of it in-house, we at the Federal Reserve focus on four broad cyclical vulnerabilities: (1) financial-sector leverage, (2) nonfinancial-sector borrowing, (3) liquidity and maturity transformation, and (4) asset valuation pressures.3Briefly, leverage, across a range of institutions, is a key amplifier of solvency shocks, leading to a greater chance of a credit crunch or fire sale. Liquidity and maturity mismatches can generate run risk, leading to fire sales and contagion. Finally, elevated valuation pressures, especially when combined with high leverage, can lead to excessive credit growth. When asset prices are appreciating rapidly and expected to continue to do so, borrowers and lenders are more willing to accept higher degrees of risk and leverage. Using a range of indicators, we assess these cyclical vulnerabilities relative to past experience. That is, we evaluate where the current levels of these indicators stand compared with their historical values, to identify whether they point to a low, average, or high level of vulnerabilities. While we try to rely on quantitative indicators, in the end, this evaluation requires some degree of judgment. We also closely monitor potential structural vulnerabilities, such as funding models and institutions that provide critical plumbing services to the system. Because these structural vulnerabilities are less amenable to traditional quantitative monitoring, their identification and assessment follow a less formal process. I will leave that discussion to another time. As mentioned, complementary to the vulnerabilities-oriented approach is an approach that focuses on institutions. If the financial system is overleveraged, that vulnerability has to be evident at particular institutions. An institutions-oriented framework can help us keep track of sector- or institution-specific structural vulnerabilities that may be masked by our overall assessment and provides additional ways to understand how distress at a particular institution or class of institutions may spill over to the wider financial system. Regardless of whether we are looking at vulnerabilities or institutions, a key feature of this monitoring framework is its forward-looking nature. For example, evidence suggests that periods of elevated risk appetite are frequently accompanied by a rise in leverage at financial intermediaries.4This evidence implies that elevated asset valuation pressures today may be indicative of rising vulnerabilities tomorrow.5 Of course, while a framework provides a disciplined way to evaluate financial stability, we constantly evaluate the framework so that we can identify new risks and vulnerabilities, which may arise as the financial system evolves--for example, in response to market-driven innovation or regulatory reform. Federal Reserve staff research helps us understand and evaluate the evolving, dynamic financial system. Before turning to the assessment of the current state of U.S. financial stability, let me discuss how we communicate our views on this matter. The Federal Reserve, unlike many other central banks, does not publish a financial stability report. The United States already has two congressionally mandated financial stability reports, one authored by the independent Office of Financial Research and a separate report published by the Financial Stability Oversight Council that represents the views of the range of financial regulators, including the Federal Reserve. Additional views of Federal Reserve officials can be reflected in a range of other venues, including, notably, the Board's semiannualMonetary Policy Report,the Board's annual report, and speeches, such as this one. Current AssessmentThat was the framework, now for the current assessment: In the interest of time, my main focus will be on the four cyclical vulnerabilities--leverage, borrowing by households and non-financial firms, liquidity and maturity transformation, and asset valuations--but I will also briefly touch on the most salient structural vulnerabilities. To summarize the assessment, overall, a range of indicators point to vulnerability that is moderate when compared with past periods: Leverage in the financial sector is at historically low levels, and, following the reforms of money market mutual fund regulations by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) last fall, vulnerabilities associated with liquidity and maturity transformation appear to have decreased. However, the increase in prices of risky assets in most asset markets over the past six months points to a notable uptick in risk appetites, although this shift has not yet led to a pickup in the pace of borrowing or a sizable rise in leverage at financial institutions. LeverageTo start with, leverage: Regulatory capital at large banks is now at multidecade highs. The largest banks have already met their fully phased-in capital requirements, including the conservation buffer and the capital surcharge for the global systemically important banks. Also, the largest banks have been able to meet the post-stress capital requirements in the past couple of stress-test exercises run by the Federal Reserve. Measures of earnings strength, such as the return on assets, continue to approach pre-crisis levels at most banks, although with interest rates being so low, the return on assets might be expected to have declined relative to their pre-crisis levels--and that fact is also a cause for concern. Borrowing by households and businessesIn the private nonfinancial sector, which includes corporations and households, total debt remains well below its long-run trend, largely driven by subdued borrowing among households. However, the corporate business sector appears to be notably leveraged, with the current aggregate corporate-sector leverage standing near 20-year highs. Some studies, including one by the International Monetary Fund in this April'sGlobal Financial Stability Report, have recently highlighted this vulnerability, so let me briefly offer my perspective.6Despite the elevated levels of corporate borrowing, recent developments show signs of improvement. Leverage has declined slightly since its peak a year ago, and firms with high debt growth appear relatively healthy. Interest expenses relative to earnings also declined of late and are below their median value since 2001. Furthermore, the fraction of corporate debt due within one year relative to total debt stands at historically low levels. Thus, positive shocks to interest rates may adversely affect the ability of some firms to service debt, but this risk may have only limited system-wide effects. Nonetheless, elevated leverage leaves the corporate sector vulnerable to other shocks, such as earnings shocks. In the household sector, new borrowing is driven mostly by borrowers with higher credit scores, and the amount of debt that borrowers have relative to their incomes is falling, suggesting that the debt is more manageable. That said, two pockets in the household sector deserve scrutiny. Auto loan balances and delinquency rates are high for borrowers with lower credit scores, meaning that the riskiest borrowers are borrowing more and not paying it back as often. Of note, delinquencies on recently issued auto loans have also increased, indicating that underwriting standards in the auto loan industry may be deteriorating. Student loan balances keep rising, and delinquency rates on those loans are near historical highs. These strains within the household sector leave such borrowers vulnerable to adverse shocks and probably weigh on their spending. At first glance, one is tempted to say that the potential for this distress to adversely affect the financial system seems moderate, because both subprime auto loan and student loan borrowers account for a small share of other debt categories. But, on second thought, one should remember that pre-crisis subprime mortgage loans were dismissed as a stability risk because they accounted for only about 13 percent of household mortgages, and not take excessive confidence.7 Liquidity and maturity transformationSimilar to my assessment of leverage, I believe that the primary vulnerability associated with liquidity and maturity transformation--that of a self-fulfilling run--is relatively low. In recent years, banks have shifted away from more run-prone short-term wholesale sources of funds toward more stable sources such as core deposits. Large domestic banks have also significantly boosted their holdings of high-quality liquid assets, making them more resilient to funding stress. In the nonbanking sector, the SEC revised the regulations governing money market mutual funds, first adopted in 2014, with the aim of reducing the key structural vulnerabilities exposed by the massive and destabilizing run on the funds in late 2008. The second round of reforms went into full effect in October 2016; ahead of this date, $1.2 trillion flowed out of prime money funds--the more fragile funds that also provide direct funding to large banking institutions--toward government money funds, which are constrained to hold government-guaranteed assets. Those assets include repurchase agreements (or repos) with private banks backed by Treasury securities and the liabilities of government-sponsored enterprises, such as, notably, the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs). While the current configuration of money markets reveals a reduced financial stability risk compared with the situation prior to the recent reforms, this configuration may not yet represent the final equilibrium. It will be important to keep an eye on the growth of alternative investment vehicles that perform liquidity transformation in money markets. Of note, in part supported by increased demand from government-only money funds, the FHLB system has increased its issuance of shorter-maturity liabilities, which are more attractive to money funds. In turn, this development has led to an increase in the FHLB system's maturity transformation because its assets--loans to banks and insurance companies--have remained relatively long maturity. As a result, the FHLBs face an increased need to roll over maturing liabilities and thus greater vulnerability should they encounter liquidity pressures. I should note that the FHLBs' regulator, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (also known as the FA-FA) flagged this issue more than a year ago and is working with the FHLBs (the FLUBS) to address it. Asset valuationsLet me conclude my assessment of current financial stability conditions with a discussion of asset valuation pressures. Prices of risky assets have increased in most major asset markets in recent months even as risk-free rates also rose. In equity markets, price-to-earnings ratios now stand in the top quintiles of their historical distributions, while corporate bond spreads are near their post-crisis lows. Prices of commercial real estate (CRE) have grown faster than rents for some time, and measures of the amount of operating income relative to the sale price of commercial properties--the capitalization rate--have reached historical lows, suggesting continued pressures in the CRE market despite some tightening in credit conditions. Valuation pressures in single-family residential real estate markets appear, at most, modest, with price-to-rent ratios only slightly higher than their long-run trend. The general rise in valuation pressures may be partly explained by a generally brighter economic outlook, but there are signs that risk appetite increased as well. For example, estimates of equity and bond risk premiums are at the lower end of their historical distributions, and, relative to some non-price-based measures of uncertainty, the implied volatility index VIX is particularly subdued. So far, the evidently high risk appetite has not lead to increased leverage across the financial system, but close monitoring is warranted. ConclusionLet me conclude by offering my view on where we stand in our effort to promote financial stability in the United States. There is no doubt the soundness and resilience of our financial system has improved since the 2007-09 crisis. We have a better capitalized and more liquid banking system, less run-prone money markets, and more robust resolution mechanisms for large financial institutions. However, it would be foolish to think we have eliminated all risks. For example, we still have limited insight into parts of the shadow banking system, and--as already mentioned--uncertainty remains about the final configuration of short-term funding markets in the wake of money funds reform. The U.S. financial system is inherently dynamic, with a range of institutions competing to offer a changing mix of financial products. New financial technologies promise great benefits but will no doubt carry novel risks. As a result, we monitor these vulnerabilities, and we are vigilant with respect to economic and financial developments across markets and institutions within the United States and around the world. And we know that complacency must be avoided. ReferencesAdrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2015). "Financial Stability Monitoring,"Annual Review of Financial Economics, vol. 7 (December), pp. 357-95. Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin (2010). "Liquidity and Leverage,"Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 19 (July), pp. 418-37. Aikman, David, Michael Kiley, Seung Jung Lee, Michael G. Palumbo, and Missaka Warusawitharana (forthcoming). "Mapping Heat in the U.S. Financial System,"Journal of Banking and Finance. Gerardi, Kristopher, Andreas Lehnert, Shane M. Sherlund, and Paul Willen (2008). "Making Sense of the Subprime Crisis (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 69-145. International Monetary Fund (2017). "Getting the Policy Mix Right," inGlobal Financial Stability Report.Washington: IMF, April. 1.I am grateful to Chiara Scotti and Filip Zikes of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance. Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.See Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2015).Return to text 3.For example, see Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2015); Aikman and others (forthcoming); and the references therein.Return to text 4.See Adrian and Shin (2012).Return to text 5.See Aikman and others (forthcoming).Return to text 6.See International Monetary Fund (2017).Return to text 7.See Gerardi and others (2008).Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Symposium on Central Clearing, Chicago, Illinois Thank you for inviting me to speak today.1The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and Darrell Duffie have provided a valuable public service in hosting this annual symposium on central clearing. I will start my remarks by taking stock of the progress made in strengthening central counterparties (or CCPs), and then offer some thoughts on central clearing and liquidity risks. The huge losses suffered by the American International Group (AIG) on its over-the-counter derivatives positions contributed to the financial crisis and highlighted the risks in derivatives markets. In response, the Group of Twenty nations committed in 2009 to moving standardized derivatives to central clearing. Central clearing serves to address many of the weaknesses exposed during the crisis by fostering a reduction in risk exposures through multilateral netting and daily margin requirements as well as greater transparency through enhanced reporting requirements. Central clearing also enables a reduction in the potential cost of counterparty default by facilitating the orderly liquidation of a defaulting member's positions, and the sharing of risk among members of the CCP through some mutualization of the costs of such a default. But central clearing will only make the financial system safer if CCPs themselves are run safely. Efforts to set heightened expectations for CCPs and other financial market infrastructures have been ongoing for years, with the regulatory community working collectively to clarify and significantly raise expectations. These efforts resulted in the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (or PFMI), which was published in 2012 by the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). The PFMI lays out comprehensive expectations for CCPs and other financial market infrastructures. Recent AccomplishmentsExtensive work has been done to implement the PFMI.2The joint CCP work plan agreed to in 2015 by the Financial Stability Board (or FSB), CPMI, IOSCO, and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (or BCBS) laid out an ambitious program to provide further guidance on the PFMI and better understand interdependencies between CCPs and their members.3 CPMI and IOSCO will soon publish more granular guidance on CCP resilience, focusing on governance, stress testing credit and liquidity risk, margin, and recovery planning. While this guidance will not establish new standards beyond those set out in the PFMI, I believe that it will encourage CCPs and their regulators to engage in thoughtful dialogue on how they could further enhance their practices. The FSB has led the work on resolution planning for CCPs, publishing draft guidance this past February. The guidance covers a range of topics, including the powers that resolution authorities need in order to effectively resolve a CCP, the potential incentives related to using various loss-allocation tools in resolution, the application of the "no creditor worse off" safeguard, and the formation of crisis management groups--a key step in facilitating cross-border regulatory coordination in the event of a failure of a systemically important CCP. Ensuring the safety of the system also requires an understanding of the interdependencies between CCPs and their clearing members. Work on this is ongoing. Preliminary analysis confirms that there are large interdependencies between banks and CCPs, including common exposures related to financial resources held to cover market and credit risk, as well as common lending and funding arrangements. Having pushed for the move to greater central clearing, global authorities have a responsibility to ensure that CCPs do not themselves become a point of failure for the system. The progress I have just described is helping to meet this responsibility by making central clearing safer and more robust. Global authorities also have a responsibility to ensure that bank capital standards and other policies do not unnecessarily discourage central clearing. In my view, the calibration of the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) for the U.S. global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) should be reconsidered from this perspective. A risk-insensitive leverage ratio can be a useful backstop to risk-based capital requirements. But such a ratio can have perverse incentives if it is the binding capital requirement because it treats relatively safe activities, such as central clearing, as equivalent to the most risky activities. There are several potential approaches to addressing this issue. For example, the BCBS is currently considering a proposal that would set a G-SIB's SLR surcharge at a level that is proportional to the G-SIB's risk-based capital surcharge. Taking this approach in the U.S. context could help to reduce the cost that the largest banks face in offering clearing services to their customers. The Federal Reserve is also considering other steps. First, we are developing an interpretation of our rules in connection with the movement of some centrally cleared derivatives to a "settled-to-market" approach. Under this approach, daily variation margin is treated as a settlement payment rather than as posting collateral. Under our capital rules, this approach reduces the need for a bank to hold capital against these exposures under risk-based and supplementary leverage ratios. Second, we are also working to move from the "current exposure method" of assessing counterparty credit risk on derivative exposures to the standardized approach for counterparty credit risk (SA-CCR). The current exposure method generally treats potential future credit exposures on derivatives as a fixed percentage of the notional amount, which ignores whether a derivative is margined and undervalues netting benefits. SA-CCR is a more risk-sensitive measurement of exposure, which would appropriately recognize the counterparty risks on derivatives, including the lower risks on most centrally cleared derivatives. Central Clearing and LiquidityCCPs are different from most other financial intermediaries in the sense that the CCP stands between two parties to a cleared transaction whose payment obligations exactly offset each other. A CCP faces market or credit risk only in the event that one of its members defaults and its required initial margin or other pre-funded financial resources are insufficient to cover any adverse price swings that occur during the period between the time of default and the time that the CCP is able to liquidate the defaulting party's positions. However, like most other financial intermediaries, CCPsdoface liquidity risks. Their business model is based on timely payments and the ability to quickly convert either the underlying assets being cleared or non-cash collateral into cash. For this reason, CCPs should carefully consider liquidity when launching new products and only offer clearing of products that can be sold quickly, even in times of stress. Liquidity problems can occur in central clearing even if all counterparties have the financial resources to meet their obligations, if they are unable to convert those resources into cash quickly enough. The amount of liquidity risk that CCPs face can sometimes dwarf the amount of credit or market risk they face. This is particularly true for the clearing of cash securities such as Treasuries. In that case, the securities being cleared are extremely safe and likely to rise in value in times of stress. But in contrast to most cleared derivatives, the cash payments involved are very large because counterparties exchange cash for the delivery of the security on a gross basis. I will look at these risks from two perspectives, first in terms of the payments that CCPs must make, and then in terms of the payments they expect to receive. Payment Flows from CCPsIn the case of a member's default, a CCP must be equipped to make the cash payments owed to non-defaulting counterparties when due. This requirement can be met as long as there is sufficient margin, mutualized resources such as the guarantee fund, or the CCP's own resources held in cash and in the required currency. But if those funds are held in securities, then the CCP will need to convert them to cash, either by entering into a repurchase agreement, or using them as collateral to draw on a line of credit. And if the CCP holds either cash or securities denominated in a currency different from the one in which payment must be made, it will need to either engage in a spot FX transaction or in an FX swap. Principle seven of the PFMI addresses these liquidity risks, calling for all CCPs to meet a "Cover 1 standard"--that is, to hold enough liquid resources in all relevant currencies to make payments on time in the event of the default of the clearing member that would generate the largest payment obligation under a wide range of potential stress scenarios. More complex CCPs and those with a systemic presence in multiple jurisdictions are encouraged to meet a "Cover 2 standard." The PFMI also provide guidance on the resources that qualify in meeting these requirements: cash held at a central bank or a creditworthy commercial bank, committed lines of credit, committed repurchase agreements, committed FX swap agreements, or highly marketable collateral that can be converted into cash under prearranged and highly reliable funding arrangements. There are two sets of risks involved here. First, where should CCPs put their cash? As central clearing has expanded, CCPs have had to deal with increasingly large amounts of cash margin. CCPs can deposit some of these funds with commercial banks. But regulatory changes have made it more expensive for banks to take large deposits from other financial firms, and in some cases banks may be unwilling to accept more cash from a CCP. And many of the largest banks are also clearing members, which introduces a certain amount of wrong-way risk. A clearing-member default could be especially fraught if the defaulting bank also held large cash balances for the CCP. For this reason, CCPs may prudently place limits on the amount deposited at a given institution. In order to diversify their holdings, many also place cash in the repo market. If it is available, the ability to deposit cash at a central bank allows for another safe, flexible, and potentially attractive option--a subject I will return to later. Second, how can CCPs be assured that they will be able to convert securities into cash or draw on other resources in times of stress? The PFMI uses the words "committed" and "pre-arranged" in describing qualifying liquid resources. Indeed, the PFMI does not view spot transactions on the open market as reliable sources of liquidity during times of stress. The Federal Reserve has strongly supported this approach. Liquidity plans should not take for granted that, at a time of stress involving a member default, lines of credit, repurchase agreements, or FX swaps could be arranged on the spot. Committed sources of liquidity are more likely to be available. They also allow market participants and regulators to make sure that plans are mutually consistent. If a CCP has arranged for a committed liquidity source, then the provider should account for it in its own plans and demonstrate that it can meet its commitment. Of course, this liquidity is not free, nor should it be. Regulatory changes have forced banks to closely examine their liquidity planning and to internalize the costs of liquidity provision. The costs of committed liquidity facilities will be passed on to clearing members. These costs are perhaps highest in clearing Treasury securities, where liquidity needs can be especially large. To meet its estimated needs, DTCC's Fixed Income Clearing Corporation (FICC) is planning to institute a committed repo arrangement with its clearing members. Despite initial concerns, the industry seems prepared to absorb these costs, but they will not be trivial for many members.4 Payment Flows to CCPsWhile initial and variation margin help mitigate credit risk in central clearing, they can also create liquidity risk. Clearing members and their clients are required to make margin payments to CCPs on a daily basis, and in times of market volatility these payments may rise dramatically. This source of liquidity risk can occur even in the absence of a default. For example, after the UK referendum on Brexit, the resulting price swings triggered many CCPs to make substantial intraday and end-of-day margin calls. Fortunately, members had prepared and were able to make the needed payments, but the sums involved caught many off guard and the experience served as a useful warning. According to data from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), the top five CCPs requested $27 billion in additional margin over the two days following the referendum, about five times the average amount.5In most cases, clearing members have an hour to meet intraday margin calls. Clearing members have no choice but to hold enough liquid resources to meet the range of possible margin calls, as the consequences of missing a margin call are considerable. Brexit was only the most recent example in which margin calls were unexpectedly large. Margin calls were also quite large after the stock market crash of October 1987. That episode helps to demonstrate how complicated payments flows can be and why liquidity risk also needs to be viewed from a macroprudential perspective, considering potential risks to flows across the system. After falling about 9 percent the week before, on October 19, 1987, the S&P 500 stock market index fell about 20 percent. Margin calls were about 10 times their normal size, and caused a very complicated set of payment flows across multiple exchanges, CCPs, and banks.6 Thenext slidehelps to represent the ensuing payment flows.7Calls requesting payment are on the left in red. When making a margin call, a CCP requests payment from its clearing members. Clearing members in turn request margin payments from the customers for whom they are clearing, and those customers must then direct their bank to make the payment. If everything works as it should, payments (in green, on the right) will ensue. The customer's bank will deliver the requested payment to the clearing member's bank (or payment bank). The payment bank will then deliver the funds to a settlement bank used by the CCP, and the settlement bank will then credit the funds to the CCP. In theory, each of these payments would have to happen sequentially, but often parties offer intraday credit (represented by the dashed orange lines) to help smooth these flows. For example, the settlement bank may provide intraday credit to the clearing member, sending funds to the CCP before the member has delivered funds to the payment bank or before those funds have been transferred to the settlement bank. Clearing members or the customer's bank may also provide intraday credit to their customers, again making payments before funds have been received in order to help speed the payments chain. Over the course of October 19, 1987, the system worked largely as I have just described. But on October 20, every single link in these payments and credit chains was interrupted. This is represented graphically in thenext slide. By that morning, many settlement banks and clearing members had yet to receive offsetting payments for credit that had been extended the previous day. Goldman Sachs and Kidder, Peabody had together extended $1.5 billion in credit that had not yet been paid.8As a result, some firms pulled back on providing further credit, which then forced each link of the payments chain to operate sequentially. Payments slowed, with the unintended consequence that uncovered positions grew larger and stayed open for even longer. Without credit, some customers were unable to meet their margin calls and were forced to liquidate their positions. This gridlock sparked fears that a clearing member or even a CCP would be forced to default. The Federal Reserve reacted to this threat by encouraging banks to continue to extend credit and by injecting funds into the system to help ensure that credit was available. The 1987 stock market crash did not leave much lasting impact on the economy, but if these liquidity problems had been allowed to cause the default of a major clearing member or even a CCP then it could have had a much more serious impact. While this might seem like simply an interesting bit of history, the payments chains involved in central clearing are still very similar today. To guard against the same sorts of liquidity risk today, we need to make sure that every link in these chains will work as it is intended to under stress. While neither Brexit nor the October 1987 crash involved a clearing member default, these incidents do point to the potential complications of such a default. I have already discussed the steps that a CCP might need to take in the event of a default to meet its liquidity needs. Some of those needs, such as committed lines of credit or repo agreements, could involve tapping financial resources at the same banks that are clearing members. Thus, clearing members may need to juggle several different liquidity exposures simultaneously in the event of a default. They may face draws on committed sources of liquidity, and if there are market stresses around the default, which seems a near certainty, they may at the same time face a sudden increase in intraday margin calls and their own internal demands for more liquid resources.9These are risks that we should seek to understand better. Policy ImplicationsThe Federal Reserve is the primary supervisory authority for two designated financial market utilities (or DFMUs), and plays a secondary role relative to the six other DFMUs. As a central bank, we are particularly concerned with liquidity issues.10I will address four policy issues that need careful consideration as the public sector and market participants continue to address liquidity risks in central clearing. Stress TestingThe 1987 stock market crash showed that we need to look at liquidity risks from a systemwide perspective. That event involved multiple CCPs and also involved multiple links in the payments chains between banks and CCPs. Conducting supervisory stress tests on CCPs that take liquidity risks into account would help authorities better assess the resilience of the financial system. A stress test focused on cross-CCP liquidity risks could help to identify assumptions that are not mutually consistent; for example, if each CCP's plans involve liquidating Treasuries, is it realistic to believe that every CCP could do so simultaneously? Authorities in both the United States and Europe have made progress in conducting supervisory stress tests of CCPs. In the United States, the CFTC conducted a useful set of tests of five major CCPs last year.11The tests analyzed each individual institution's ability to withstand the credit risks emanating from the default of one or more clearing members. This was innovative and necessary work. It would be useful to build on it by adding tests that focus on liquidity risks across CCPs and their largest common clearing members. Such an exercise could focus on the robustness of the system as a whole rather than individual CCPs. The European Securities and Markets Authority is already expanding its supervisory stress testing exercise to incorporate liquidity risk. A similar exercise here in the United States should be seriously considered. Ensuring EfficiencyThe industry collectively needs to ensure that the liquidity flows involved in central clearing are handled efficiently and in a way that minimizes potential disruption. As I noted, there was some concern about the size of margin calls following Brexit, and certain CCPs have taken measures to address this. For example, LCH has subsequently made changes to its intraday margining procedures in an effort to reduce liquidity pressures on its clearing members, allowing them to offset losses on their client accounts with gains on the house account.12 Other CCPs are also actively engaged in efforts to increase their efficiency.FICC is looking at potential solutions using distributed ledger technology to clear both legs of overnight repo trades, which could allow for greater netting opportunities and thereby reduce potential liquidity needs.13Several CCPs are also looking at ways to expand central clearing to directly include more buy-side firms, which could also offer greater netting opportunities. Doing so could also offer new sources of liquidity if the new entrants are able to take part in the CCP's committed liquidity arrangements. Diversification of sources of liquidity would offer tangible benefits--CCPs would avoid relying on the same limited set of clearing members for all of their liquidity needs. As one example, the Options Clearing Corporation established an innovative pre-funded, committed repurchase facility with a leading pension fund. As regulators, we should encourage innovations that increase clearing efficiency and reduce liquidity risks where they meet the PFMI and our supervisory expectations. Central Bank AccountsAs I discussed earlier, CCPs have a complicated set of decisions on how and where to hold their cash balances. Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act authorized the Federal Reserve to establish accounts for DFMUs, and we now have accounts with each of the eight institutions that the Financial Stability Oversight Council has so designated. These accounts permit DFMUs to hold funds at the Federal Reserve, but not to borrow from it.14Allowing DFMUs to deposit balances at the Federal Reserve helps them avoid some of the risk involved in holding balances with their clearing members. Doing so also provides CCPs with a flexible way to hold balances on days when margin payments unexpectedly spike and it is difficult to find banks that are willing to accept an unexpected influx in deposits. In such a case, it may also be too late in the day to rely on the repo market. The availability of Fed accounts could help avoid potential market disruptions in those types of circumstances. Cross-Border CooperationThe lessons from Brexit also point to the need for cross-border cooperation. Brexit triggered payments flows to CCPs across many jurisdictions. As far as liquidity risks are concerned, it is immaterial whether a CCP is based in the United States or abroad so long as it clears U.S. dollar denominated assets and must make and receive U.S. dollar payments. There are different possible approaches to such cross-border issues. Efforts to address these liquidity risks should carefully take into consideration the effect that they would have on the broader financial system. For example, splintering central clearing by currency area would fragment liquidity and reduce netting opportunities, which in the case of events like Brexit could actually trigger even greater liquidity risk. In my opinion, we should be searching for cooperative solutions to these issues. ConclusionIn the years following the financial crisis, one of the primary lessons for market participants and their regulators was the criticality of liquidity risk management. Financial firms such as Lehman Brothers and AIG struggled to obtain sufficient liquidity to meet their obligations. Liquidity is also a crucial concern in central clearing, and while regulatory reforms have done much to strengthen both CCPs and their clearing members, we should continue to make progress in creating a more robust and efficient system. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Federal Reserve.Return to text 2. In 2013, CPMI-IOSCO launched a multi-level, multi-year monitoring program to evaluate how the principles and responsibilities in the PFMI are being implemented around the world. Several different assessments have been completed to date and the findings have provided important insight on both the progress and methods by which authorities and CCPs have sought to implement the PFMI. In 2014, CPMI-IOSCO published supplemental guidance and a menu of recovery tools to help financial market infrastructures, including CCPs, meet the expectations in the PFMI that all financial market infrastructures have a comprehensive and effective recovery plan.Return to text 3. While the work done in the context of the joint work plan represents significant regulatory efforts related to CCPs, progress is also being made on a parallel path. In particular, it is important to highlight the adoption and implementation of the SEC's Covered Clearing Agency Standards, which further strengthens the risk management standards that clearing agencies registered with the SEC must meet. In addition, the SEC and the industry have been working jointly to shorten the settlement cycle to two days for many securities products, culminating in the SEC's adoption of amendments to Rule 15c6-1(a) earlier this year.Return to text 4. "Treasury repos may hit 20bp under DTCC liquidity plan," Risk.net, November 25, 2015.Return to text 5. "Derivatives traders forced to provide $27bn collateral post-Brexit," Financial Times, November 16, 2016.Return to text 6. Cash equities were traded in New York on the New York Stock Exchange, equity futures were traded and cleared in Chicago by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, while stock options were traded on the Chicago Board Options Exchange and cleared by the Options Clearing Corporation.Return to text 7. This figure is an adaptation from one presented in Andrew Brimmer (1989), "Central Banking and Systemic Risks in Capital Markets,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring, 3–16.Return to text 8. "The Day the Nation's Cash Pipeline Almost Ran Dry," The New York Times, October 2, 1988.Return to text 9. Regulatory changes since the financial crisis have encouraged banks to hold much greater amounts of high-quality liquid assets, which would help them in meeting such liquidity demands.Return to text 10. Section 804 of the Dodd-Frank Act requires the Financial Stability Oversight Council to designate those financial market utilities that the council determines are, or are likely to become, systemically important. Eight utilities have been designated: The Clearing House Payments Company, L.L.C.; CLS Bank International; Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Inc.; The Depository Trust Company; Fixed Income Clearing Corporation; ICE Clear Credit L.L.C.; National Securities Clearing Corporation; and The Options Clearing Corporation.Return to text 11. "Supervisory Stress Test of Clearinghouses (PDF)," Commodity Futures Trading Commission, November 2016.Return to text 12. LCH has also moved forward by one hour the timing of the last intraday margin call and made procedural changes that will speed up the processing of the call, which should also help with payment flows.Return to text 13. "DTCC & Digital Asset Move to Next Phase after Successful Proof-Of-Concept for Repo Transactions Using Distributed Ledger Technology," DTCC, February 2017.Return to text 14. According to title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act, a designated financial market utility may only borrow from the discount window only in unusual and exigent circumstances and only upon a majority vote of the Board of Governors following consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury.Return to text Accessible Version
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the June 13-14 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the June 13-14 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced a $3 million fine against Bank of New York Mellon Corporation (BNY Mellon) for unsafe and unsound practices after the firm improperly assigned a lower risk weighting to a portfolio of assets, reducing the firm's risk-based capital ratios. In 2010, following a change in the relevant accounting rules, BNY Mellon consolidated a portfolio of collateralized loan obligations onto its balance sheet. BNY Mellon incorrectly assigned the assets a zero-risk weighting, which was improper under the rules in place at the time. As a result of its improper treatment of the portfolio BNY Mellon understated its reported risk-weighted assets and overstated its risk-based capital ratios for nearly 14 quarters. BNY Mellon took action to correct its risk-weighting and risk-based capital ratios when the errors were identified, and BNY Mellon is now in compliance. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 10(e) of the Home Owners' Loan Act by TIAA Board of Overseers, Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America, and TCT Holdings, Inc., all of New York, New York, to acquire EverBank Financial Corp and thereby indirectly acquire EverBank, both of Jacksonville, Florida. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the applications under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Toronto, Canada, and CIBC Holdco Inc., New York, New York, to acquire PrivateBancorp, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire its wholly owned subsidiary, The PrivateBank and Trust Company, both of Chicago, Illinois. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by FirstSun Capital Bancorp, formerly known as Sunflower Reincorporation Sub, Inc., to acquire Sunflower Financial, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire Sunflower Bank, National Association, all of Salina, Kansas. The Federal Reserve Board also has announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by FirstSun Capital Bancorp to acquire Strategic Growth Bank Incorporated and Strategic Growth Bancorp Incorporated, both of El Paso, Texas, and thereby indirectly acquire Capital Bank, SSB, El Paso, Texas, and First National Bank of Santa Fe, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Attached is the Board's order relating to these actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Results from the latest supervisory stress tests conducted as part of the Dodd-Frank Act will be released on Thursday, June 22, and the results from the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) will be released on Wednesday, June 28, the Federal Reserve Board announced on Thursday. Results for both exercises will be released at 4:30 p.m. EDT. The Dodd-Frank Act stress tests are forward-looking exercises conducted by both the Federal Reserve and by large bank holding companies supervised by the Federal Reserve. The exercises assess whether firms have sufficient capital to absorb losses and continue operating during stressful economic and financial conditions over nine quarters. The results of the supervisory tests conducted by the Federal Reserve will include data such as projected post-stress capital ratios, revenue, expense, and loss estimates under hypothetical adverse and severely adverse scenarios previously published by the Federal Reserve. The standardized capital actions used for the Dodd-Frank Act stress tests assume no changes in recent levels of dividend payments and no common stock repurchases for each participating bank holding company, and allow the results to be compared across the firms. The same firms will separately release their company-run Dodd-Frank Act stress test results on or before July 7. CCAR is an annual exercise undertaken by the Federal Reserve to assess whether large bank holding companies have forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks and are supported by sound risk-measurement and -management practices. As part of CCAR, the Federal Reserve evaluates each firm's plans to make capital distributions, such as dividend payments, stock repurchases, as well as planned acquisitions. CCAR results will include post-stress capital ratios under hypothetical adverse and severely adverse scenarios published by the Federal Reserve and will reflect the capital actions the firms plan to undertake during the nine-quarter period. In a change from last year, the qualitative portion of CCAR, which evaluates the strength of each firm's capital planning processes, no longer applies to 21 firms with less complex operations. Rather, the capital planning processes of these firms will be evaluated in the normal course of supervision. The 13 larger and more complex firms continue to be subject to the qualitative assessment of CCAR. The instructions, scenarios, and further information regarding the 2017 Dodd-Frank Act stress tests and CCAR are available on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of an enforcement action against EverBank Financial Corp (EFC) issued in April 2011 related to residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. The Board also announced a $1.8 million civil money penalty against EFC for its mortgage servicing deficiencies related to that enforcement action. The enforcement action required EFC to enhance its oversight over the mortgage servicing and foreclosure processing of its thrift subsidiary, EverBank. A separate enforcement action also issued in April 2011 required EverBank, supervised by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), to correct its servicing practices. In January 2016, the OCC terminated that action because it determined that EverBank had complied with the action's requirements. The termination of the action against EFC reflects that Federal Reserve supervisory teams have found sustainable improvement in EFC's oversight over EverBank's mortgage servicing practices. The April 2011 enforcement action against EFC was taken in conjunction with Board enforcement actions against other major mortgaging servicing organizations and required correction of their servicing deficiencies. The Board assessed penalties against mortgage servicing institutions when the institutions entered into the National Mortgage Settlement with the Justice Department and the state Attorneys General. The Board believes that penalties are appropriate against EFC and the remaining institutions that have not entered into the National Mortgage Settlement. These actions against EFC are being announced at this time in order to coordinate with the timing of the acquisition of EFC by Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Bank of America CorporationCharlotte, North CarolinaWritten Agreement dated December 6, 2010Terminated June 8, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Bank of the Orient, San Francisco, CaliforniaCease and Desist Order dated June 17, 2015Terminated June 7, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: JP Morgan Chase & Co., New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated July 6, 2011Terminated June 16, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Thursday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, St. Louis, and Minneapolis, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 1-1/2 percent to 1-3/4 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that it had approved an extended transition period of up to five years for Deutsche Bank AG, SVB Financial Group, and UBS Group AG to conform investments in certain "illiquid funds" to the requirements of section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, commonly known as the Volcker rule. Section 619 generally prohibits banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading and from acquiring or retaining ownership interests in, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with a hedge fund or private equity fund. These prohibitions are subject to a number of statutory exemptions and restrictions. The Dodd-Frank Act permits the Board, upon an application by a banking entity, to provide up to an additional five years to conform investments in a narrow class of certain legacy illiquid funds where the banking entity had a contractual commitment to invest in the fund that was in effect on May 1, 2010. In December 2016, the Board published guidelines describing how firms should seek an extension. This extended transition period for certain legacy illiquid funds is the last conformance period extension that the Board is authorized under the statute to provide banking entities. Today's action relates only to the conformance period for illiquid funds. Attached are the Board's orders related to these actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday permanently barred Richard Henderson and Philip Cooper, former employees of Regions Bank, from the banking industry after both pled guilty to conspiracy to commit money laundering, and conspiracy to commit bank bribery and wire fraud affecting a financial institution. Henderson and Cooper held senior positions at Regions Equipment Finance Corporation (REFCO), a Regions' subsidiary. In their plea agreements, Henderson and Cooper admitted that they conspired to defraud Regions and REFCO by directing REFCO to purchase insurance from a shell company that paid kickbacks to Henderson and Cooper. Henderson and Cooper attempted to conceal those kickbacks by establishing additional shell companies to receive their kickbacks. The Board previously barred Henderson and Cooper from the banking industry in December 2016 for the duration of their criminal proceedings. Henderson and Cooper consented to Wednesday's action, which is permanent, as part of their plea agreements. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released its annual determination of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of financial companies as required by section 622 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The act prohibits a financial company from combining with another company if the resulting company's liabilities would exceed 10 percent of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of all financial companies. As of July 1, 2017, aggregate consolidated liabilities equal $21,010,053,985,500. This number, which is the average of the year-end financial sector liabilities of the preceding two years, will be the measure of aggregate consolidated liabilities for purposes of section 622 of the Dodd-Frank Act from July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018. Financial companies subject to the limit include insured depository institutions, bank holding companies, savings and loan holding companies, foreign banking organizations, companies that control insured depository institutions, and nonbank financial companies designated for Board supervision by the Financial Stability Oversight Council. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The nation's largest bank holding companies have strong capital levels and retain their ability to lend to households and businesses during a severe recession, according to the results of supervisory stress tests released Thursday by the Federal Reserve Board. The most severe hypothetical scenario projects $383 billion in loan losses at the 34 participating bank holding companies during the nine quarters tested. The "severely adverse" scenario features a severe global recession with the U.S. unemployment rate rising by approximately 5.25 percentage points to 10 percent, accompanied by heightened stress in corporate loan markets and commercial real estate. The firms' aggregate common equity tier 1 capital ratio, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, would fall from an actual 12.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2016 to a minimum level of 9.2 percent in the hypothetical stress scenario. Since 2009, the 34 firms have added more than $750 billion in common equity capital. "This year's results show that, even during a severe recession, our large banks would remain well capitalized," Governor Jerome H. Powell said. "This would allow them to lend throughout the economic cycle, and support households and businesses when times are tough." Capital is critical to banking organizations, the financial system, and the economy because it acts as a cushion to absorb losses and helps to ensure that losses are borne by shareholders. The Board's stress scenarios assume deliberately stringent and conservative hypothetical economic and financial market conditions. The results are not forecasts or expected outcomes. This is the seventh round of stress tests led by the Federal Reserve since 2009 and the fifth round required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The 34 bank holding companies tested--generally those with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets--represent more than 75 percent of the assets of all domestic bank holding companies. The Federal Reserve uses its own independent projections of losses and incomes for each firm. In addition to releasing results under the severely adverse hypothetical scenario, the Board on Thursday also released results from the "adverse" scenario, which features a moderate recession in the United States. In this scenario, the aggregate common equity capital ratio of the 34 firms fell from an actual 12.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2016 to a minimum level of 10.7 percent. The Dodd-Frank Act stress tests are one component of the Federal Reserve's analysis during the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which is an annual exercise to evaluate the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of large bank holding companies. CCAR results will be released on Wednesday, June 28, at 4:30 p.m. EDT. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board will publish the July 2017Monetary Policy Report to the Congressat 11 a.m. EDT on July 7, in order to allow members of Congress and the public time to review the report in advance of Chair Yellen's scheduled testimony on July 12. Chair Yellen's opening statement will be released at 8:30 a.m. EDT on July 12. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in May indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising moderately so far this year. Job gains have moderated but have been solid, on average, since the beginning of the year, and the unemployment rate has declined. Household spending has picked up in recent months, and business fixed investment has continued to expand. On a 12-month basis, inflation has declined recently and, like the measure excluding food and energy prices, is running somewhat below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, and labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further. Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent in the near term but to stabilize around the Committee's 2 percent objective over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but the Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1 to 1-1/4 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee currently expects to begin implementing a balance sheet normalization program this year, provided that the economy evolves broadly as anticipated. This program, which would gradually reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings by decreasing reinvestment of principal payments from those securities, is described in the accompanying addendum to the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Charles L. Evans; Stanley Fischer; Patrick Harker; Robert S. Kaplan; and Jerome H. Powell. Voting against the action was Neel Kashkari, who preferred at this meeting to maintain the existing target range for the federal funds rate. Implementation Note issued June 14, 2017
Consumers wrote nearly two-thirds fewer checks per household in 2015 than in 2000, while total noncash payments per household, which includes not only checks but also card payments and electronic transfers via the automated clearinghouse (ACH) system, expanded almost 95 percent, according to additional results released today from the2016 Federal Reserve Payments Study. The number of checks written per household fell from 19.3 per month in 2000 to 7.1 in 2015, while total noncash payments increased from 40.3 to 78.6 per month, reflecting fundamental shifts in consumer behavior such as changes in shopping, purchasing, and bill payment habits. At the same time, businesses also increasingly replaced check payments with other noncash payments. The information supplements initial results released last December. The report also contains data on major trends in payment card, ACH, and check payments, as well as alternative payment initiation methods and services, from 2012 to 2015. Highlights include: Numerical estimates of the number and value of noncash payments from the 2016 study are available in a downloadable data table format to facilitate customized review and analysis. Both the report and data tables may be found at:https://www.frbservices.org/communications/payment_system_research.html. The 2016 study also collected updated information on payments identified as fraudulent, allowing for the first time estimates of trends in payments fraud by type of payment. Additional detail on the characteristics of fraud was collected from card networks and depository institutions and that information is targeted for release in the third quarter of 2017. Updated data table information will also be published at that time. The Federal Reserve is now collecting information on the number and value of noncash payments made during 2016 as part of a smaller and more targeted data collection effort intended to allow for annual updates to estimates and trends in noncash payments between the major studies, which are published every three years. The annual supplement is expected to be released in the fourth quarter of 2017. The estimates reported today are based on information gathered in three separate data collections comprising the 2016 study: The Federal Reserve partnered with McKinsey & Company on the DFIPS and CSS, and with Blueflame Consulting, of Melrose, Massachusetts, on the NPIPS. The information collected in each survey is combined with information about payments trends from previous studies and then analyzed to produce comprehensive estimates not available in other studies. Media Contacts 2016 Federal Reserve Payments Study
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced it has completed its review of the capital planning practices of the nation's largest banks and did not object to the capital plans of all 34 bank holding companies participating in the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). However, the Board is requiring one firm to address weaknesses in its capital planning process and resubmit its capital plan by the end of 2017. CCAR, in its seventh year, evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest U.S.-based bank holding companies, including the firms' planned capital actions such as dividend payments and share buybacks. Strong capital levels act as a cushion to absorb losses and help ensure that banking organizations have the ability to lend to households and businesses even in times of stress. "I'm pleased that the CCAR process has motivated all of the largest banks to achieve healthy capital levels and most to substantially improve their capital planning processes," said Governor Jerome H. Powell. When considering a firm's capital plan, the Federal Reserve considers both quantitative and qualitative factors. Quantitative factors include a firm's projected capital ratios under a hypothetical scenario of severe economic and financial market stress. Qualitative factors include the strength of the firm's capital planning process, which incorporate risk management, internal controls, and governance practices that support the process. This year, 13 of the largest and most complex banks were subject to both the quantitative and qualitative assessments. The 21 other firms in CCAR were subject only to the quantitative assessment. The Federal Reserve may object to a capital plan based on quantitative or qualitative concerns, and if it does, a firm may not make any capital distribution unless authorized by the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve did not object to the capital plans of Ally Financial, Inc.; American Express Company; BancWest Corporation; Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; BB&T Corporation; BBVA Compass Bancshares, Inc.; BMO Financial Corp.; CIT Group Inc.; Citigroup, Inc.; Citizens Financial Group; Comerica Incorporated; Deutsche Bank Trust Corporation; Discover Financial Services; Fifth Third Bancorp; Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; HSBC North America Holdings, Inc.; Huntington Bancshares, Inc.; JP Morgan Chase & Co.; Keycorp; M&T Bank Corporation; Morgan Stanley; MUFG Americas Holdings Corporation; Northern Trust Corp.; The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.; Regions Financial Corporation; Santander Holdings USA, Inc.; State Street Corporation; SunTrust Banks, Inc.; TD Group US Holdings LLC; U.S. Bancorp; Wells Fargo & Company; and Zions Bancorporation. The Federal Reserve did not object to the capital plan of Capital One Financial Corporation, but is requiring the firm to submit a new capital plan within six months that addresses identified weaknesses in its capital planning process. U.S. firms have substantially increased their capital since the first round of stress tests led by the Federal Reserve in 2009. The common equity capital ratio--which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets--of the 34 bank holding companies in the 2017 CCAR has more than doubled from 5.5 percent in the first quarter of 2009 to 12.5 percent in the first quarter of 2017. This reflects an increase of more than $750 billion in common equity capital to a total of $1.25 trillion during the same period. Attachment (PDF) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans All participants agreed to augment the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans by providing the following additional details regarding the approach the FOMC intends to use to reduce the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury and agency securities once normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way.1 The Committee intends to gradually reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings by decreasing its reinvestment of the principal payments it receives from securities held in the System Open Market Account. Specifically, such payments will be reinvested only to the extent that they exceed gradually rising caps. For payments of principal that the Federal Reserve receives from maturing Treasury securities, the Committee anticipates that the cap will be $6 billion per month initially and will increase in steps of $6 billion at three-month intervals over 12 months until it reaches $30 billion per month. For payments of principal that the Federal Reserve receives from its holdings of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, the Committee anticipates that the cap will be $4 billion per month initially and will increase in steps of $4 billion at three-month intervals over 12 months until it reaches $20 billion per month. The Committee also anticipates that the caps will remain in place once they reach their respective maximums so that the Federal Reserve's securities holdings will continue to decline in a gradual and predictable manner until the Committee judges that the Federal Reserve is holding no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. Gradually reducing the Federal Reserve's securities holdings will result in a declining supply of reserve balances. The Committee currently anticipates reducing the quantity of reserve balances, over time, to a level appreciably below that seen in recent years but larger than before the financial crisis; the level will reflect the banking system's demand for reserve balances and the Committee's decisions about how to implement monetary policy most efficiently and effectively in the future. The Committee expects to learn more about the underlying demand for reserves during the process of balance sheet normalization. The Committee affirms that changing the target range for the federal funds rate is its primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. However, the Committee would be prepared to resume reinvestment of principal payments received on securities held by the Federal Reserve if a material deterioration in the economic outlook were to warrant a sizable reduction in the Committee's target for the federal funds rate. Moreover, the Committee would be prepared to use its full range of tools, including altering the size and composition of its balance sheet, if future economic conditions were to warrant a more accommodative monetary policy than can be achieved solely by reducing the federal funds rate. 1.The Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans were adopted on September 16, 2014, and are available atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.pdf. On March 18, 2015, the Committee adopted an addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, which is available atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20150318.pdf.Return to text
Federal Reserve System Payments Strategy Director Gordon Werkema announced today that he will retire in September. As payments strategy director, Werkema has led the ongoing initiative to ensure that consumers and businesses have access to an efficient, real time, and secure payments network in the United States. Werkema was instrumental in the development of the Federal Reserve's 2015 "Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System," a plan to support five specific strategies in which the Federal Reserve and various private sector businesses, financial services providers, consumer groups, and government agencies would collaborate to make improvements to the national payment system. "We want to express our gratitude to Gordon for taking on this key leadership role for the Federal Reserve System and the U.S. payments industry," said Esther George, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and sponsor of the payments improvement initiative. "His work has been central to the success of these efforts to date, including the important accomplishments of the Faster Payments Task Force and the Secure Payments Task Force." Before assuming his current role in 2015, Werkema was first vice president and chief operating officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, a position he held for nearly 15 years. As first vice president, Werkema supervised all Bank operations and served as the product director of the System's National Customer Relations and Support Office. As product director, he oversaw a technological modernization of the Federal Reserve's payments network. Prior to accepting the Chicago Fed role, Werkema spent 20 years in the San Francisco District, where he ultimately served as executive vice president. Werkema holds a master's degree from Johns Hopkins University. "During his 35-year career with the Fed, Gordon has made many extraordinary contributions to both the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and to the System as a whole," said Charles Evans, president and chief executive officer of the Chicago Fed. "He has played a key role in modernizing the Federal Reserve's national payments services, strengthening stakeholder relationships, and developing a generation of Fed leaders. Gordon will be missed, but his legacy of excellence will continue long after he retires." Werkema said he has taken great pride in having dedicated a major part of his career to public service and the important work of the Federal Reserve. "The Fed is an organization with extraordinary integrity and it's been an honor to work with so many talented and committed people. I am convinced that the Fed and the payments industry have brought the right leaders to the table and will continue to do so to support improvements to our national payment system that will bring significant benefits to consumers and businesses now and well into the future," Werkema said.
Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the DNB-Riksbank Macroprudential Conference Series, Amsterdam, Netherlands It is often said that real estate is at the center of almost every financial crisis. That is not quite accurate, for financial crises can, and do, occur without a real estate crisis. But it is true that there is a strong link between financial crises and difficulties in the real estate sector.1In their research about financial crises, Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff document that the six major historical episodes of banking crises in advanced economies since the 1970s were all associated with a housing bust.2Plus, the drop in house prices in a bust is often bigger following credit-fueled housing booms, and recessions associated with housing busts are two to three times more severe than other recessions.3And, perhaps most significantly, real estate was at the center of the most recent crisis. In addition to its role in financial stability, or instability, housing is also a sector that draws on and faces heavy government intervention, even in economies that generally rely on market mechanisms. Coming out of the financial crisis, many jurisdictions are undergoing housing finance reforms, and enacting policies to prevent the next crisis. Today I would like to focus on where we now stand on the role of housing and real estate in financial crises, and what we should be doing about that situation. We shall discuss primarily the situation in the United States, and to a much lesser extent, that in other countries. Housing and GovernmentWhy are governments involved in housing markets? Housing is a basic human need, and politically important‑‑and rightly so. Using a once-popular term, housing is amerit good‑‑it can be produced by the private sector, but its benefit to society is deemed by many great enough that governments strive to make it widely available.4As such, over the course of time, governments have supported homebuilding and in most countries have also encouraged homeownership.5 Governments are involved in housing in a myriad of ways. One way is through incentives for homeownership. In many countries, including the United States, taxpayers can deduct interest paid on home mortgages, and various initiatives by state and local authorities support lower-income homebuyers. France and Germany created government-subsidized home-purchase savings accounts. And Canada allows early withdrawal from government-provided retirement pension funds for home purchases.6 And‑‑as we all know‑‑governments are also involved in housing finance. They guarantee credit to consumers through housing agencies such as the U.S. Federal Housing Administration or the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation.7The Canadian government also guarantees mortgages on banks' books. And at various points in time, jurisdictions have explicitly or implicitly backstopped various intermediaries critical to the mortgage market. Government intervention in the United States has also addressed the problem of the fundamental illiquidity of mortgages. Going back 100 years, before the Great Depression, the U.S. mortgage system relied on small institutions with local deposit bases and lending markets. In the face of widespread runs at the start of the Great Depression, banks holding large portfolios of illiquid home loans had to close, exacerbating the contraction. In response, the Congress established housing agencies as part of the New Deal to facilitate housing market liquidity by providing a way for banks to mutually insure and sell mortgages.8 In time, the housing agencies, augmented by post-World War II efforts to increase homeownership, grew and became the familiar government-sponsored enterprises, or GSEs: Fannie, Freddie, and the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs). The GSEs bought mortgages from both bank and nonbank mortgage originators, and in turn, the GSEs bundled these loans and securitized them; these mortgage-backed securities were then sold to investors. The resulting deep securitized market supported mortgage liquidity and led to broader homeownership.9 Costs of Mortgage CreditWhile the benefits to society from homeownership could suggest a case for government involvement in securitization and other measures to expand mortgage credit availability, these benefits are not without costs. A rapid increase in mortgage credit, especially when it is accompanied by a rise in house prices, can threaten the resilience of the financial system. One particularly problematic policy is government guarantees of mortgage-related assets. Pre-crisis, U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were viewed by investors as having an implicit government guarantee, despite the GSEs' representations to the contrary. Because of the perceived guarantee, investors did not fully internalize the consequence of defaults, and so risk was mispriced in the agency MBS market. This mispricing can be notable, and is attributable not only to the improved liquidity, but also to implicit government guarantees.10Taken together, the government guarantee and resulting lower mortgage rates likely boosted both mortgage credit extended and the rise in house prices in the run-up to the crisis. Another factor boosting credit availability and house price appreciation before the crisis was extensive securitization.11In the United States, securitization through both public and private entities weakened the housing finance system by contributing to lax lending standards, rendering the mid-2000 house price bust more severe.12Although the causes are somewhat obscure, it does seem that securitization weakened the link between the mortgage loan and the lender, resulting in risks that were not sufficiently calculated or internalized by institutions along the intermediation chain. For example, even without government involvement, in Spain, securitization grew rapidly in the early 2000s and accounted for about 45 percent of mortgage loans in 2007.13Observers suggest that Spain's broad securitization practices led to lax lending standards and financial instability.14 Yet, as the Irish experience suggests, housing finance systems are vulnerable even if they do not rely on securitization. Although securitization in Ireland amounted to only about 10 percent of outstanding mortgages in 2007, lax lending standards and light regulatory oversight contributed to the housing boom and bust in Ireland.15 Macroprudential PoliciesTo summarize, murky government guarantees, lax lending terms, and securitization were some of the key factors that made the housing crisis so severe. Since then, to damp the house price-credit cycle that can lead to a housing crisis, countries worldwide have worked to create or expand existing macroprudential policies that would, in principle, limit credit growth and the rate of house price appreciation.16 Most macroprudential policiesfocus on borrowers. Loan-to-value (LTV) and debt-to-income (DTI) ratio limits aim to prevent borrowers from taking on excessive debt. The limits can also be adjusted in response to conditions in housing markets; for example, the Financial Policy Committee of the Bank of England has the authority to tighten LTV or DTI limits when threats to financial stability emerge from the U.K. housing market. Stricter LTV or DTI limits find some measure of success. One study conducted across 119 countries from 2000 to 2013 suggests that lower LTV limits lead to slower credit growth.17In addition, evidence from a range of studies suggests that decreases in the LTV ratio lead to a slowing of the rate of house price appreciation.18However, some other research suggests that the effectiveness of LTV limits is not significant or somewhat temporary.19 Other macroprudential policiesfocus on lenders. First and foremost, tightening bank capital regulation enhances loss-absorbing capacity, strengthening financial system resilience. In addition, bank capital requirements for mortgages that increase when house prices rise may be used to lean against mortgage credit growth and house price appreciation.20These policies are intended to make bank mortgage lending more expensive, leading borrowers to reduce their demand for credit, which tends to push house prices down. Estimates of the effects of such changes vary widely: After consideration of a range of estimates from the literature, an increase of 50 percentage points in the risk weights on mortgages would result in a house price decrease from as low as 0.6 percent to as high as 4.0 percent.21These policies are more effective if borrowers are fairly sensitive to a rise in interest rates and if migration of intermediation outside the banking sector to nonbanks is limited. Of course, regulatory reforms and in some countries, macroprudential policies‑‑are still being implemented, and analysis is currently under way to monitor the effects. So far, research suggests that macroprudential tightening is associated with slower bank credit growth, slower housing credit growth, and less house price appreciation. Borrower, lender, and securitization-focused macroprudential policies are likely all useful in strengthening financial stability. Loan Modification in a CrisisEven though macroprudential policies reduce the incidence and severity of housing related crises, they may still occur. When house prices drop, households with mortgages may find themselves underwater, with the amount of their loan in excess of their home's current price. As Atif Mian and Amir Sufi have pointed out, this deterioration in household balance sheets can lead to a substantial drop in consumption and employment.22Extensive mortgage foreclosures--that is, undertaking the legal process to evict borrowers and repossess the house and then selling the house--as a response to household distress can exacerbate the downturn by imposing substantial dead-weight costs and, as properties are sold, causing house prices to fall further.23 Modifying loans rather than foreclosing on them, including measures such as reducing the principal balance of a loan or changing the loan terms, can allow borrowers to stay in their homes. In addition, it can substantially reduce the dead-weight costs of foreclosure. Yet in some countries, institutional or legal frictions impeded desired mortgage modifications during the recent crisis. And in many cases, governments stepped in to solve the problem. For example, U.S. mortgage loans that had been securitized into private-label MBS relied on the servicers of the loans to perform the modification. However, operational and legal procedures for servicers to do so were limited, and, as a result, foreclosure, rather than modification, was commonly used in the early stages of the crisis. In 2008, new U.S. government policies were introduced to address the lack of modifications. These policies helped in three ways. First, they standardized protocols for modification, which provided servicers of private-label securities some sense of common practice. Second, they provided financial incentives to servicers for modifying loans. Third, they established key criteria for judging whether modifications were sustainable or not, particularly limits on mortgage payments as a percentage of household income. This last policy was to ensure that borrowers could actually repay the modified loans, which prompted lenders to agree more readily to the modification policies in the first place. Ireland and Spain also aimed to restructure nonperforming loans. Again, government involvement was necessary to push these initiatives forward. In Ireland, mortgage arrears continued to accumulate until the introduction of the Mortgage Arrears Resolution Targets scheme in 2013, and in Spain, about 10 percent of mortgages were restructured by 2014, following government initiatives to protect vulnerable households.24Public initiatives promoting socially desirable mortgage modifications in times of crises tend to be accompanied by explicit public fund support even though government guarantees may be absent in normal times. What Has Been Done? What Needs to Be Done?With the recent crisis fresh in mind, a number of countries have taken steps to strengthen the resilience of their housing finance systems. Many of the most egregious practices that emerged during the lending boom in the United States‑‑such as no- or low-documentation loans or negatively amortizing mortgages‑‑have been severely limited. Other jurisdictions are taking actions as well. Canadian authorities withdrew government insurance backing on non-amortizing lines of credit secured by homes. The United States and the European Union required issuers of securities to retain some of the credit risk in them to better align incentives among participants (although in the United States, MBS issued by Fannie and Freddie are currently exempt from this requirement). And post-crisis, many countries are more actively pursuing macroprudential policies, particularly those targeted at the housing sector.25New Zealand, Norway, and Denmark instituted tighter LTV limits or guidelines for areas that had overheating housing markets. Globally, the introduction of new capital and liquidity regulations has increased the resilience of the banking system. But memories fade. Fannie, Freddie, and the Federal Housing Administration are now the dominant providers of mortgage funding, and the FHLBs have expanded their balance sheets notably. House prices are now high and rising in several countries, perhaps as a result of extended periods of low interest rates. What should be done as we move ahead? First, macroprudential policies can help reduce the incidence and severity of housing crises. While some policies focus on the cost of mortgage credit, others attempt directly to restrict households' ability to borrow. Each policy has its own merits and working out their respective advantages is important. Second, government involvement can promote the social benefits of homeownership, but those benefits come at a cost, both directly, for example through the beneficial tax treatment of homeownership, and indirectly through government assumption of risk. To that extent, government support, where present, should be explicit rather than implicit, and the costs should be balanced against the benefits, including greater liquidity in housing finance engendered through a uniform, guaranteed instrument. Third, a capital regime that takes the possibility of severe stress seriously is important to calm markets and restart the normal process of intermediation should a crisis materialize. A well-capitalized banking system is a necessary condition for stability in bank-based financial systems as well as those with large nonbank sectors. This necessity points to the importance of having resilient banking systems and also stress testing the system against scenarios with sharp declines in house prices. Fourth, rules and expectations for mortgage modifications and foreclosure should be clear and workable. Past experience suggests that both lenders and borrowers benefit substantially from avoiding costly foreclosures. Housing-sector reforms should consider polices that promote efficient modifications in systemic crises. In the United States, as around the world, much has been done. The core of the financial system is much stronger, the worst lending practices have been curtailed, much progress has been made in processes to reduce unnecessary foreclosures, and the actions associated with the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 created some improvement over the previous ambiguity surrounding the status of government support for Fannie and Freddie. But there is more to be done, and much improvement to be preserved and built on, for the world as we know it cannot afford another pair of crises of the magnitude of the Great Recession and the Global Financial Crisis. References Aaronson, Daniel (2000). "A Note on the Benefits of Homeownership,"Journal of Urban Economics,vol. 47 (May), pp. 356-69. Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino (2012). "Credit Supply and House Prices: Evidence from Mortgage Market Segmentation," NBER Working Paper Series 17832. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Akinci, Ozge, and Jane Olmstead-Rumsey (forthcoming). "How Effective Are Macroprudential Policies? An Empirical Investigation,"Journal of Financial Intermediation. Andritzky, Jochen R. (2014). "Resolving Residential Mortgage Distress: Time to Modify? (PDF)" IMF Working Paper WP/14/226. Washington: IMF, December. Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler (2013). "Do Strict Capital Requirements Raise the Cost of Capital? Banking Regulation and the Low Risk Anomaly," NBER Working Paper Series 19018. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Campbell, John Y. (2013). "Mortgage Market Design,"Review of Finance, vol. 17 (January), pp. 1-33. Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak (2011). "Forced Sales and House Prices,"American Economic Review, vol. 101 (August), pp. 2108-31. Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (2017). "Loans Administration and Direct Lending," webpage, CMHC. Carbó-Valverde, Santiago, David Marques-Ibanez, and Francisco Rodríguez-Fernández (2012). "Securitization, Risk-Transferring, and Financial Instability: The Case of Spain,"Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 31 (February), pp. 80-101. Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Luc Laeven (2017). "The Use and Effectiveness of Macroprudential Policies: New Evidence,"Journal of Financial Stability, vol. 28 (February), pp. 203-24. Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose, and Marco E. Terrones (2009). "What Happens during Recessions, Crunches, and Busts?"Economic Policy,vol. 24 (October), pp. 653-700. Connor, Gregory, Thomas Flavin, and Brian O'Kelly (2012). "The U.S. and Irish Credit Crises: Their Distinctive Differences and Common Features,"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 31 (February), pp. 60-79. Crowe, Christopher, Deniz Igan, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia, and Pau Rabanal (2011). "Policies for Macrofinancial Stability: Options to Deal with Real Estate Booms," IMF Staff Discussion Notes 11/02. Washington: IMF, March 1. DeMarzo, Peter M. (2005). "The Pooling and Tranching of Securities: A Model of Informed Intermediation,"Review of Financial Studies,vol. 18 (Spring), pp. 1-35. DiPasquale, Denise, and Edward L. Glaeser (1999). "Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens?"Journal of Urban Economics,vol. 45 (March), pp. 354-84. Duca, John V., John Muellbauer, and Anthony Murphy (2012). "Credit Standards and the Bubble in U.S. House Prices: New Econometric Evidence (PDF)," inProperty Markets and Financial Stability,BIS Papers 64. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, March, pp. 83-89. Glaeser, Edward L., Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko (2010). "Can Cheap Credit Explain the Housing Boom?" NBER Working Paper Series 16230. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Hanson, Samuel G., Anil K. Kashyap, and Jeremy C. Stein (2011). "A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 3-28. International Monetary Fund (2011). "Housing Finance and Financial Stability--Back to Basics?" inGlobal Financial Stability Report. Washington: IMF, April. -------- (2014). "Israel: Selected Issues (PDF)," IMF Country Report 14/48. Washington: IMF, February. Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig (2010). "Did Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 125 (February), pp. 307-62. Kuttner, Kenneth N., and Ilhyock Shim (2016). "Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies,"Journal of Financial Stability,vol. 26 (October), pp. 31-44. Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010).Assessing the Macroeconomic Impact of the Transition to Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements (PDF)(final report). Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, December. Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi (2013). "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 128 (November), pp. 1687-1726. Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi (2014). "What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?"Econometrica,vol. 82 (November), pp. 2197-2223. Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi (2015). "Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real Economy,"Journal of Finance,vol. 70 (December), pp. 2587-2634. Musgrave, R.A. (1987). "Merit Goods [dictionary entry]," in J. Eatwell, M. Milgate, and P. Newman, eds.,The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, vol. 3. London: Macmillan, pp. 452-53. Nadauld, Taylor D., and Shane M. Sherlund (2013). "The Impact of Securitization on the Expansion of Subprime Credit,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 107 (February), pp. 454-76. Passmore, Wayne, Shane M. Sherlund, and Gillian Burgess (2005). "The Effect of Housing Government-Sponsored Enterprises on Mortgage Rates,"Real Estate Economics,vol. 33 (September), pp. 427-63. Rappoport, David E. (2016). "Do Mortgage Subsidies Help or Hurt Borrowers? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-081. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). "The Aftermath of Financial Crises,"American Economic Review, vol. 99 (May), pp. 466-72. Rohe, William M., and Mark Lindblad (2013). "Reexamining the Social Benefits of Homeownership after the Housing Crisis," working paper. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Joint Center for Housing Studies, August. Sherlund, Shane M. (2008). "The Jumbo-Conforming Spread: A Semiparametric Approach (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-01. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2009). "Housing Finance in the Euro Area (PDF)," Occasional Paper Series 101. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, March. Van den Heuvel, Skander J. (2008). "The Welfare Cost of Bank Capital Requirements,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 55 (March), pp. 298-320. 1. I am grateful to Elizabeth Klee, Andreas Lehnert, Mary Tian, and Alexandros Vardoulakis of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance. Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).Return to text 3. See Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2009). Cerutti, Dagher, and Dell'Arricia (2015) find that the probability of a credit and house price boom being followed within three years by a recession is between 59 and 67 percent, depending on the precise definition of a boom episode.Return to text 4. The concept of a merit good is defined in Musgrave (1987). Research suggests that homeownership is correlated with higher educational attainment (Aaronson 2000), community involvement (DiPasquale and Glaeser, 1999) and lower crime incidence (Rohe and Lindblad, 2013).Return to text 5. An exception to the rule is Germany, where most government policies focus on subsidizing renting, not homeownership. See Campbell (2013).Return to text 6. See the International Monetary Fund's April 2011Global Financial Stability Report,table 3.5, p.126.Return to text 7. See Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (2017).Return to text 8. The National Housing Act of 1934 established the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC).Return to text 9. "Broader" relative to other countries; see IMF (2011).Return to text 10. See Passmore, Sherlund, and Burgess (2005) and Sherlund (2008).Return to text 11. See Nadauld and Sherlund (2013) and DeMarzo (2005).Return to text 12. See Keys and others (2010) and Nadauld and Sherlund (2013).Return to text 13. Out of that 45 percent, 30 percent was "true sale" securitization. See Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2009).Return to text 14. See Carbó-Valverde, Marques-Ibanez, and Rodríguez-Fernández (2012).Return to text 15. See Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2009) and Connor, Flavin, and O'Kelly (2012).Return to text 16. See Akinci and Olmstead-Rumsey (forthcoming).Return to text 17. See Cerutti, Claessens, and Laeven (2017).Return to text 18. See Crowe and others (2011); Duca, Muellbauer, and Murphy (2012); and Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2010).Return to text 19. See Kuttner and Shim (2016) and International Monetary Fund (2014).Return to text 20. For example, in 2016, the Norges Bank used house price appreciation as a criterion for raising its countercyclical capital buffer.Return to text 21. Based on a range of estimates for banks' cost of capital and for the elasticity of house prices with respect to interest rates. See Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010); Baker and Wurgler (2013); Hanson, Kashyap, and Stein (2011); and Van den Heuvel (2008) for a range of estimates for banks' cost of capital. See Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2012); Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2010); and Rappoport (2016) for a range of estimates for the elasticity of house prices with respect to interest rates.Return to text 22. See Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014).Return to text 23. See Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2015) and Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011).Return to text 24. See Andritzky (2014).Return to text 25. See Akinci and Olmstead-Rumsey (forthcoming).Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify at today's hearing on the relationship between regulation and economic growth. We need a resilient, well-capitalized, well-regulated financial system that is strong enough to withstand even severe shocks and support economic growth by lending through the economic cycle. The Federal Reserve has approached the post-crisis regulatory and supervisory reforms with that outcome in mind. As a result of an improving economy and actions taken by both the federal regulators and the industry, the U.S. financial system is substantially stronger and more stable than it was before the financial crisis erupted nearly a decade ago. In this testimony, I will highlight the considerable gains made since the crisis and reflect on the principles that should guide us in the next phase. I will also discuss some specific actions that align with these principles that we have recently taken or expect to take that are designed to reduce regulatory burden without compromising safety and soundness and financial stability. Post-Crisis Regulatory and Supervisory ReformThere is little doubt that the U.S. financial system is stronger today than it was a decade ago. As I will discuss, loss-absorbing capacity among banks is substantially higher. The banking industry, and the largest banking firms in particular, face far less liquidity risk than before the crisis. And progress in resolution planning by the largest firms has reduced the threat that their failure would pose. These efforts have made U.S. banking firms both more robust and more resolvable. And history shows that when U.S. banking firms are financially strong, they are able to better serve their customers. Today I will highlight developments in the four key regulatory areas designed to improve and maintain the resiliency of the banking industry: capital, stress testing, liquidity, and resolution planning. Regulatory capital reformsThe U.S. banking agencies have substantially strengthened regulatory capital requirements for large banking firms, improving the quality and increasing the amount of capital in the banking system. High-quality common equity tier 1 capital (CET1) is important because it is available under all circumstances to absorb losses. Since the financial crisis, U.S. banks have been required to meet new minimum requirements for CET1 to ensure a base of protection against losses. U.S. banks also have been required to meet capital conservation buffers that incentivize banking firms to keep their capital levels well above the minimums in order to maintain full flexibility to allocate profits to shareholders and employees. For the U.S. global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), we have also imposed an additional capital surcharge designed to reduce the threat that a failure of any of these firms would pose to financial stability. Stress testingThe Federal Reserve also conducts the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), a stress test that assesses whether large banking firms have enough capital to withstand severely adverse macroeconomic and financial market stress. We also use this process to assess the quality of the capital planning processes of large banking firms. The U.S. bank holding companies (BHCs) subject to CCAR have more than doubled the dollar amount of their CET1 from around $500 billion in 2009 to $1.2 trillion in the first quarter of 2017, and have more than doubled their CET1 risk-based capital ratios from 5.5 percent to 12.4 percent over that period. Liquidity regulation reformsThe banking agencies have also required large banking firms to substantially reduce their liquidity risk. Our key reforms in this area include a liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) that requires large banking firms to keep enough high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) to meet net stressed cash outflows over a 30-day period. The Federal Reserve has also adopted the Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review (CLAR) supervisory program for evaluating the liquidity of the most systemic banking firms. In addition, the banking agencies have proposed a net stable funding ratio (NSFR) regulation that would help ensure that large banking firms maintain a stable funding profile over a one-year horizon. Liquidity positions within the U.S. banking system have improved substantially since the financial crisis. The U.S. G-SIBs increased their holdings of HQLA from about $1.5 trillion to about $2.3 trillion between 2011 and the first quarter of 2017. The same institutions have also reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale funding from approximately 35 percent of assets in 2006 to about 15 percent of assets today. Large bank resolvability reformsAs required by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), the Federal Reserve has been working with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to improve resolution planning by banks. Through thoughtful resolution planning, firms can reduce the risk that their failure would have disruptive effects on the financial system and the economy. The resolution planning process has caused the largest U.S. banking firms to substantially improve their internal structures, governance, information collection systems, and allocation of capital and liquidity in ways that both promote resolvability. The Federal Reserve also has helped improve the resolvability of the largest banking firms by requiring U.S. G-SIBs and the U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign G-SIBs to meet long-term debt and total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) requirements. Effect of regulation on U.S. banksEvidence overwhelmingly shows that financial crises can cause severe and lasting damage to the economy's productive capacity and growth potential.1Post-crisis reforms to financial sector regulation and supervision have been designed to significantly reduce the likelihood and severity of future financial crises. We have sought to accomplish this goal in significant part by reducing both the probability of failure of a large banking firm and the consequences of such a failure were it to occur. We have substantially increased the capital, liquidity, and other prudential requirements for large banking firms, and these increases are not free. Stronger capital requirements increase bank costs, and at least some of those costs are passed along to bank customers. But in the longer term, stronger prudential requirements for large banking firms will produce more sustainable credit availability and economic growth. Our objective should be to set capital and other prudential requirements for large banking firms at a level that protects financial stability and maximizes long-term, through-the-cycle credit availability and economic growth. Guiding Principles to Simplify and Reduce Regulatory BurdenAs we near completion of the major post-crisis regulatory reforms, this is a good time to assess the effectiveness and efficiency of these reforms. Several principles are guiding us in this effort. First, we should protect the core elements of the reforms for our largest banking firms in capital regulation, stress testing, liquidity regulation, and resolvability. Second, we should continue to tailor our requirements to the size, risk, and complexity of the firms subject to those requirements. In particular, we should always be aware that community banks face higher costs to meet complex requirements. Third, we should assess whether we can adjust regulation in common-sense ways that will simplify rules and reduce unnecessary regulatory burden without compromising safety and soundness. And finally, we should strive to provide appropriate transparency to supervised firms and the public regarding our expectations. Areas of Focus for Recalibration and SimplificationSmall and medium bank regulatory simplificationOver the course of the last year, the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies finalized significant burden-reducing measures for smaller banks. The banking agencies significantly streamlined Call Report requirements for banks with less than $1 billion in total assets. This streamlined Call Report resulted in 24 fewer pages than the previous total of 85, and reduced data items required to be reported by small banks by 40 percent. The banking agencies alsoincreased the number of institutions eligible for 18-month, rather than 12-month, cycles for safety and soundness and Bank Secrecy Act exams. And the Federal Reserve implemented a desirable statutory change to raise the threshold of its Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement from $500 million to $1 billion in assets. In addition, earlier this year, the U.S. banking agencies issued a report under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) that outlined additional measures that the agencies committed to completing to reduce regulatory burden. Perhaps most notably, the agencies committed to developing a proposal to simplify the generally applicable capital framework that applies to community banking organizations. Among other things, this proposal is being designed to simplify the current regulatory capital treatment of commercial real estate exposures, mortgage-servicing assets, and deferred tax assets. The agencies would seek industry comment on the proposal through the normal notice and comment process. The agencies also expect to further reduce burden on small banks by additional streamlining of Call Reports. The Federal Reserve has also supported increases in various statutory thresholds in the Dodd-Frank Act to more narrowly focus financial stability reforms on larger banking firms. For example, we believe that small banking organizations could be exempted from the Volcker rule and from the incentive compensation requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act. We also would support an increase in the $10 billion Dodd-Frank Act asset threshold for company-run stress tests and risk committee requirements, and in the $50 billion threshold for enhanced prudential standards under section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act. Resolution plansThe U.S. G-SIBs have made substantial progress in improving their resolvability and have taken concrete steps to implement important organizational, governance, and operational measures developed in the course of their resolution planning exercises. These firms will be filing new plans on July 1 that should incorporate agency feedback and guidance. The Federal Reserve and FDIC will engage in a full review of these plans. We are exploring with the FDIC ways to improve the resolution planning process. We believe it is worthwhile to consider extending the cycle for living will submissions from annual to once every two years, and focusing every other of these filings on key topics of interest and material changes from the prior full plan submission. In addition, there may be opportunities to greatly reduce the submission requirements for a large number of firms due to their relatively small, simple, and domestically focused activities. Such an approach could limit full plan filing requirements to firms that are large, complex, or have systemically critical operations. Volcker ruleThe Federal Reserve is reassessing whether the Volcker rule implementing regulation most efficiently achieves its policy objectives, and we look forward to working with the other four Volcker rule agencies to find ways to improve the regulation. In our view, there is room for eliminating or relaxing aspects of the implementing regulation that do not directly bear on the Volcker rule's main policy goals. We also believe it would be constructive for Congress to consider focusing the Volcker rule on entities with significant trading books and eliminating the requirement that smaller firms be subject to the rule. In the meantime, we believe that it is worthwhile for the agencies to consider further tailoring of the implementing rule as it applies to smaller firms and firms with small trading books, and to consider ways to streamline or reduce the paperwork and reporting burden associated with the rule. Enhancements to stress testing and CCARThe Federal Reserve is committed to increasing the transparency of the stress testing and CCAR processes. We will soon seek public feedback concerning possible forms of enhanced disclosure. One such disclosure would be a range of indicative loss rates predicted by the Federal Reserve's models for various loan and securities portfolios. We would also disclose more information about risk characteristics that contribute to the loss-estimate ranges. When we release CCAR results next week, we will disclose more detailed information on CCAR's qualitative assessment. We will also publish a document later this year summarizing the performance of the industry on qualitative matters. Many of our largest banking firms have made substantial progress toward meeting supervisory expectations for capital planning. If that progress continues, I believe it will be appropriate to consider removing the qualitative objection from CCAR for those firms that achieve and sustain high-quality capital planning capabilities. We would continue to assess the capital planning practices of these firms as part of our ongoing supervisory processes. I would also see it as appropriate to adjust CCAR's assumptions regarding the balance sheet and capital distributions. These adjustments would take place in conjunction with the integration of the stress test into a firm's regulatory capital requirements. Leverage ratioIn light of the substantial progress in the build-out of our overall regulatory capital and stress testing frameworks over the past few years, the Federal Reserve is taking a fresh look at the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio. We believe that the leverage ratio is an important backstop to the risk-based capital framework, but that it is important to get the relative calibrations of the leverage ratio and the risk-based capital requirements right. Doing so is critical to mitigating any perverse incentives and preventing distortions in money markets and other safe asset markets. Changes along these lines also could address concerns of custody banks that their business model is disproportionately affected by the leverage ratio. ConclusionU.S. banks today are as strong as any in the world, as shown by their solid profitability and healthy lending over recent years. As we consider the progress that has been achieved in improving the resiliency and resolvability of our banking industry, it is important for us to look for ways to reduce unnecessary burden. We must also be vigilant against new risks that may develop. In all of our efforts, our goal is to establish a regulatory framework that helps ensure the resiliency of our financial system, the availability of credit, economic growth, and financial market efficiency. We look forward to working with our fellow regulatory agencies and with Congress to achieve these important goals. 1.See, for example, Robert F. Martin, Teyanna Munyan, and Beth Anne Wilson (2014), "Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves?" IFDP Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 12); and Olivier Blanchard, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015), "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/230 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, November).Return to text
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Salzburg Global Seminar, Salzburg, Austria I appreciate the opportunity to speak at the Salzburg Global Seminar. Today I will discuss our current regulatory regime, and areas where we may be able to make adjustments. As always, the views I express here are my own.1 We need a resilient, well-capitalized, well-regulated financial system that is strong enough to withstand even severe shocks and support economic growth by lending through the economic cycle. The Federal Reserve has approached the post-crisis regulatory and supervisory reforms with that outcome in mind. There is little doubt that the U.S. financial system is stronger today than it was a decade ago. Loss-absorbing capacity among banks is substantially higher as a result of both regulatory requirements and stress testing exercises. The banking industry, and the largest banking firms in particular, face far less liquidity risk than before the crisis. And progress in resolution planning by the largest firms has reduced the threat that their failure would pose. These efforts have made U.S. banking firms both more robust and more resolvable. Evidence overwhelmingly shows that financial crises can cause severe and lasting damage to the economy's productive capacity and growth potential. Post-crisis reforms to financial sector regulation and supervision have been designed to significantly reduce the likelihood and severity of future financial crises. We have sought to accomplish this goal in significant part by reducing both the probability of failure of a large banking firm and the consequences of such a failure were it to occur. As I mentioned, we have substantially increased the capital, liquidity, and other prudential requirements for large banking firms. These measures are not free. Higher capital requirements increase bank costs, and at least some of those costs will be passed along to bank customers and shareholders. But in the longer term, stronger prudential requirements for large banking firms will produce more sustainable credit availability and economic growth. Our objective should be to set capital and other prudential requirements for large banking firms at a level that protects financial stability and maximizes long-term, through-the-cycle credit availability and economic growth. To accomplish that goal, it is essential that we protect the core elements of these reforms for our most systemic firms in capital and liquidity, stress testing and resolution. With that in mind, I will highlight five key areas of focus for regulatory reform. The first is simplification and recalibation of regulation of small and medium-sized banks. We are working to build on the relief we have provided in the areas of call reports and exam cycles, by developing a proposal to simplify the generally applicable capital framework that applies to community banking organizations. The second area is resolution plans. The Fed and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation believe that it is worthwhile to consider extending the cycle for living will submissions from annual to once every two years, and focusing every other of these filings on key topics of interest and material changes from the prior full plan submission. We are also considering other changes, as I discussed last week when testifying to Congress. Third, the Federal Reserve is reassessing whether the Volcker rule implementing regulation most efficiently achieves its policy objectives, and we look forward to working with the other four Volcker rule agencies to find ways to improve that regulation. In our view, there is room for eliminating or relaxing aspects of the implementing regulation in ways that do not undermine the Volcker rule's main policy goals. Fourth, we will continue to enhance the transparency of stress testing and the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). We will soon seek public feedback concerning possible forms of enhanced disclosure, including a range of indicative loss rates predicted by the Federal Reserve's models for various loan and securities portfolios, and information about risk characteristics that contribute to the loss-estimate ranges. We will also provide more detail on the qualitative aspects of stress testing in next week's CCAR disclosure. Finally, the Federal Reserve is taking a fresh look at the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio. We believe that the leverage ratio is an important backstop to the risk-based capital framework, but that it is important to get the relative calibrations of the leverage ratio and the risk-based capital requirements right. U.S. banks today are as strong as any in the world. As we consider the progress that has been achieved in improving the resiliency and resolvability of our banking industry, it is important for us to look for ways to reduce unnecessary burden. We must also be vigilant against new risks that may develop. In all of our efforts, our goal is to establish a regulatory framework that helps ensure the resiliency of our financial system, the availability of credit, economic growth, and financial market efficiency. We look forward to working with our fellow regulatory agencies and with Congress to achieve these important goals. And finally, I would also like to note that work continues to address the risks identified with existing reference rates. Just last week, the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) selected a new rate suitable for use with new derivative contracts. I am confident the broad Treasuries repo rate, which the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has proposed publishing in cooperation with the Office of Financial Research, is based on a deep and actively traded market and will be highly robust. With this choice, the ARRC has taken another step in addressing the risks involved with the LIBOR. 1. These remarks are substantially similar to the testimony delivered at the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, & Urban Affairs hearing titled "Fostering Economic Growth: Regulator Perspective" on June 22, 2017.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the appointment of Ricardo A. Aguilera as director of the Division of Financial Management and chief financial officer, effective June 26. The Division of Financial Management supports the Board's financial decisionmaking and strategic planning. Mr. Aguilera succeeds Bill Mitchell, who retired in April after 24 years of Board service. Mr. Aguilera served as assistant secretary of the Air Force for financial management and comptroller until January 2017. In this role, he was the principal adviser to the secretary and chief of staff of the Air Force on all financial matters. From 2010 until his Air Force appointment in 2016, he was director of the Chief Financial Officer Academy at the National Defense University. Upon the conclusion of his appointment to the Air Force, Mr. Aguilera returned to the university. From 2006 to 2010, Mr. Aguilera held executive positions at the U.S. Department of Defense as the special assistant to the deputy comptroller for program and budget and as associate director for contingencies and international affairs. Earlier in his career, he served at the Office of Management and Budget and the U.S. Government Accountability Office. Mr. Aguilera received a master's degree in national security from George Washington University and a bachelor's degree in journalism/political science from New York University. He is certified in defense financial management. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York Thank you for the opportunity to speak here at the Economic Club of New York. Today I will discuss the ongoing progress of our economy and the prospects for returning both the federal funds rate and the size of the Fed's balance sheet to more normal levels. As always, the views I express here are mine and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Economic DevelopmentsThe Federal Reserve is committed to fulfilling our statutory mandate of stable prices and maximum employment. To begin with the labor market, many indicators suggest that the economy is close to full employment. In April, the unemployment rate was 4.4 percent, a level not reached since May 2007 and below most current estimates of the natural rate of unemployment (figure 1).1Estimates of the natural rate are inherently uncertain, but other labor market measures are also near their pre-crisis levels, including a broader measure of labor market underutilization that includes those who would like to work but have not recently looked for a job and those working part time who want full-time work.2The labor force participation rate, which had declined sharply after the crisis, has now been roughly stable for 3-1/2 years, which represents an improvement against its estimated downward trend (figure 2). Participation is now close to estimates of its trend level.3 Wage data have gradually moved up, consistent with a tightening labor market. Although average hourly earnings are rising only about 2.5 percent per year, slower than before the crisis, much of that downshift may reflect the slowdown in productivity growth we have experienced. For example, over the past three years, unit labor costs--that is, nominal wages adjusted for increases in productivity--have been generally rising a bit faster than prices.4 Turning to inflation, the FOMC interprets price stability to mean inflation of 2 percent as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE).5This objective is symmetric, so the Committee would be concerned if inflation were to run persistently above or below this target. Inflation has run below 2 percent for most of the period since the financial crisis, reflecting generally soft economic conditions as well as transitory factors such as the earlier declines in energy prices. But over the past two years, inflation has moved gradually closer to our objective. Prices rose 1.6 percent over the 12 months ending in April, compared with only 0.2 percent two years earlier (figure 3). But much of that movement reflects price changes in the often-volatile energy and food components of the index. Core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, has proven historically to be a better indicator of where overall inflation is heading, although it, too, can be affected by transitory factors such as import prices. Core inflation was 1.5 percent for the 12 months through April. This measure has also risen since 2015, although its gradual increase appears to have paused because of weak inflation readings for March and April. Some of the recent weakness can be explained by transitory factors. And there are good reasons to expect that inflation will resume its gradual rise. Incoming spending data have been relatively strong, and the labor market should continue to tighten, exerting some upward pressure on wages and prices. Nonetheless, it is important that the Committee assess incoming inflation data carefully and continue to demonstrate a strong commitment to achieving our symmetric 2 percent objective. Despite strong job gains, very weak productivity gains have led to disappointingly slow economic growth of only about 2 percent over the course of this expansion (figure 4). While monetary policy can contribute to growth by supporting a durable expansion in a context of price stability, it cannot reliably affect the long-run sustainable level of the economy's growth.6The success of monetary policy should be judged by the economy's performance against our statutory mandates of price stability and maximum employment. Today, the economy is as close to our assigned goals as it has been for many years (figure 5). My baseline expectation is that the economy will continue on a path of growth of about 2 percent, strong job creation and tightening labor markets, and inflation moving up toward our 2 percent target. I expect that unemployment will decline a bit further and remain at low levels for some time, which could draw more workers into the workforce, put upward pressure on wages, or cause businesses to invest more as labor costs rise, all of which I would view as desirable outcomes. Risks to the forecast now seem more balanced than they have been for some time. In particular, the global picture has brightened as growth and inflation have broadly moved up for the first time in several years. Here at home, risks seem both moderate and balanced, including the downside risk of lower inflation and the upside risk of labor market overheating. Monetary Policy NormalizationThe healthy state of our economy and favorable outlook suggest that the FOMC should continue the process of normalizing monetary policy. The Committee has been patient in raising rates, and that patience has paid dividends. While the recent performance of the labor market might warrant a faster pace of tightening, inflation has been below target for five years and has moved up only slowly toward 2 percent, which argues for continued patience, especially if that progress slows or stalls. If the economy performs about as expected, I would view it as appropriate to continue to gradually raise rates. I would also see it as appropriate to begin the process of reducing the size of the balance sheet later this year. Of course, both decisions will depend on the performance of the economy. To put this process in context, consider where we have come from. Ten years ago, in the summer of 2007, we were just entering the most painful economic crisis since the Great Depression. The crisis and its aftermath prompted large-scale policy interventions by the Federal Reserve and other authorities to avert the collapse of the financial system and prevent the economy from spiraling into depression. Most of the Federal Reserve's targeted financial measures--such as liquidity facilities to ensure the flow of credit to households and businesses--were withdrawn soon after the crisis as orderly conditions resumed in financial markets. In contrast, the FOMC's easing of monetary policy increased over time as the longer-term economic effects of the crisis gradually became clear. From 2007 through 2013, the FOMC added ever greater support for the economy.7From late 2008, with rates pinned at the zero lower bound, the Committee resorted to unconventional policies to put additional downward pressure on long-term rates, including strong calendar-based forward guidance regarding the likely future path of the federal funds rate, and several rounds of large-scale asset purchases (often referred to as quantitative easing (QE)).8 Both the federal funds rate and the balance sheet are currently set at levels intended to provide significant support to economic activity. Normalization of the stance of monetary policy will return both tools to a more neutral setting over time. That process can be said to have begun in 2014, when the FOMC ended its asset purchases and began active discussions on lifting the federal funds rate from its lower bound.9Our first rate hike came in December 2015, with another in December 2016, and one additional increase so far this year. The normalization process is projected to have several years left to run. In the case of the federal funds rate, the endpoint of that process will occur when our target reaches the long-run neutral rate of interest. Estimates of that rate are subject to significant uncertainty. The median estimate of its level by FOMC participants in March was 3 percent, more than a full percentage point below pre-crisis estimates. This decline in the long-run neutral rate, and an even larger decline in the short-run neutral rate, imply that even the very low rates of recent years may be providing less support to the economy than may appear. At present, the median FOMC participant estimates that we will reach a long-run neutral level by year-end 2019 if the economy performs about as expected (figure 6). The Balance SheetIn September 2014, the FOMC outlined its plans for the balance sheet. That initial guidance has been supplemented over time in other FOMC communications, most recently in the minutes of the May meeting. Here is a summary of the key points: Taken together, the Committee's communications present the broad outline of our likely approach to normalizing the balance sheet. Although the process of normalizing the size of the balance sheet will be in the background, that process will interact with the Committee's decisions regarding the federal funds rate. As the Fed's balance sheet shrinks, so debt held by the public will grow, which in theory should tighten financial conditions by putting upward pressure on long-term rates. Any such tightening could affect the Committee's decisions on the federal funds rate. But how big is this effect likely to be? Model-based approaches to that question estimate changes to financial conditions through increases in the term premium as the balance sheet shrinks. These estimates vary but are generally modest.16One reason is that, for several years, the FOMC has signaled its intention to normalize the balance sheet as economic conditions allow, and so some of the effects of normalization should already be priced in. A recent research paper by Federal Reserve staff estimated that unconventional policies are holding down term premiums by about 100 basis points, but that these effects should decline to about 85 basis points by the end of 2017 as market participants see the normalization process approaching.17The same approach suggests that bringing forward the date of the start of the anticipated phasing out of the Federal Reserve's reinvestments from mid-2018 to the end of 2017 should have raised the term premium by only about 5 basis points.18Of course, markets sometimes react quite differently than expected, as the 2013 taper tantrum showed. The market's response to recent changes in expectations for reinvestment policy also suggests that there need not be a major reaction when the Committee begins to phase out reinvestments. Long-term rates did not react strongly to the reinvestment discussions in the minutes for the FOMC's March and May meetings, which led market participants to bring forward their expectations about the starting date for this process by about six months (figure 7).19A recent survey of economists also suggests that they expect that a gradual, well-telegraphed reduction in the Fed's balance sheet should have modest effects.20These results augur well for an orderly phaseout of reinvestments. If changes to reinvestment policy do tighten financial conditions more than anticipated, then I expect that the FOMC would take that into account. The Long-Run FrameworkOver the next few years, the runoff of assets acquired through QE is expected to reduce the balance sheet substantially below its current level of $4.5 trillion. In the long run, the ultimate size of the balance sheet will depend mainly on the demand for Federal Reserve liabilities--currency, reserves, and other liabilities--and on the Committee's long-run framework for setting interest rates.21 The next slide compares the Fed's balance sheet of May 2007 with that of May 2017 (figure 8). On the asset side, the balance sheet increased by about $3.5 trillion as the FOMC acquired securities in its QE programs. These assets were matched on the liability side of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet by a $2.2 trillion increase in reserve balances held by commercial banks, a $700 billion increase in currency outstanding, and a $500 billion increase in other liabilities. As can be seen more clearly in the next slide, prior to the crisis, currency was the Fed's main liability (figure 9). Currency outstanding has nearly doubled over the past 10 years to $1.5 trillion, growing at a compound annual rate of 6.8 percent. This growth reflects strong domestic and international demand for U.S. currency, which is expected to continue. The eventual level of demand for reserves is less certain but is highly likely to exceed pre-crisis levels when reserve balances averaged only about $15 billion. Reserves are the ultimate "safe asset," and demand for safe assets has increased substantially over time because of long-run trends, including regulatory requirements. Other liabilities include the Treasury General Account, the foreign repurchase agreement (or repo) pool, balances held at the Fed by designated financial market utilities, and other items. To gain a sense of the possible long-run size of the balance sheet, the next slide shows simulations under three different assumptions for the ultimate level of reserve balances: $100 billion, $600 billion, and $1 trillion (figure 10).22These simulations show that, due to the growth of currency and other liabilities, the balance sheet will remain considerably above its pre-crisis levels even if reserves were to fall back to $100 billion (the black line). At its current growth rate, currency in circulation would reach $2 trillion by 2022 and $2.8 trillion in 2027. Even in the low case in which reserves decline to $100 billion, our balance sheet would be about $2.4 trillion in 2022 and would grow from there in line with currency demand. If the long-run level of reserves is $600 billion in 2022, then the balance sheet would be about $2.9 trillion.23 The appropriate long-run level of reserves will also depend on the operating framework the Committee chooses. Before the crisis, reserves were scarce, and the Committee used open market operations to control the federal funds rate by managing reserve supply. This process was operationally and resource intensive for the Desk and its counterparties. As a consequence of QE, however, reserves have been highly abundant and will remain so for some years. To affect financial conditions, the Federal Reserve has therefore used administered rates, including the interest rate paid on excess reserves (IOER) and, more recently, the offering rate of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility. This approach, sometimes referred to as a "floor system," is simple to operate and has provided good control over the federal funds rate. In November 2016, when the Committee discussed using a floor system as part of its longer-run framework, I was among those who saw such an approach as "likely to be relatively simple and efficient to administer, relatively straightforward to communicate, and effective in enabling interest rate control across a wide range of circumstances."24 Some have advocated a return to a framework similar to the pre-2007 system, in which the volume of reserves would likely be far below its present level and the federal funds rate would be managed by frequent open market operations.25This "corridor" framework remains a feasible option, although, in my view, it may be less robust over time than a floor system. Concluding RemarksAfter a tumultuous decade, the economy is now close to full employment and price stability. The problems that some commentators predicted have not come to pass. Accommodative policy did not generate high inflation or excessive credit growth; rather, it helped restore full employment and return inflation closer to our 2 percent goal. The current discussions of the normalization of monetary policy are a result of that success. 1.For example, the Congressional Budget Office estimates that the natural rate of unemployment is currently 4.7 percent. The March 2017 Blue Chip Economic Indicators reported that the consensus forecast for the unemployment rate over 2024 to 2028 was 4.7 percent, with the top 10 projections averaging 5.1 percent and the bottom 10 averaging 4.3 percent. The median estimate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment in the March 2017 Summary of Economic Projections was 4.7 percent. The uncertainty around these estimates is large. The canonical paper by Staiger, Stock, and Watson puts the 95 percent confidence interval at 1-1/2 percentage points on either side of the point estimate; see Douglas Staiger, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1997), "How Precise Are Estimates of the Natural Rate of Unemployment?" in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).Return to text 2.The broader measure is the Bureau of Labor Statistics' U-6 alternative measure of labor underutilization.Return to text 3.The labor force participation rate is currently slightly below the Congressional Budget Office's estimate of trend and slightly above trend estimates based on the methodology of Aaronson and others. See Congressional Budget Office (2017),The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2017 to 2027(Washington: CBO, January); and Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197-275.Return to text 4.There are several other measures of nominal wage growth in addition to the Bureau of Labor Statistics' (BLS) average hourly earnings. The BLS employment cost index measure of year-over-year wage and salary growth was also 2.5 percent in the first quarter, while the BLS measure of compensation per hour rose to 3.9 percent. Compensation per hour is quite volatile and subject to large revisions. The unit labor cost measure is based on the BLS measures of compensation per hour and productivity for the business sector. All of these measures indicate that compensation has picked up in recent years.Return to text 5.See Federal Open Market Committee (2017),Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF), amended effective January 31 (original version adopted effective January 24, 2012).Return to text 6.I have argued elsewhere that we need to find ways to increase our long-term growth and spread that prosperity broadly if we are to avoid this "low growth trap." We need policies that support business investment, labor force participation, and productivity growth. Increased spending on public infrastructure may raise private-sector productivity over time. Greater support for public and private research and development, encouragement of workers to increase their skills, and policies that improve product and labor market dynamism may also be fruitful. See Jerome H. Powell (2016), "Recent Economic Developments and Longer-Run Challenges," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Indiana, Indianapolis, Indiana, November 29,Return to text 7.A chronology of changes in the FOMC's target federal funds rate is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/openmarket.htm.Return to text 8.The FOMC's purchases of longer-term securities (U.S. Treasury securities, agency debt obligations, and agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities) reduced the outstanding stock of these securities available in the market and therefore tended to put upward pressure on bond prices and downward pressure on their yields--specifically, on the term premium component of longer-term interest rates. This unconventional monetary policy was an appropriate means of providing a boost to spending by households and firms during a period of economic slack, when our ability to provide accommodation by conventional means was limited by the fact that the federal funds rate had reached almost zero.Return to text 9.Over this period, the size of the balance sheet has been maintained by our reinvestment policy, which I will consider later in the remarks.Return to text 10.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 16.Return to text 11.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, May 2-3, 2017," press release, May 24.Return to text 12.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, September 17.Return to text 13.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 14-15, 2017," press release, April 5.Return to text 14.See Board of Governors, "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, May 2-3, 2017," in note 11.Return to text 15.See Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," in note 12.Return to text 16.See, for example, Eric M. Engen, Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015), "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.005; Brian Bonis, Jane Ihrig, and Min Wei (2017), "The Effect of the Federal Reserve's Securities Holdings on Longer-Term Interest Rates," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 20), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.1977; and Troy Davig and A. Lee Smith (2017), "Forecasting the Stance of Monetary Policy under Balance Sheet Adjustments (PDF)," Macro Bulletin (Kansas City, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, May 10).Return to text 17.See Bonis, Ihrig, and Wei, "Effect of the Federal Reserve's Securities Holdings," in note 16.Return to text 18.Of course, estimates of the effects of monetary policy on term premiums often differ. Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider estimated that the Federal Reserve's asset purchases are currently holding down term premiums by about 60 basis points, less than the estimate of Bonis, Ihrig, and Wei, but their findings still imply a similar small effect of bringing forward the date of normalization by six months; see Bonis, Ihrig, and Wei, "Effect of the Federal Reserve's Securities Holdings," and Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider, "Macroeconomic Effects," in note 16.Return to text 19.See the results of the March and May 2017 primary dealer surveys, which are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_survey_questions.html.Return to text 20.See David Harrison (2017), "Economists See Modest Impact from a Fed Balance-Sheet Reduction,"Wall Street Journal, May 11.Return to text 21.For a more detailed discussion of the longer-run framework, see Lorie K. Logan (2017), "Implementing Monetary Policy: Perspective from the Open Market Trading Desk," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, May 18.Return to text 22.The intermediate figure of $600 billion is based on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's May 2017 surveys of primary dealers and market participants. Following the 2017 study by Ferris, Kim, and Schlusche, the federal funds rate path used in the balance sheet simulations consists of the modal path given in the FOMC participants' Summary of Economic Projections (SEP); see Erin E. Syron Ferris, Soo Jeong Kim, and Bernd Schlusche (2017), "Confidence Interval Projections of the Federal Reserve Balance Sheet and Income," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 13), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.1875. In the simulations shown here, the SEP used pertains to the projections submitted in conjunction with the March 2017 FOMC meeting. All three of the simulated balance sheet paths shown are predicated on a 12-month reinvestment phaseout commencing in late 2017. The FRB/US model is used to generate the associated paths of the 10-year Treasury yield as well as the paths of other financial and macroeconomic variables. Different paths of these variables imply different trajectories of the balance sheet, in part by changing the implied path of currency in circulation. Other assumptions used in generating the simulations are like those described in Ferris, Kim, and Schlusche (2017). The time of balance sheet normalization is defined as the point at which reserve balances decline to their assumed terminal value. Both in Ferris, Kim, and Schlusche (2017) and in the illustration here, the evolution of the balance sheet is represented by the path of the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account holdings.Return to text 23.In the simulations from which these values are obtained, it is assumed that some prominent items in the "Other liabilities" category diminish to zero by the end of 2022.Return to text 24.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, November 1-2, 2016," press release, November 23, paragraph 6.Return to text 25.See, for example, John B. Taylor (2016), "Interest on Reserves and the Fed's Balance Sheet,"Cato Journal, vol. 36 (Fall), pp. 711-20.Return to text Accessible Version