The federal bank regulatory agencies have amended their respective Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations primarily to conform to changes made by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) to Regulation C, which implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). Since 1995, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency have conformed certain definitions in their respective CRA regulations to the scope of loans reported under Regulation C and believe that continuing to do so produces a less burdensome CRA performance evaluation process. In particular, the agencies have amended their CRA regulations to revise the definitions of "home mortgage loan" and "consumer loan," as well as the public file content requirements. These revisions maintain consistency between the CRA regulations and amendments to Regulation C, which generally become effective on January 1, 2018. In addition, the final rule contains technical corrections and removes obsolete references to the Neighborhood Stabilization Program. The amendments to the CRA regulations also will become effective on January 1, 2018. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
Federal Reserve Board of GovernorsConsumer Financial Protection Bureau The Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) today announced the dollar thresholds in Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) that will apply for determining exempt consumer credit and lease transactions in 2018. These thresholds are set pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) amendments to the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act that require adjusting these thresholds annually based on the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). If there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the Federal Reserve Board and the CFPB will not adjust this exemption threshold from the prior year. However, in years following a year in which the exemption threshold was not adjusted, the threshold is calculated by applying the annual percentage change in CPI-W to the dollar amount that would have resulted, after rounding, if the decreases and any subsequent increases in the CPI-W had been taken into account. Transactions at or below the thresholds are subject to the protections of the regulations. Based on the annual percentage increase in the CPI-W as of June 1, 2017, the protections of the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act generally will apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases of $55,800 or less in 2018. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property (such as mortgages) are subject to the Truth in Lending Act regardless of the amount of the loan. Although the Dodd-Frank Act generally transferred rulemaking authority under the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to the CFPB, the Federal Reserve Board retains authority to issue rules for certain motor vehicle dealers. Therefore, the agencies are issuing these notices jointly. The attached notices will be published shortly in theFederal Register.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) today announced that the threshold for exempting loans from special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans during 2018 will increase from $25,500 to $26,000. The threshold amount will be effective January 1, 2018, and is based on the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) as of June 1, 2017. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 amended the Truth in Lending Act to add special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans, including a requirement that creditors obtain a written appraisal based on a physical visit to the home's interior before making a higher-priced mortgage loan. The rules implementing these requirements contain an exemption for loans of $25,000 or less and also provide that the exemption threshold will be adjusted annually to reflect increases in the CPI-W. If there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the agencies will not adjust this exemption threshold from the prior year. However, in years following a year in which the exemption threshold was not adjusted, the threshold is calculated by applying the annual percentage change in CPI-W to the dollar amount that would have resulted, after rounding, if the decreases and any subsequent increases in the CPI-W had been taken into account. TheFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Governor Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the Committee, thank you for expeditiously scheduling this hearing and providing me the opportunity to appear before you today. I would also like to express my gratitude to President Trump for the confidence he has shown by nominating me to serve as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The Federal Reserve has had a productive relationship with this Committee over the years, and, if you and your colleagues see fit to confirm me, I look forward to working closely with you in the years ahead. Before I continue, I would like to introduce my wife, Elissa, who is sitting behind me. I would not be here today without her unstinting love, support, and wise counsel. As you know, I have served as a member of the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) for more than five years, contributing in a variety of capacities, including most recently as chairman of the Board's Committee on Supervision and Regulation. My views on a wide range of monetary policy and regulatory issues are on the public record in speeches and testimonies during my service at the Fed. The Congress established the Federal Reserve more than a century ago to provide a safer and more flexible monetary and financial system. And, almost exactly 40 years ago, it assigned us monetary policy goals:maximum employment,meaning people who want to work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly quickly; andprice stability,meaning inflation is low and stable enough that it need not figure into households' and businesses' economic decisions. I have had the great privilege of serving under Chairman Bernanke and Chair Yellen, and, like them, I will do everything in my power to achieve those goals while preserving the Federal Reserve's independent and nonpartisan status that is so vital to their pursuit. In our democracy, transparency and accountability must accompany that independence. We are transparent and accountable in many ways. Among them, we affirm our numerical inflation objective annually and publish our economic and interest rate projections quarterly. And, since 2011, the Chairman has conducted regular news conferences to explain the FOMC's thinking. Additionally, we are accountable to the people's representatives through twice-a-year reports, testimony, oversight, and audited financial statements. I am strongly committed to that framework of transparency and accountability and to continuing to look for ways to enhance it. In our federated system, members of the Washington-based Board of Governors participate in FOMC deliberations with the presidents of the 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks, which are deeply rooted in their local communities. I am a strong supporter of this institutional structure, which helps ensure a diversity of perspectives on monetary policy and helps sustain the public's support for the Federal Reserve as an institution. If confirmed, I would strive, along with my colleagues, to support the economy's continued progress toward full recovery. Our aim is to sustain a strong jobs market with inflation moving gradually up toward our target. We expect interest rates to rise somewhat further and the size of our balance sheet to gradually shrink. However, while we endeavor to make the path of policy as predictable as possible, the future cannot be known with certainty. So we must retain the flexibility to adjust our policies in response to economic developments. Above all, even as we draw on the lessons of the past, we must be prepared to respond decisively and with appropriate force to new and unexpected threats to our nation's financial stability and economic prosperity--the original motivation for the Federal Reserve's founding. As a regulator and supervisor of banking institutions, in collaboration with other federal and state agencies, we must help ensure that our financial system remains both stable and efficient. Our financial system is without doubt far stronger and more resilient than it was a decade ago. Our banks have much higher levels of capital and liquid assets, are more aware of the risks they run, and are better able to manage those risks. Even as we have worked to implement improvements, we also have sought to tailor regulation and supervision to the size and risk profile of banks, particularly community institutions. We will continue to consider appropriate ways to ease regulatory burdens while preserving core reforms--strong levels of capital and liquidity, stress testing, and resolution planning--so that banks can provide the credit to families and businesses necessary to sustain a prosperous economy. In doing so, we must be clear and transparent about the principles that are driving our decisions and about the expectations we have for the institutions we regulate. To conclude, inside the Federal Reserve, we understand that our decisions in all these areas matter for American families and communities. I am committed to making decisions objectively and based on the best available evidence. In doing so, I would be guided solely by our mandate from the Congress and the long-run interests of the American public. Thank you. I would be happy to respond to your questions.
The federal banking agencies on Tuesday finalized a rule for certain banking organizations by extending the existing capital requirements for mortgage servicing assets and certain other items. The rule is being finalized to prevent different rules from taking effect while the agencies consider a broader simplification of the capital rules. As part of the recent review of regulations under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act, the agencies announced that they intended to simplify the capital rules to reduce regulatory burden, particularly for community banks. Subsequently, in September, the agencies released a proposal that would simplify the capital rules' treatment of mortgage servicing assets and other items for some banking organizations. However, prior to that rule being finalized, the current transitional treatment for many of these items was scheduled to be replaced with a different treatment on January 1, 2018. The final rule from the agencies is substantively similar to the proposal issued by the agencies to extend the existing capital requirements for certain banking organizations for a targeted set of items: mortgage servicing assets, certain deferred tax assets, investments in the capital instruments of unconsolidated financial institutions, and minority interest. The final rule would apply only to banking organizations that are not subject to the agencies' "advanced approaches" capital rules, which are generally firms with less than $250 billion in total consolidated assets and less than $10 billion in total foreign exposure. Banking organizations that are subject to the advanced approaches rules are not affected by this rule. The rule will be effective on January 1, 2018. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the annual indexing of two amounts used in determining reserve requirements of depository institutions. These amounts are the reserve requirement exemption amount and the low reserve tranche. All depository institutions must hold a percentage of certain types of deposits as reserves in the form of vault cash, as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or as a deposit in a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). Depository institutions must also regularly submit reports of their deposits and other reservable liabilities. For net transaction accounts in 2018, the first $16 million, up from $15.5 million in 2017, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $16 million up to and including $122.3 million, up from $115.1 million in 2017. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts in excess of $122.3 million. These annual adjustments, known as the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment and the low reserve tranche adjustment, are based on growth in total reservable liabilities and net transaction accounts, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 2016 and June 30, 2017. The new low reserve tranche and reserve requirement exemption amount will apply to the 14-day reserve maintenance period that begins January 18, 2018. For depository institutions that report deposit data weekly, this maintenance period corresponds to the 14-day computation period that begins Tuesday, December 19, 2017. For depository institutions that report deposit data quarterly, this maintenance period corresponds to the seven-day computation period that begins Tuesday, December 19, 2017. The Board also announced changes in two other amounts, the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit, that are used to determine the frequency with which depository institutions must submit deposit reports. The attachedFederal Registernotice contains a description of the new boundaries for deposit reporting that will be effective in 2018. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Reserve Maintenance Manual
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that James A. Clouse has been appointed secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), succeeding Brian F. Madigan, effective November 26. In addition to directing the work of the FOMC Secretariat, which produces minutes and transcripts of FOMC meetings, Clouse will continue as deputy director of the Board's Division of Monetary Affairs and will continue to report to Thomas Laubach, division director. Madigan will serve as senior adviser before retiring in 2018. Clouse began his career at the Board in 1989, after service as an officer in the U.S. Army. He was on leave from the Board from December 2005 to November 2006, when he served as a deputy assistant secretary at the Treasury Department, overseeing Treasury debt financing. He has been a deputy director of the Monetary Affairs division since 2007. He holds a B.A. in economics from Princeton University and a Ph.D. in economics from Northwestern University. "I'm very pleased that Jim is undertaking additional duties as FOMC secretary," said Chair Janet L. Yellen. "Over the past three decades, Jim has developed deep expertise in central banking broadly, the Federal Reserve in particular, and most especially in monetary policy implementation." Madigan was appointed FOMC secretary in June 2015, when he returned to the Board staff after a five-year absence. He initially joined the Board staff in 1979 and served as director of the Division of Monetary Affairs and FOMC Secretary from 2007 to 2010. "I'm very grateful for Brian's service through a long and distinguished career and, most particularly, for his leadership during the challenging years of the financial crisis." Chair Yellen said. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Frost Bank, San Antonio, Texas, to establish a branch at 640 Taylor Street, Fort Worth, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to these actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by National Bank Holdings Corporation, Greenwood Village, Colorado, to merge with Peoples, Inc., Lawrence, Kansas, and thereby indirectly acquire Peoples Bank, Lawrence, Kansas, and Peoples National Bank, Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Board also approved the applications under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act, by NBH Bank, Greenwood Village, Colorado, to merge with Peoples Bank and Peoples National Bank, and to establish and operate branches at locations of Peoples Bank and Peoples National Bank. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by South State Corporation, Columbia, South Carolina, to acquire Park Sterling Corporation ("PSC") and thereby indirectly acquire PSC's subsidiary bank, Park Sterling Bank, both of Charlotte, North Carolina. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the proposal under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Sandy Spring Bancorp, Inc., Olney, Maryland, to merge with WashingtonFirst Bankshares, Inc. ("WashingtonFirst"), and thereby indirectly acquire WashingtonFirst's subsidiary bank, WashingtonFirst Bank, both of Reston, Virginia, and acquire WashingtonFirst's nonbank subsidiary, 1st Portfolio, Inc., Fairfax, Virginia. The Board also approved the applications under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Sandy Spring Bank, Olney, Maryland, to merge with WashingtonFirst Bank and to establish and operate branches at locations of the main office and branches of WashingtonFirst Bank. Attached is the Board's order relating to these actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Brand Group Holdings, Inc., Lawrenceville, Georgia and The Brand Banking Company, Lawrenceville, Georgia,Written Agreement dated August 2, 2010Terminated November 27, 2017 The enforcement action from August 2010 can be foundhere (PDF)and other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Maple Leaf Financial, Inc., Newbury, OhioOrder to Cease and Desist and Amended Order to Cease and Desist issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated March 27, 2009 and July 8, 2010, respectivelyTerminated November 8, 2017 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the approval of fee schedules, effective January 2, 2018, for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to depository institutions (priced services). The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 100 percent of their priced services costs in 2018. The Reserve Banks expect to fully recover actual and imputed expenses, including profit that would have been earned if a private business firm provided the services. Overall, the Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 1.4 percent average price increase. The Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 0.4 percent average price increase for check customers. The Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 3.6 percent average price increase for FedACH®customers. The FedACH price increase is in response to increasing operating costs associated with an ongoing technology upgrade. The Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 1.2 percent average price decrease for Fedwire®Funds customers. The fees will remain unchanged for the Reserve Banks' National Settlement Service and Fedwire Securities Service. Lastly, the Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 4.3 percent average price increase for FedLine®customers. The 2018 fee schedule for each of the priced services is available on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial services website at FRBservices.org. The Board approved the 2018 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) of $18.9 million for Reserve Bank priced services. The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and profit that would have been earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve establish fees to recover the costs of providing priced services, including imputed costs, over the long run, to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector service providers. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday extended the comment periods for two related proposals until February 15, 2018. One would enhance the effectiveness of boards of directors. The other would implement a new ratings system for large financial institutions that would be aligned with the post-crisis supervisory program. The Board extended the comment periods to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Comments on both proposals had been due November 30, 2017. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDFFederal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday issued a Consent Order against Peoples Bank ("Peoples"), Lawrence, Kansas, for deceptive residential mortgage origination practices in violation of section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act. Peoples told certain borrowers that they were paying an additional amount for discount points that would lower the borrowers' interest rate. In fact, many borrowers did not receive a reduced rate. The Consent Order requires Peoples to pay approximately $2.8 million into an account to provide restitution to these borrowers. Under the terms of the Consent Order, Peoples will be required to refund all payments for discount points that did not reduce borrowers' interest rates, and avoid violations of section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act in the future. The deceptive practices at issue were centered within Peoples' national mortgage business, which is in the process of being wound down. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Wayne Bank and Trust Company, Cambridge City, IndianaOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated October 31, 2017 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a solid rate despite hurricane-related disruptions. Although the hurricanes caused a drop in payroll employment in September, the unemployment rate declined further. Household spending has been expanding at a moderate rate, and growth in business fixed investment has picked up in recent quarters. Gasoline prices rose in the aftermath of the hurricanes, boosting overall inflation in September; however, inflation for items other than food and energy remained soft. On a 12-month basis, both inflation measures have declined this year and are running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. Hurricane-related disruptions and rebuilding will continue to affect economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, but past experience suggests that the storms are unlikely to materially alter the course of the national economy over the medium term. Consequently, the Committee continues to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, and labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further. Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent in the near term but to stabilize around the Committee's 2 percent objective over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but the Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1 to 1-1/4 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The balance sheet normalization program initiated in October 2017 is proceeding. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Lael Brainard; Charles L. Evans; Patrick Harker; Robert S. Kaplan; Neel Kashkari; Jerome H. Powell; and Randal K. Quarles. Implementation Note issued November 1, 2017
Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Roundtable of the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York (via prerecorded video) Good morning. I am sorry that I am not able to be with you today at the FRBNY for this important meeting. I thought that I would begin by discussing the LIBOR related events that have brought us here, and then talk about the way forward. LIBOR gained negative public attention when reports began to surface during the financial crisis that employees at some banks had attempted to manipulate the rate by altering the quotes they submitted for use in the calculation of LIBOR. A number of agencies, including the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), the Department of Justice, and the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), took the lead in investigating and prosecuting the cases of LIBOR manipulation that were uncovered. The Federal Reserve also joined in international efforts to strengthen LIBOR. Among other things, we joined the ICE Benchmark Administration's (IBA's) LIBOR Oversight Committee as an observer, and we also worked intensively with international authorities and IBA in developing and encouraging the reforms set out in IBA's Roadmap for LIBOR. But at the same time, as we and other authorities collected data on the transactions underlying banks' submissions to LIBOR, we began to see that those transactions were relatively few and far between. As a result, many began to question whether LIBOR could be truly and permanently fixed. To be sure, much has been done to address the cases of attempted manipulation, and LIBOR has much stronger governance in place than it did before the crisis. The question instead was whether there were enough actual LIBOR transactions to form a stable basis for this critical rate. Since many of the pressures around LIBOR stem from the low level of underlying transactions, let me share some data regarding activity in U.S. dollar wholesale funding markets. Today, there are 17 banks that submit quotes in support of dollar LIBOR. Some have suggested requiring more banks to submit LIBOR data, but doing so would not materially improve the situation. The panels inFigure 1show the distribution of daily aggregate wholesale dollar funding volumes for the 30 global systemically important banks (or GSIBs). The data here include all of the Eurodollar, federal funds, CD, and commercial paper transactions that the Federal Reserve has access to--the most complete picture of U.S. dollar unsecured funding that I am aware of. For one-month funding, shown in the top panel, the median daily volume of transactions by these banks since money-market reforms took effect last year was just over $1 billion. For three-month funding (the middle panel), the most heavily referenced LIBOR tenor, the median is less than $1 billion per day. On some days we see less than $100 million. If we compare this to the more than $100 trillion in outstanding volumes of U.S. dollar LIBOR contracts, it should be clear that the activity in this market is miniscule compared to the size of the contracts written on it. In our view, it would not be feasible to produce a robust, transaction-based rate constructed from the activity in wholesale unsecured funding markets. A transactions-based rate from this market would be fairly easy to manipulate given such a thin level of activity, and the rate itself would likely be quite volatile. Thus, LIBOR seems consigned to rely primarily on some form of expert judgment rather than direct transactions. As we discussed these issues with the officials in the United Kingdom who oversee and regulate LIBOR, we also became aware that they were receiving a steady stream of requests, and sometimes demands, from banks seeking to leave the LIBOR panels. The use of expert judgment in submissions allows LIBOR to be published every day, but many banks are now understandably uncomfortable with being asked to provide judgment about something that they do very little of. In his July speech, Andrew Bailey discussed the efforts of the FCA to keep these banks on the panels. Market participants should understand that the official sector has done everything it can to stabilize and strengthen LIBOR. Without the intervention of U.K. authorities, LIBOR would be in a weaker state today. But that balancing act has grown increasingly difficult. As time has passed, some banks have grown more resistant to public-sector entreaties to remain on the panels. As you know, one bank left the U.S. dollar panel last year. At the same time, we have had to confront the fact that, if banks could not be persuaded to voluntarily remain on panels, then the legal powers to compel them to do so were limited. Under European Union benchmark regulations, which LIBOR will soon be subject to, authorities can only compel submissions to a critical benchmark for a period of two years. Given this time limit, brokering a voluntary agreement with the submitting banks to stay on for a longer period was the last, best choice that authorities had available to guarantee some further period of stability for LIBOR. CFTC Chairman Chris Giancarlo and I have publicly supported the FCA's efforts to secure an agreement with the submitting banks to stay on through the end of 2021, and we have encouraged the U.S. banks that submit to LIBOR to cooperate with FCA's effort. Of course, LIBOR may remain viable well past 2021, but we do not think that market participants can safely assume that it will. Users of LIBOR must now take in to account the risk that it may not always be published. While the public's understanding of this risk has increased significantly since Andrew Bailey's speech, the official sector has been concerned about it for some years, as reflected for example in our public comments and in the annual reports of the Financial Stability Oversight Council. Given our understanding of the risks to LIBOR, the Federal Reserve convened the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (or ARRC) in 2014 in cooperation with the Treasury Department and CFTC. Consistent with recommendations from the Financial Stability Board (FSB), we charged the ARRC with identifying a robust alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR and with developing a plan to encourage its use in some derivatives and other transactions as appropriate. The ARRC has accomplished the things that we asked of it. I want to thank the members for their work and also to extend my special thanks to Sandie O'Connor as the chair of the ARRC. Sandie will discuss the ARRC's work shortly, but I'll make a few points. First, I'd note that, like most market participants, the ARRC members initially had a difficult time conceiving of any kind of transition from LIBOR. As is the case for all of you, a transition will be a complicated task for the broker-dealers and other members of the ARRC, and will involve significant costs. Over time, however, I think the ARRC members have developed a greater understanding of the risks to LIBOR and now see that, despite those complications and costs, a transition may prove necessary. I also think that, having had time to consider the transition plans that Sandie will talk about, ARRC members have become more comfortable with the idea that a transition is feasible, even if the necessity of achieving it is regrettable. Second, it is clear that any rate the ARRC selected as a potential alternative needed to be highly robust. There would be no point in selecting a rate that might find itself quickly in the same kinds of conditions that LIBOR is in now. In our view, the ARRC has chosen the most robust rate available. In general, only overnight unsecured or secured funding markets appeared to have enough underlying transactions to produce a robust rate. The overnight Treasury repo market is the largest and most active market in any tenor of U.S. rates markets.Figure 2illustrates the point: the transactions underlying the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), at about $700 billion per day or more, are much larger than the volumes in overnight unsecured markets, even much larger than estimates of the volume in Treasury bills, and they dwarf the volumes in other term markets. The alternative reference rate needs to be able to stand the weight of having trillions of dollars written on it, and the ARRC has definitely met this standard in choosing SOFR. Third, we charged the ARRC with devising plans for a voluntary transition that encouraged the use of their recommended rate where appropriate. We have never told anyone that they cannot use LIBOR. The ARRC did consider whether other cash products could move from LIBOR to the rates it evaluated, but their paced transition plan has focused on derivatives because that is where the largest gross exposures to LIBOR are, and because it may be easier for many derivatives transactions to move away from LIBOR to a new rate. Now, however, market participants have realized that they may need to more seriously consider transitioning other products away from LIBOR, and the ARRC has expanded its work to help ensure that this can be done in a coordinated way that avoids unnecessary disruptions. Sandie will discuss plans to eventually create a term reference rate, which may help to smooth any transition. That term reference rate would have to be built by first developing futures and OIS markets that reference SOFR. It will likely never be as robust as SOFR itself, and so derivatives transactions will almost certainly need to be based on the overnight rate, but a term reference rate could conceivably be used in some loan or other contracts that currently reference LIBOR. All of the work that we will talk about today will help, but we have to acknowledge that the transition will be complicated. Unfortunately, as I have discussed, we cannot guarantee that it won't be necessary. The most complicated aspects involve the legacy contracts that reference LIBOR, many of which do not have strong language in place if LIBOR were to stop publication. The FSB has been working with the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (or ISDA) to devise better language for derivatives, and ISDA's Scott O'Malia and Katherine Tew Darras will discuss that work later this morning. As people now consider the risks around LIBOR for other types of contracts, they will need to go through their documentation to understand what the fallback language is and how it can be improved. We will also discuss those issues today. This is important work, both for the parties to these contracts and for our financial stability. While there may be no perfect contract language or fallback, good risk management requires that we work together to find language and fallbacks that are robust and that limit unintended valuation changes. So, while much work has been done, there is more still to do. I have been heartened in seeing that many market participants are already confronting these issues. For some, Andrew Bailey's speech was a difficult wake-up call. But the efforts we have undertaken with the ARRC show what is possible when the official sector works collectively with market participants. If market participants are willing to continue to work together, then we can safely achieve the transitions needed to create a better and more robust system that will help to ensure our ongoing financial stability. Accessible Version
Janet L. Yellen submitted her resignation Monday as a Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, effective upon the swearing in of her successor as Chair. Dr. Yellen, 71, was appointed to the Board by President Obama for an unexpired term ending January 31, 2024. Her term as Chair expires on February 3, 2018. She also serves as Chair of the Federal Open Market Committee, the System's principal monetary policymaking body. Prior to her appointment as Chair, Dr. Yellen served as Vice Chair of the Board of Governors, from October 2010 to February 2014, and as President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, from June 2004 to October 2010. She was initially appointed to the Board by President Clinton in August 1994 and served until February 1997, when she resigned to serve as Chair of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, until August 1999. Dr. Yellen is Professor Emerita at the University of California at Berkeley, where she has been a member of the faculty since 1980. She was born in Brooklyn, New York, in August 1946 and received her undergraduate degree in economics from Brown University in 1967 and her Ph.D. in economics from Yale University in 1971. Dr. Yellen is married and has an adult son. A copy of her resignation letter is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from October 10 through November 1, 2017. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on October 31-November 1, 2017. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 31-November 1, 2017:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Randal K. Quarles was ceremonially sworn in as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and as Vice Chair for Supervision on Monday in the atrium of the Board's Eccles building in Washington. Friends, family, and Board employees attended the ceremony, which was presided over by Federal Reserve Chair Janet L. Yellen. Following his confirmation by the Senate, Vice Chair Quarles took office on October 13 to fill an unexpired term ending on January 31, 2018. His term as Vice Chair for Supervision ends on October 13, 2021. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lael Brainard At a Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Regional Food Systems Meeting, Boston, Massachusetts Thank you for inviting me. I appreciate the opportunity to listen and learn about the important work that you do.1 One of the Federal Reserve's responsibilities is to understand how communities across America are experiencing the economy. That is why Congress established a network of Federal Reserve Banks and Branches across the country. Our local presence gives us valuable opportunities to engage with communities across a broad spectrum--from those who are thriving to those who are confronting challenges, and from inner-city neighborhoods to rural towns. One of the lessons that our community engagement has taught us is that there is an important connection between the strength of regional food systems and community health. Today's meeting is one in a series that Federal Reserve Banks are holding across the country to talk about local efforts to support regional food systems, and how such efforts can advance communities' goals. These meetings build on the Federal Reserve Board's release last August ofHarvesting Opportunity,a publication that explores the community and economic development potential of investing in regional food systems.2Through this collaborative research effort, we learned several important lessons about what works to strengthen regional food systems. First, we learned that appropriately tailored investments in regional food systems have the potential to support the creation of new jobs and small businesses in local communities, as well as to improve farm profitability and financial resilience. Second, we learned that in order to take advantage of new business opportunities in the regional food sector, entrepreneurs need access to capital, specialized knowledge, and general business skills. Unfortunately, one or more of these is often missing from historically marginalized communities. We also learned that organizations across the country are filling these gaps and empowering communities to take advantage of opportunities. I understand that many of you in this room are engaged in this important work; for that I thank you and hope that this meeting will help advance your efforts. As a result of an intentional focus on equity and inclusiveness, these investments can create new access to economic opportunity for segments of communities that have often faced challenges, such as people of color, recent immigrants, the formerly homeless, and the previously incarcerated. Lastly, we learned that no organization has all of the resources or expertise necessary to effectively carry out this work alone. As such, long-term partnerships and collaboration are necessary for success in implementing regional food strategies. Because of the critical role of multi-sectoral partnerships, I am heartened to see so many of you here today to talk about the current state of regional food system investment in New England, to build new relationships, and to strengthen existing ones. It is this ongoing commitment to working together that will carry you through to the next stage of regional food systems development. Later today, I will be meeting with several local organizations that not only bring important resources and expertise to their communities, but also exemplify this important dedication to partnership and cross-sector collaboration. The Urban Farming Institute of Boston demonstrates dedication to cross-sector collaboration through their Farmer Training Program, many of whose graduates go on to work for or start up regional food enterprises. They also advance the broader regional food system by co-hosting an annual conference that brings together farmers, policymakers, investors, and other stakeholders. Likewise, CommonWealth Kitchen has emerged as an important hub where farmers, entrepreneurs, universities, investors, and other stakeholders come together in ways that not only advance regional food systems, but also increase access to economic opportunity for people impacted by racial, social, or economic inequality. In this way, CommonWealth Kitchen is dedicated to addressing Greater Boston's growing wealth divide by promoting inclusive entrepreneurship through an integrated approach that links education, training, and manufacturing to a strong network of industry partners, including anchor institutions. These are just two examples of the great work going on in New England, and I look forward to visiting both organizations later today. This morning, I am eager to learn about the work of the many organizations represented here, especially the barriers and opportunities you face when trying to invest in this sector, and how your investments are linking more families and communities to meaningful economic opportunities. Attending events like this and visiting communities around the country provide me with opportunities to speak with families, farmers, small business owners, investors, bankers, and other community members about their experiences in the economy. These conversations help me to develop a granular and very human understanding of the economy that, when combined with the information provided by our traditional research and data collection efforts, are important considerations informing judgments about policy. A community-level understanding of the economy is especially important in today's economy, where we see welcome strength in the aggregate statistics coexisting side-by-side with important disparities at the community and family levels. In addition to disparities based on the community where a family lives and significant and persistent racial disparities, I have been struck while traveling around the country by the widening gulf between the economic fortunes of our large metropolitan areas and those of our small cities, towns, and rural areas. The statistics bear this out: the convergence in income across regions of the country has slowed dramatically over recent decades.3Much of the gains in employment, income, and wealth since the end of the recession--and more broadly over the past few decades--have accrued to workers and families in larger cities. If some workers and families find it difficult to move, this concentration of economic opportunities in larger cities may have adverse implications for the well-being of these households and, potentially, the economy overall. In my visits, I have also been heartened by the efforts of local partners to address these disparities and improve their communities, including those aimed at capitalizing on local food-based assets to advance economic opportunity and address food insecurity. For instance, in El Paso, I visited with several vibrant community organizations that were running community gardens, local nutrition and farming educational outreach programs, a commercial kitchen, and a food pantry to improve nutrition and access to fresh food in an area that lacked full-scale grocery stores. In the Mississippi Delta, I met with people involved in an interesting collaboration between a local entrepreneur, a community development financial institution, the engineering department of a local community college, local farmers, and local food organizations--the aim of which was to produce biofuels from food waste. Of course, pockets of both opportunity and persistent poverty are found in large metro and rural areas alike. In fact, a recent report found Boston to have one of the highest rates of income inequality among the 100 largest metropolitan areas in the United States, despite the overall strength of Boston's economy.4Findings like this remind us that not all communities are well positioned to access the opportunities available in the economy, even those in their own backyard. Our research suggests there are things that can be done to improve the likelihood that an area will be a community of opportunity. Some localities have fared better than others in this respect, and their successes can provide us with actionable lessons. For instance, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston undertook an in-depth study of 25 medium-sized cities nationwide that had experienced a post-industrial decline and identified 10 that experienced an economic resurgence. The study found that the critical determinant of success was the ability of leaders in those cities to collaborate across sectors around a long-term vision for revitalization.5To encourage such collaboration, the Boston Fed has facilitated Working Cities Challenges in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut that reward effective public–private collaboration to reach communitywide goals. For instance, one of the winning cities, Lawrence, Massachusetts, set goals of increasing the income of parents with children in the Lawrence Public School system by 15 percent, dramatically increasing parental engagement in the schools and tracking the impact of these efforts on student achievement. A cross-section of partners from the public, private, nonprofit, and philanthropic sectors sought to achieve this, in part, by embedding Family Resource Centers within the Lawrence Public Schools. To-date, these efforts have placed over 200 parents in new positions paying 25 percent higher wages on average than their previous jobs, with 200 more parents in the training pipeline. Learning about what works reinforces for me the importance of events like this one: events that bring together different stakeholders to talk about the future of their communities and how they can work together to advance common goals. Thank you for being our valued partners in this important work. 1. I am grateful to Andrew Dumont for his assistance in preparing these remarks. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. A. Dumont, D. Davis, J. Wascalus, T. Cheeks Wilson, J. Barham, and D. Tropp.Harvesting Opportunity: The Power of Regional Food System Investments to Transform Communities(St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2017).Return to text 3. P. Ganong, and D.W. Shoag. "Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S. Declined?" National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23609 (Cambridge, Mass: NBER, 2017).Return to text 4. Natalie Holmes and Alan Berube."City and Metropolitan Inequality on the Rise, Driven by Declining Incomes." (Washington: Brookings Institution, January 2016).Return to text 5. Y.K. Kodrzycki, A.P. Muñoz, L. Browne, D. Green, M. Benton, P. Chakrabarti, D. Plasse, R. Walker, and B. Zhao. "Reinvigorating Springfield's Economy: Lessons from Resurgent Cities," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Community Affairs Discussion Paper No. 2009-03 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 2009).Return to text
Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Institute of Government and Public Affairs at the University of Illinois, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the honor of sharing this award with such a worthy person, my friend and former colleague Ben Bernanke, and also for the honor of being associated with the exemplary life and legacy of Paul Douglas. Sen. Douglas's contributions to ethics in government are an important aspect of that legacy, but since Ben and I are the first economists to win this award, I would also like to give due credit to Professor Douglas for his contributions to economics. Working with the mathematician Charles Cobb, Douglas gathered data and created a statistical model that advanced economists' understanding of the relative contributions to production made by capital and labor. This work demonstrated many of the methods that economists would come to use and continue to use to this day. Douglas constructed empirical measures of key economic concepts. He then employed what were, for the time, advanced statistical techniques to analyze these data, thereby shedding light on a basic economic relationship. As one recent commentator put it, work such as Douglas's was part of "a growing literature , , , [that] played an important role in shaping the approach to combining statistical methods and economic theory that would become the standard econometric practice in the later decades of the 20th century."1 But, of course, Paul Douglas was much more than an economist. From an early age, he always seemed to be the man in the middle, seen by the two sides of a dispute as intelligent, knowledgeable, and impartial enough to be trusted to seek a solution. He mediated labor disputes and advised local government officials in Illinois. He also helped governors in Pennsylvania and New York develop what became Social Security, unemployment insurance, and the idea of publicly owned power utilities. After losing his first election for the U.S. Senate in 1942, at the age of 49 he enlisted in the U.S. Marines and was awarded a Bronze Star and Purple Heart for his service in the Pacific. Later, after he was elected to the Senate, Douglas was a champion of consumer protection laws, including the 1968 Truth in Lending Act, and was a leading supporter of civil rights legislation. One of Paul Douglas's most important achievements in public life was to promote ethics in government. He was raised with a strong sense of right and wrong and was heavily influenced by the philosopher John Stuart Mill to believe that ethical behavior was also an eminently practical approach to life. As a college professor, he entered public life in Chicago in the 1920s somewhat reluctantly to fight the spectacular political and commercial corruption that was strangling the city. Once elected to office, he faced the challenge of how to act ethically when corruption was so universal that the city's aldermen were expected to funnel large sums to their constituents, based on the presumption that all politicians were "on the take." If he refused bribes and then had no money to hand out, how would he convince people that he wasn't simply refusing to share? The key was transparency and communication. Everyone who asked for a large payment was handed a mimeographed statement titled "Please Help Me to Be an Honest Alderman." At first, the public, inured to corruption, either disbelieved him or thought him a sucker for refusing to take bribes. But over time, Douglas's stand changed both the demands made by supplicants and his constituents' expectations for ethical behavior by a government official. Similarly, in 1939, Paul Douglas was one of the first public officials in America to publish a full accounting of his personal finances. In his memoir, Douglas admits that this and other ethical rules he imposed on himself were often a nuisance and, in some cases, probably went further than needed to demonstrate his honesty. But he believed that the public's trust was so fundamental to the effectiveness of government that such steps were appropriate. As a senator, he continued to publish his finances and observed strict limits on the value of personal gifts he received from those seeking benefits from him as a public official. He strongly believed that these gift limits also made him more effective as a public servant, and he campaigned for legislation that ultimately led to the widespread requirement of financial disclosure and limits on accepting gifts. I share Paul Douglas's view that behaving ethically is both the right thing to do and, in practical terms, helps maintain the trust the public places in those who act on its behalf. The Federal Reserve's very effectiveness in setting monetary policy depends on the public's assured confidence that we act only in its interest. We must act ethically, and we must demonstrate our ethical standards in ways that leave little room for doubt. I am grateful to share this award with Ben, and I am even more grateful for the example Paul Douglas set for ethics in government that has guided countless public officials since his day and also shaped the public's expectation that its leaders will put the public's interests first. 1. See p. 228 in Jeff Biddle (2012), "Retrospectives: The Introduction of the Cobb-Douglas Regression,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 26 (Spring), pp. 223-36.Return to text
Statement by Federal Reserve Board Chair Janet L. Yellen: I congratulate my colleague Jay Powell on his nomination to be Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. Jay's long and distinguished career has been marked by dedicated public service and seriousness of purpose. I am confident in his deep commitment to carrying out the vital public mission of the Federal Reserve. I am committed to working with him to ensure a smooth transition.
Statement by Federal Reserve Board Governor Jerome H. Powell: Thank you, Mr. President, for the faith you have shown in me through this nomination. I am both honored and humbled by this opportunity to serve our great country. If I am confirmed by the Senate, I will do everything within my power to achieve the goals assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress: stable prices and maximum employment. I want to thank my wife, Elissa, for her love, support, and wise counsel. Without her, I would not be standing here. We are thinking today of our three children, and of the world they are inheriting. My five siblings and I are also thinking today of our parents, who gave us so many gifts, most of all a loving home. In the years since the global financial crisis ended, our economy has made substantial progress toward full recovery. By many measures we are close to full employment, and inflation has gradually moved up toward our target. Our financial system is without doubt far stronger and more resilient than it was before the crisis. Our banks have much higher capital and liquidity, are more aware of the risks they run, and are better able to manage those risks. While post-crisis improvements in regulation and supervision have helped us to achieve these gains, I will continue to work with my colleagues to ensure that the Federal Reserve remains vigilant and prepared to respond to changes in markets and evolving risks. Finally, I have had the great privilege of serving under Chairman Bernanke and Chair Yellen, who guided the economy with insight and courage through difficult times while moving monetary policy toward greater transparency and predictability. Each of them embodies the highest ideals of public service--unquestioned integrity and unflinching commitment to fulfilling our mandate. Inside the Federal Reserve, we understand that monetary policy decisions matter for American families and communities. I strongly share that sense of mission and am committed to making decisions with objectivity and based on the best available evidence, in the longstanding tradition of monetary policy independence. Mr. President, thank you again for this extraordinary opportunity to serve the American people.
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C. Chairman Tiberi, Ranking Member Heinrich, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today. I will discuss the current economic outlook and monetary policy. The Economic OutlookThe U.S. economy has strengthened further this year. Smoothing through the volatility caused by the recent hurricanes, job gains averaged about 170,000 per month from January through October, a somewhat slower pace than last year but still above the range that we estimate will be consistent with absorbing new entrants to the labor force in coming years. With the job gains this year, 17 million more Americans are employed now than eight years ago. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate, which stood at 4.1 percent in October, has fallen 0.6 percentage point since the turn of the year and is nearly 6 percentage points below its peak in 2010. In addition, the labor force participation rate has changed little, on net, in recent years, which is another indication of improving conditions in the labor market, given the downward pressure on the participation rate associated with an aging population. However, despite these labor market gains, wage growth has remained relatively modest. Unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics, which tend to be more sensitive to overall economic conditions than those for whites, have moved down, on net, over the past year and are now near levels last seen before the recession. That said, it remains the case that unemployment rates for these minority groups are noticeably higher than for the nation overall. Meanwhile, economic growth appears to have stepped up from its subdued pace early in the year. After having risen at an annual rate of just 1-1/4 percent in the first quarter, U.S. inflation-adjusted gross domestic product (GDP) is currently estimated to have increased at a 3 percent pace in both the second and third quarters despite the disruptions to economic activity in the third quarter caused by the recent hurricanes. Moreover, the economic expansion is increasingly broad based across sectors as well as across much of the global economy. I expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, the economy will continue to expand and the job market will strengthen somewhat further, supporting faster growth in wages and incomes. Although asset valuations are high by historical standards, overall vulnerabilities in the financial sector appear moderate, as the banking system is well capitalized and broad measures of leverage and credit growth remain contained. Even with a step-up in growth of economic activity and a stronger labor market, inflation has continued to run below the 2 percent rate that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judges most consistent with our congressional mandate to foster both maximum employment and price stability. Increases in gasoline prices in the aftermath of the hurricanes temporarily pushed up measures of overall consumer price inflation, but inflation for items other than food and energy has remained surprisingly subdued. The total price index for personal consumption expenditures increased 1.6 percent over the 12 months ending in September, while the core price index, which excludes energy and food prices, rose just 1.3 percent over the same period, about 1/2 percentage point slower than a year earlier. In my view, the recent lower readings on inflation likely reflect transitory factors. As these transitory factors fade, I anticipate that inflation will stabilize around 2 percent over the medium term. However, it is also possible that this year's low inflation could reflect something more persistent. Indeed, inflation has been below the Committee's 2 percent objective for most of the past five years. Against this backdrop, the FOMC has indicated that it intends to carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward our inflation goal. Although the economy and the jobs market are generally quite strong, real GDP growth has been disappointingly slow during this expansion relative to earlier decades. One key reason for this slowdown has been the retirement of the older members of the baby-boom generation and hence the slower growth of the labor force. Another key reason has been the unusually sluggish pace of productivity growth in recent years. To generate a sustained boost in economic growth without causing inflation that is too high, we will need to address these underlying causes. In this regard, the Congress might consider policies that encourage business investment and capital formation, improve the nation's infrastructure, raise the quality of our educational system, and support innovation and the adoption of new technologies. Monetary PolicyI will turn now to the implications of recent economic developments and the outlook for monetary policy. With ongoing strengthening in labor market conditions and an outlook for inflation to return to 2 percent over the next couple of years, the FOMC has continued to gradually reduce policy accommodation. The Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point at both our March and June meetings, with the range now standing at 1 to 1-1/4 percent. And, in October, the Committee began its balance sheet normalization program, which will gradually and predictably reduce our securities holdings. The Committee set limits on the pace of balance sheet reduction; those limits should guard against outsized moves in interest rates and other potential market strains. Indeed, there has been little, if any, market effect associated with the balance sheet runoff to date. We do not foresee a need to alter the balance sheet program, but, as we said in June, we would be prepared to resume reinvestments if a material deterioration in the economic outlook were to warrant a sizable reduction in the federal funds rate. Changes to the target range for the federal funds rate will continue to be the Committee's primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. At our meeting earlier this month, we decided to maintain the existing target range for the federal funds rate. We continue to expect that gradual increases in the federal funds rate will be appropriate to sustain a healthy labor market and stabilize inflation around the FOMC's 2 percent objective. That expectation is based on the view that the current level of the federal funds rate remains somewhat below its neutral level--that is, the rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary and keeps the economy operating on an even keel. The neutral rate currently appears to be quite low by historical standards, implying that the federal funds rate would not have to rise much further to get to a neutral policy stance. If the neutral level rises somewhat over time, as most FOMC participants expect, additional gradual rate hikes would likely be appropriate over the next few years to sustain the economic expansion. Of course, policy is not on a preset course; the appropriate path for the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee has noted that it will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. More generally, in determining the timing and size of future interest rate adjustments, the Committee will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Thank you. I would be pleased to answer your questions.
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C. Chairman Tiberi, Ranking Member Heinrich, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today. I will discuss the current economic outlook and monetary policy. The Economic OutlookThe U.S. economy has strengthened further this year. Smoothing through the volatility caused by the recent hurricanes, job gains averaged about 170,000 per month from January through October, a somewhat slower pace than last year but still above the range that we estimate will be consistent with absorbing new entrants to the labor force in coming years. With the job gains this year, 17 million more Americans are employed now than eight years ago. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate, which stood at 4.1 percent in October, has fallen 0.6 percentage point since the turn of the year and is nearly 6 percentage points below its peak in 2010. In addition, the labor force participation rate has changed little, on net, in recent years, which is another indication of improving conditions in the labor market, given the downward pressure on the participation rate associated with an aging population. However, despite these labor market gains, wage growth has remained relatively modest. Unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics, which tend to be more sensitive to overall economic conditions than those for whites, have moved down, on net, over the past year and are now near levels last seen before the recession. That said, it remains the case that unemployment rates for these minority groups are noticeably higher than for the nation overall. Meanwhile, economic growth appears to have stepped up from its subdued pace early in the year. After having risen at an annual rate of just 1-1/4 percent in the first quarter, U.S. inflation-adjusted gross domestic product (GDP) is currently estimated to have increased at a 3 percent pace in both the second and third quarters despite the disruptions to economic activity in the third quarter caused by the recent hurricanes. Moreover, the economic expansion is increasingly broad based across sectors as well as across much of the global economy. I expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, the economy will continue to expand and the job market will strengthen somewhat further, supporting faster growth in wages and incomes. Although asset valuations are high by historical standards, overall vulnerabilities in the financial sector appear moderate, as the banking system is well capitalized and broad measures of leverage and credit growth remain contained. Even with a step-up in growth of economic activity and a stronger labor market, inflation has continued to run below the 2 percent rate that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judges most consistent with our congressional mandate to foster both maximum employment and price stability. Increases in gasoline prices in the aftermath of the hurricanes temporarily pushed up measures of overall consumer price inflation, but inflation for items other than food and energy has remained surprisingly subdued. The total price index for personal consumption expenditures increased 1.6 percent over the 12 months ending in September, while the core price index, which excludes energy and food prices, rose just 1.3 percent over the same period, about 1/2 percentage point slower than a year earlier. In my view, the recent lower readings on inflation likely reflect transitory factors. As these transitory factors fade, I anticipate that inflation will stabilize around 2 percent over the medium term. However, it is also possible that this year's low inflation could reflect something more persistent. Indeed, inflation has been below the Committee's 2 percent objective for most of the past five years. Against this backdrop, the FOMC has indicated that it intends to carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward our inflation goal. Although the economy and the jobs market are generally quite strong, real GDP growth has been disappointingly slow during this expansion relative to earlier decades. One key reason for this slowdown has been the retirement of the older members of the baby-boom generation and hence the slower growth of the labor force. Another key reason has been the unusually sluggish pace of productivity growth in recent years. To generate a sustained boost in economic growth without causing inflation that is too high, we will need to address these underlying causes. In this regard, the Congress might consider policies that encourage business investment and capital formation, improve the nation's infrastructure, raise the quality of our educational system, and support innovation and the adoption of new technologies. Monetary PolicyI will turn now to the implications of recent economic developments and the outlook for monetary policy. With ongoing strengthening in labor market conditions and an outlook for inflation to return to 2 percent over the next couple of years, the FOMC has continued to gradually reduce policy accommodation. The Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point at both our March and June meetings, with the range now standing at 1 to 1-1/4 percent. And, in October, the Committee began its balance sheet normalization program, which will gradually and predictably reduce our securities holdings. The Committee set limits on the pace of balance sheet reduction; those limits should guard against outsized moves in interest rates and other potential market strains. Indeed, there has been little, if any, market effect associated with the balance sheet runoff to date. We do not foresee a need to alter the balance sheet program, but, as we said in June, we would be prepared to resume reinvestments if a material deterioration in the economic outlook were to warrant a sizable reduction in the federal funds rate. Changes to the target range for the federal funds rate will continue to be the Committee's primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. At our meeting earlier this month, we decided to maintain the existing target range for the federal funds rate. We continue to expect that gradual increases in the federal funds rate will be appropriate to sustain a healthy labor market and stabilize inflation around the FOMC's 2 percent objective. That expectation is based on the view that the current level of the federal funds rate remains somewhat below its neutral level--that is, the rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary and keeps the economy operating on an even keel. The neutral rate currently appears to be quite low by historical standards, implying that the federal funds rate would not have to rise much further to get to a neutral policy stance. If the neutral level rises somewhat over time, as most FOMC participants expect, additional gradual rate hikes would likely be appropriate over the next few years to sustain the economic expansion. Of course, policy is not on a preset course; the appropriate path for the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee has noted that it will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. More generally, in determining the timing and size of future interest rate adjustments, the Committee will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Thank you. I would be pleased to answer your questions.
Chair Janet L. Yellen Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C. Chairman Tiberi, Ranking Member Heinrich, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today. I will discuss the current economic outlook and monetary policy. The Economic OutlookThe U.S. economy has strengthened further this year. Smoothing through the volatility caused by the recent hurricanes, job gains averaged about 170,000 per month from January through October, a somewhat slower pace than last year but still above the range that we estimate will be consistent with absorbing new entrants to the labor force in coming years. With the job gains this year, 17 million more Americans are employed now than eight years ago. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate, which stood at 4.1 percent in October, has fallen 0.6 percentage point since the turn of the year and is nearly 6 percentage points below its peak in 2010. In addition, the labor force participation rate has changed little, on net, in recent years, which is another indication of improving conditions in the labor market, given the downward pressure on the participation rate associated with an aging population. However, despite these labor market gains, wage growth has remained relatively modest. Unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics, which tend to be more sensitive to overall economic conditions than those for whites, have moved down, on net, over the past year and are now near levels last seen before the recession. That said, it remains the case that unemployment rates for these minority groups are noticeably higher than for the nation overall. Meanwhile, economic growth appears to have stepped up from its subdued pace early in the year. After having risen at an annual rate of just 1-1/4 percent in the first quarter, U.S. inflation-adjusted gross domestic product (GDP) is currently estimated to have increased at a 3 percent pace in both the second and third quarters despite the disruptions to economic activity in the third quarter caused by the recent hurricanes. Moreover, the economic expansion is increasingly broad based across sectors as well as across much of the global economy. I expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, the economy will continue to expand and the job market will strengthen somewhat further, supporting faster growth in wages and incomes. Although asset valuations are high by historical standards, overall vulnerabilities in the financial sector appear moderate, as the banking system is well capitalized and broad measures of leverage and credit growth remain contained. Even with a step-up in growth of economic activity and a stronger labor market, inflation has continued to run below the 2 percent rate that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judges most consistent with our congressional mandate to foster both maximum employment and price stability. Increases in gasoline prices in the aftermath of the hurricanes temporarily pushed up measures of overall consumer price inflation, but inflation for items other than food and energy has remained surprisingly subdued. The total price index for personal consumption expenditures increased 1.6 percent over the 12 months ending in September, while the core price index, which excludes energy and food prices, rose just 1.3 percent over the same period, about 1/2 percentage point slower than a year earlier. In my view, the recent lower readings on inflation likely reflect transitory factors. As these transitory factors fade, I anticipate that inflation will stabilize around 2 percent over the medium term. However, it is also possible that this year's low inflation could reflect something more persistent. Indeed, inflation has been below the Committee's 2 percent objective for most of the past five years. Against this backdrop, the FOMC has indicated that it intends to carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward our inflation goal. Although the economy and the jobs market are generally quite strong, real GDP growth has been disappointingly slow during this expansion relative to earlier decades. One key reason for this slowdown has been the retirement of the older members of the baby-boom generation and hence the slower growth of the labor force. Another key reason has been the unusually sluggish pace of productivity growth in recent years. To generate a sustained boost in economic growth without causing inflation that is too high, we will need to address these underlying causes. In this regard, the Congress might consider policies that encourage business investment and capital formation, improve the nation's infrastructure, raise the quality of our educational system, and support innovation and the adoption of new technologies. Monetary PolicyI will turn now to the implications of recent economic developments and the outlook for monetary policy. With ongoing strengthening in labor market conditions and an outlook for inflation to return to 2 percent over the next couple of years, the FOMC has continued to gradually reduce policy accommodation. The Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point at both our March and June meetings, with the range now standing at 1 to 1-1/4 percent. And, in October, the Committee began its balance sheet normalization program, which will gradually and predictably reduce our securities holdings. The Committee set limits on the pace of balance sheet reduction; those limits should guard against outsized moves in interest rates and other potential market strains. Indeed, there has been little, if any, market effect associated with the balance sheet runoff to date. We do not foresee a need to alter the balance sheet program, but, as we said in June, we would be prepared to resume reinvestments if a material deterioration in the economic outlook were to warrant a sizable reduction in the federal funds rate. Changes to the target range for the federal funds rate will continue to be the Committee's primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. At our meeting earlier this month, we decided to maintain the existing target range for the federal funds rate. We continue to expect that gradual increases in the federal funds rate will be appropriate to sustain a healthy labor market and stabilize inflation around the FOMC's 2 percent objective. That expectation is based on the view that the current level of the federal funds rate remains somewhat below its neutral level--that is, the rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary and keeps the economy operating on an even keel. The neutral rate currently appears to be quite low by historical standards, implying that the federal funds rate would not have to rise much further to get to a neutral policy stance. If the neutral level rises somewhat over time, as most FOMC participants expect, additional gradual rate hikes would likely be appropriate over the next few years to sustain the economic expansion. Of course, policy is not on a preset course; the appropriate path for the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. The Committee has noted that it will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. More generally, in determining the timing and size of future interest rate adjustments, the Committee will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Thank you. I would be pleased to answer your questions.
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the 2017 Financial Stability and Fintech Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Office of Financial Research, and the University of Maryland's Robert H. Smith School of Business, Washington, D.C. It is a pleasure to be with you today to talk about financial stability and fintech. Being in the Treasury's beautifully restored Cash Room calls to mind the themes of both history and finance. History, because the room was constructed just after the Civil War. Finance, because it was designed to be the Treasury's bank and was originally used to conduct daily banking and payment transactions with other banks and the general public. Of course the functionality of this room has changed over the decades as the financial system landscape has evolved, and today we are holding a conference here to discuss financial innovation. Before I begin, I will note that my colleague, Jay Powell, was supposed to be your speaker today. However, as you can likely surmise, he had to attend to other matters and asked me to speak in his place. So to carry through the theme of today's topic, one might call Jay the innovator on payments issues at the Federal Reserve, as he has spoken extensively on the subject for many years. And one might think of me as tech support on these issues for the day. New technologies have brought tremendous, positive change to our lives, raising productivity and living standards and contributing to economic growth. In the past few years, innovation has profoundly transformed industries such as retail shopping, the media, and even transportation by providing greater speed, convenience, and competition. Not surprisingly, both the banking industry and technology firms have also been seeking innovations in financial services that mirror and complement changes that have been made in other industries. Innovation is coming to finance with changes to consumer lending, financial advice, and retail payments, to name a few. The Federal Reserve, itself, is engaged in a multiyear effort to address challenges and opportunities in the current payment system. During my experience in the realm of private equity, I had a chance to interact with many new firms in these areas. The pace of innovation was often dizzying. In my new role as Vice Chairman for Supervision at the Federal Reserve, I see innovation as something that can and should be fostered, but of course I must also scrutinize these innovations from a different perspective. That is to say, it is appropriate not only to evaluate the potential of innovations to improve on existing services, but also to judge their ramifications for the safety and soundness of the institutions we supervise and for financial stability--the topic of this conference. Although many of these technologies are still nascent, it is important to have an eye on the potential financial stability implications both in the short- and long-run. Payment systems need to be resilient during adversity. Without that resilience, we could face a sudden loss of public confidence and the seizing up of systems and critical activities. With the Cash Room's perspective on history and daily financial operations in mind, I would like to concentrate my remarks on the U.S. payment system, which is a critical foundation on which financial transactions and the conduct of business take place. New technologies are being proposed that could alter the design of our payment system. Today, I will talk about the necessary trust and confidence that the system requires, the tension between the need for financial stability and the need to innovate, and the challenges that digital currencies, in particular, present relative to the current system. These considerations highlight the need for a prudent approach to innovation in payment systems. Payment Systems, Networks, and TrustPayment systems are both financial networks and technical networks. In simple terms, there is an asset that functions as money that can be transferred by households and businesses to buy goods and services, which, along with their financial institutions, make up the bulk of the financial network. Today, the predominant forms of money used in payment systems are Federal Reserve notes and reserve balances as well as transaction balances at depository institutions. Payment systems also require a technical network to hold and transfer money. In earlier times, the network was less technical in nature and almost exclusively designed for the logistical storage and transfer of physical forms of money. Today, the main payments networks use centralized technology to process and safeguard the public's electronic funds transfers. Regulated banking institutions provide deposit money to the public and are a main source of trust for these systems. Transfers of balances on the books of these institutions are at the center of the public's transactions, with the Federal Reserve Banks playing a central, supporting role in interbank clearing and settlement for the most critical systems. A great amount of resources and effort goes into the networks that make the overall payment system safe, efficient, and resilient. It is fair to say that the general public places a great deal of trust in the components of the overall system to safeguard their money and operate as planned every day, and that trust is necessary for the system to work. From the perspective of financial stability, if the safety and integrity of the institutions and assets at the heart of a system erode or the transfer operations are not dependable, then the necessary trust and confidence that the system requires to work may quickly cease to function as needed. Payment System InnovationWith a steady diet of news about the effect of electronic networks, personal devices, apps, and more on U.S. industries, many question the effect of these technologies on the payment system. I think we should recognize that there can be a tension between the need for financial stability in the overall payment system and the need to innovate to keep up with the demands of modern technology and lifestyles. However, we should also recognize that this tension is not necessarily troubling. By definition innovation means doing something new, which usually involves taking risk in furtherance of some gain. But at the same time, we should be vigilant in balancing the benefits of innovation with the safe and reliable operation of systems and critical activities. From an analytical perspective, payment systems typically increase in value as more people use a system and the more attractive it becomes to others. In addition, there is an inverse relationship between the volume of users of a system and the cost of production--more users lower the cost of production. Until recently, these features may have hindered innovation by presenting high barriers to entry and may have also fostered greater concentration into a few key entities that could become systemically important.1Of course, technology may be able to reduce the effect of at least some of these hurdles by, for example, attracting high numbers of users quickly or reducing the costs of production. However, the effect of reducing technological barriers for financial stability is not clearly positive or negative. For example, on the one hand, new market participants attracted by lower barriers to entry may introduce new and unknown risks in the payment system. On the other hand, new market participants may relieve the concentration of activity in a limited number of players. Thus, the potential tension between innovation and stability can be more difficult to manage in the case of payment systems as compared to other industries that are less affected by these hurdles. One sensible approach to risk management would emphasize "starting small" and taking small risks. But unless a payment system grows a fairly large network of users in a reasonable time, it is unlikely to achieve the scope and scale it needs to be successful. Conversely, if a system attempts to start on a large scale and is successful, there will surely be questions about resilience in adversity, particularly if cutting-edge technologies and methods are used to handle people's money. The essential problem is how to achieve scale and manage financial and technical risk at the same time. Not surprisingly, because striking the right balance takes time, genuine innovation in payment systems over history has often been measured in decades, not years. Private Digital CurrenciesAs part of the new technology associated with fintech, we are now seeing the emergence of privately developed digital currencies using new decentralized technologies. Fundamental to these digital currencies is the establishment of a new asset, the unit of the digital currency--for example, a bitcoin--and a new record-keeping and transfer mechanism that enables users to store and trade those units--for example, a blockchain--often without reliance on traditional financial institutions. I believe the financial industry is increasingly recognizing that we should separate the concept of digital currencies from the innovative new technologies that they have employed to transfer assets. Those technologies, such as distributed ledgers, may offer useful new ways to store, transfer, and protect data and traditional financial assets. The industry is now moving cautiously from pilot projects in many of these areas to the use of these new technologies in limited production settings. This cautious approach to using new technology appears to reflect the weight of responsibility the financial industry bears for protecting both their customers and their reputations. Continued monitoring of developments is in order, and time will tell how these new technologies--and others--can contribute to a safe and secure payment system and broader financial system. The Federal Reserve has been actively monitoring these developments and will continue to do so.2 But when we examine the assets at the center of digital currency systems, I think we should begin to think clearly about the long-term properties we seek for large-scale payment networks and systems used by the general public. Today, the vast majority of our payments by volume and value are processed by regulated financial institutions. In the U.S. payment system, digital currencies are a niche product that sometimes garners large headlines. But from the standpoint of analysis, the "currency" or asset at the center of some of these systems is not backed by other secure assets, has no intrinsic value, is not the liability of a regulated banking institution, and in leading cases, is not the liability of any institution at all. Indeed, how to treat and define this new asset is complicated.3 While these digital currencies may not pose major concerns at their current levels of use, more serious financial stability issues may result if they achieve wide-scale usage. Risk management can act as a mitigant, but if the central asset in a payment system cannot be predictably redeemed for the U.S. dollar at a stable exchange rate in times of adversity, the resulting price risk and potential liquidity and credit risk pose a large challenge for the system. During times of crisis, the demand for liquidity can increase significantly, including the demand for the central asset used in settling payments. Even private-sector banks and certainly non-banks can have a hard time meeting large-scale demands for extra liquidity at the very time when their balance sheets may be in question. Moreover, this inability to meet the demand for extra liquidity can have spillover effects to other areas of the financial system. Earlier in our history, the United States frequently witnessed bank runs that severely disrupted financial and economic activity, an example of what can happen when people lose faith in a payment system. In response, Congress ultimately introduced both a central bank and deposit insurance programs to help regulate fluctuations in the supply of liquidity in order to keep prices stable. Without the backing of a central bank asset and institutional support, it is not clear how a private digital currency at the center of a large-scale payment system would behave, or whether the payment system would be able to function, in times of stress. Central-Bank-Issued Digital CurrencyGiven that privately developed digital currencies may raise important financial stability issues tied to the value of the asset, some have argued that central banks should begin to issue their own digital currency as a 21st century analogue to paper currency. I would urge caution, particularly for countries like the United States with highly developed banking systems and ongoing robust demand for physical cash. As a practical matter, I believe that consideration of a central-bank-issued digital currency to the general public would require extensive reviews and consultations about legal issues, as well as a long list of risk issues, including the potential deployment of unproven technology, money laundering, cybersecurity, and privacy to name a few. I am particularly concerned that a central-bank-issued digital currency that's held widely around the globe could be the subject of serious cyberattacks and could be widely used in money laundering and terrorist financing. The effect of all this would significantly divert our focus from work to improve or establish new private-sector retail payment systems based on existing institutions. The prospect of a government-sponsored digital currency might even derail private-sector plans to enhance the payment services provided to their customers, thereby significantly disrupting the financial networks that exist today in ways that could create instability. For example, if payment activity radically shifted from using deposits at financial institutions to using central-bank-issued digital currency, deposits could significantly shrink and potentially disrupt financial institutions' ability to make loans that spur economic activity. That said, research into digital currency issues, including highly liquid and secure limited-purpose digital currencies for use as a settlement asset for wholesale payment systems, should continue. As technologies are developed and refined, old issues are resolved and new issues arise. Other countries may have different environments and experiences. We should always be open to learning and understanding from the experiences of others. Prudent InnovationFor the United States, the alternative to privately issued digital currency is not necessarily a publicly issued digital currency. Instead, the near-term alternative is to build on the trusted foundations of the existing payment system and work to improve private-sector payment services. Importantly, this means looking to the banking system, which holds the bulk of the transaction deposits in this country, to improve services. This began a number of years ago with internet banking. Today, many banks offer around-the-clock internet-based access to accounts as well as mobile banking and payment capabilities. Many banks typically allow real-time or near real-time transfers of funds among their own customer base. What does not yet exist in the United States is the sort of ubiquitous, real-time payment system that would allow banks and their customers to make transfers and settlements of funds across the banking system instantly, conveniently, and securely all the time. As my colleague at the Board, Jay Powell, recently discussed at a conference in New York, the Federal Reserve has been working with the banking industry and a wide range of other payment system stakeholders to better understand the consequences of this state of affairs and support efforts to expand the available options through our payment system improvement initiative.4For example, based on recommendations from the industry, the Federal Reserve is currently studying potential improvements in its settlement services--a traditional core function of a central bank--that could address the future needs of a ubiquitous real-time retail payments environment. Building on our existing banking system also makes sense from a financial stability perspective. Federally insured and supervised institutions are the core of our current payment system and largely address the potential financial stability problem of relying on payment systems with unbacked and unregulated digital currencies at their heart. But leveraging our existing banking system does not suggest that there is no room for new or emerging institutions and technologies. Indeed, there are a number of promising avenues that would allow the innovations that appear to be of the greatest interest to households and business--attributes like instant payment capabilities and around-the-clock operations--to be offered using a variety of existing and new technologies without requiring significant tradeoffs in safety and resiliency. SummaryTo conclude, our financial stability requires that the payment system be reliable and dependable so that the public can trust it. As a result, there can be a tension between innovation and the need for financial stability in the overall payment system. Innovation must therefore account for the effects that it has on both the financial and technology networks that make up our payment system. The innovation that is beginning to flow from the development of digital currencies--and other technologies--will likely have a long-run effect on the technical networks and the business processes used in the payment system and the wider financial system. Privately developed digital currencies as currently configured would raise concerns about the effect on financial stability if they take on more prominence in the payments and overall financial system. Central bank digital currencies are also not immune to a large range of risks and could even adversely affect financial stability. As such, central banks should tread cautiously as they contemplate issuing them. But this does not mean that we should avoid further innovation. Working cooperatively, private-sector participants and central banks can incorporate innovation that may be able to strike the right balance of improving the technical networks without adversely generating financial stability concerns. I am optimistic that the Federal Reserve's work with the payments industry will facilitate a future with a safe and more efficient payment system. 1. See Financial Stability Board,Financial Stability Implications from FinTech: Supervisory and Regulatory Issues that Merit Authorities' Attention(PDF), June 27, 2017.Return to text 2. See David Mills, Kathy Wang, Brendan Malone, Anjana Ravi, Jeff Marquardt, Clinton Chen, Anton Badev, Timothy Brezinski, Linda Fahy, Kimberley Liao, Vanessa Kargenian, Max Ellithorpe, Wendy Ng, and Maria Baird, "Distributed Ledger Technology in Payments, Clearing, and Settlement (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-095 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2016).Return to text 3. For example, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission published a statement on digital currencies making clear that many fall into the category of commodities under the Commodity Exchange Act (www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/pr7231-15). The Securities and Exchange Commission has published guidance on the treatment of digital currencies under the Securities Exchange Act (www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2017-131). The Internal Revenue Service has published guidance on the tax treatment of digital currencies (www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/n-14-21.pdf). And the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network has published guidance on the treatment of digital currencies under the Bank Secrecy Act (www.fincen.gov/resources/statutes-regulations/guidance/application-fincens-regulations-persons-administering).Return to text 4. See Jerome H. Powell, "Financial Innovation: A World in Transition" (speech delivered at the 41st Annual Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, October 18, 2017).Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At "FinTech Risks and Opportunities: An Interdisciplinary Approach," a conference sponsored by the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan The new generation of fintech tools offers the potential to help consumers manage their increasingly complicated financial lives, but also poses risks that will need to be managed as the marketplace matures.1 In many ways, the new generation of fintech tools can be seen as the financial equivalent of an autopilot. The powerful new fintech tools represent the convergence of numerous advances in research and technology--ranging from new insights into consumer decisionmaking to a revolution in available data, cloud computing, and artificial intelligence (AI). They operate by guiding consumers through complex decisions by offering new ways of looking at a consumer's overall financial picture or simplifying choices, for example with behavioral nudges. As consumers start to rely on financial autopilots, however, it is important that they remain in the driver's seat and have a good handle on what is happening under the hood. Consumers need to know and decide who they are contracting with, what data of theirs is being used by whom and for what purpose, how to revoke data access and delete stored data, and how to seek relief if things go wrong. In short, consumers should remain in control of the data they provide. In addition, consumers should receive clear disclosure of the factors that are reflected in the recommendations they receive. If these issues can be appropriately addressed, the new fintech capabilities have enormous potential to deliver analytically grounded financial services and simplified choices, tailored to the consumers' needs and preferences, and accessible via their smartphones.2 Consumers Face Complex Financial ChoicesWhen the first major "credit card," the Diner's Club Card, was introduced in 1949, consumers could only use the cardboard card at restaurants and, importantly, only if they paid the entire amount due each month.3Today, the average cardholder has about four credit cards, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York estimates that American consumers collectively carry $785 billion in credit card debt.4 When signing up for a credit card, consumers face a bewildering array of choices. Half of consumers report that they select new cards based on reward programs, weighing "cash back" offers against "points" with their credit card provider that may convert into airline or hotel "miles," which may have varying values depending on how they are redeemed.5In some cases, rewards may apply to specific spending categories that rotate by quarter and require that consumers re-register each term, and the rewards may expire or be forfeited under complicated terms.6 In some cases, the choices may be confusing. Let's take the example of zero percent interest credit card promotions. A consumer may choose a zero percent interest credit card promotion and expect to pay no interest on balances during a promotional period, after which any balances are assessed at a higher rate of interest going forward. But if a consumer instead chooses a zero percent interest private-label credit card with deferred interest and has a positive balance when the promotional period expires, interest could be retroactively assessed for the full time they held a balance during the promotional period.7Even sophisticated consumers could be excused for confusing these products. As it turns out, it is often the most vulnerable consumers who have to navigate the most complicated products. For instance, one recent study of the credit card market found that the average length of agreements for products offered to subprime consumers was 70 percent longer than agreements for other products.8 The complexity multiplies when we go beyond credit cards and consider other dimensions of consumers' financial lives.9The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has found that nearly a quarter of the Americans that don't maintain bank accounts are concerned that bank fees are too unpredictable.10Even though mortgage debt is over two-thirds of household debt, nearly half of consumers don't comparison shop before taking out a mortgage.11Student loans now make up 11 percent of total household debt, more than twice its share in 2008.12Over 11 percent of student debt is more than 90 days delinquent or in default--and researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York estimate that this figure may understate the problem by as much as half.13 Today, consumers navigate numerous weighty financial responsibilities for themselves and their dependents.14It seems fair to assume they could use some help managing this complexity. In the Federal Reserve Board's annual Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), more than half of respondents reported that their spending exceeded their income in the prior year.15Indeed, 44 percent of SHED respondents reported that they could not cover an emergency expense costing $400 without selling something or borrowing money.16 New Tools to Help Consumers Manage Their FinancesGiven the complexity and importance of these decisions, it is encouraging to see the fast-growing development of advanced, technology-enabled tools to help consumers navigate the complex issues in their financial lives. These tools build on important advances in our understanding of consumer financial behavior and the applications, or "app," ecosystem. Researchers have invested decades of work exploring how consumers actually make decisions. We all tend to use shortcuts to simplify financial decisions, and it turns out many of these can prove faulty, particularly when dealing with complex problems.17For example, empirical evidence consistently shows that consumers overvalue the present and undervalue the future.18Researchers have documented that consumers make better savings decisions when they are presented with fewer options.19They have shown the importance of "anchoring" bias--the tendency to place disproportionate weight on the first piece of information presented. This bias can lead consumers either to make poor financial choices or instead to tip the scales in favor of beneficial choices, as with automatic savings defaults.20Similarly, "nudges" can help consumers in the right circumstances or instead backfire in surprising ways.21 These behavioral insights are especially powerful when paired with the remarkable advances we have seen in the technological tools available to the average consumer, especially through their smartphones.22Smartphones are ubiquitous. The 2016 Federal Reserve Survey of Consumer and Mobile Financial Services (SCMF) found that 87 percent of the U.S. adult population had a mobile phone, the vast majority of which were smartphones.23Smartphone use is prevalent even among the unbanked and underbanked populations. Survey evidence suggests we are three times more likely to reach for our phone than our significant other when we first wake up in the morning.24 Some evidence suggests that smartphones are already helping consumers make better financial decisions. The 2016 SCMF found that 62 percent of mobile banking users checked their account balances on their phones before making a large purchase, and half of those that did so decided not to purchase an item as a result.25In addition, 41 percent of smartphone owners checked product reviews or searched product information online while shopping in a retail store, and 79 percent of those respondents reported changing their purchase decision based on the information they accessed on their smartphone.26 And those use cases just scratch the surface of what is possible. First of all, the smartphone platform has become a launch pad for a whole ecosystem of apps created by outside developers for a wide variety of services, including helping consumers manage their financial lives. Second, the smartphone ecosystem puts the enormous computing power of the cloud at the fingertips of consumers. Interfacing with smartphone platforms and other apps, outside developers can tap the computing power of the leading cloud computing providers in building their apps. Importantly, cloud computing offers not only the power to process and store data, but also powerful algorithms to make sense of it. Due to early commitment to open-source principles, app developers have open access to many of the same machine-learning and artificial intelligence tools that power the world's largest internet companies.27Further, the major cloud computing providers have now taken these free building blocks and created different machine-learning and artificial intelligence stacks on their cloud platforms. A developer that wants to incorporate artificial intelligence into their financial management app can access off-the-shelf models of cloud computing providers, potentially getting to market faster than by taking the traditional route of finding training data and building out models in-house from scratch. Third, fintech developers can also draw from enormous pools of data that were previously unavailable outside of banking institutions. Consumer financial data are increasingly available to developers via a new breed of business-to-business suppliers, called data aggregators.28These companies enable outside developers to access consumer account and transactional information typically stored by banks. But aggregators do more than just provide access to raw data. They facilitate its use by developers, by cleaning the data, standardizing it across institutions, and offering their own application programming interfaces for easy integration. Further, similar to cloud computing providers, data aggregators are also beginning to provide off-the-shelf product stacks on their own platforms.29This means that developers can quickly and easily incorporate product features, such as predicting creditworthiness, determining how much a consumer can save each month, or creating alerts for potential overdraft charges. Researchers have documented the benefits of tailored one-on-one financial coaching.30Until recently, though, it has been hard to deliver that kind of service affordably and at scale, due to differences in consumers' circumstances. Let's again consider the example of deferred interest credit cards. It turns out only a small minority of consumers miss the deadlines for repaying promotional balances and are charged retroactive interest payments, and they typically have deep subprime scores.31Similarly, for consumers that opt into overdraft products on their checking accounts, 8 percent of consumers pay 75 percent of the fees.32Up until now, it has been hard for consumers to understand those odds and objectively assess whether they are likely to be in the group of customers that will face challenges with a particular financial product. The convergence of smartphone ubiquity, cloud computing, data aggregation, and off-the-shelf AI products offer the potential to make tailored financial advice scalable. For instance, a fintech developer could pair historical data about how different types of consumers fare with a specific product, on the one hand, with a consumer's particular financial profile, on the other hand, to make a prediction about how that consumer is likely to fare with the product. The Evolution of Financial AutopilotsSince the early days of internet commerce, developers have tried to move beyond simple price comparison tools to offer tailored "agents" for consumers that can recommend products based on analyses of individual behavior and preferences.33Today, a new generation of personal financial management tools seems poised to make that leap. When a consumer wishes to select a new financial product, he or she can now solicit options from a number of websites and mobile apps. These new comparison sites can walk the consumer through a wide array of financial products, offering to compare features like rewards, fees, and rates, or tailoring to a consumer's stated goals. Some fintech advisors ask consumers to provide access to their bank accounts, retirement accounts, college savings accounts, and other investment platforms in order to enable a fintech advisor to offer a consumer a single, near complete picture of his balances and cash flows across different institutions. In reviewing the advertising, terms and conditions, and apps of an array of fintech advisors, it appears that many of these tools offer advanced data analysis, machine learning, and even artificial intelligence to help consumers cut down on unnecessary spending, set aside money for savings, and use healthy nudges to improve their financial decisions. For instance, a fintech advisor may help a consumer automate savings "rules," like rounding up charges and putting the difference into savings, enabling these small balances to accumulate over time or setting a small amount of money aside every time a consumer spends money on little splurges. The early stages of innovation inevitably feature a lot of learning from trial and error. Fortunately, as the fintech ecosystem advances, there are useful experiences and good practices to draw upon from the evolution of the commercial internet. To begin with, one internet adage is that if a product is free, "youare the product."34In this vein, fintech advisors frequently offer free services to consumers and earn their revenue from the credit cards and other financial products that they recommend through lead generation. Of course, many fintech advisors are not lead generators. Some companies offer fee-for-service models, with consumers paying a monthly fee for the product. Other companies are paid by employers, who then provide the products free of charge to their employees as an employee benefit. In these cases, they likely have quite different business models. But for those services that do act as lead generators, there are important considerations about whether and how best to communicate information to the consumer about the nature of the recommendations being made. For instance, according to some reports, fintech advisors can make between $100 and $700 in lead generation fees for every customer that signs up for a credit card they recommend.35 In many cases, a fintech advisor may describe their service as providing tailored advice or making recommendations as they would to friends and family. In such cases, a consumer might not know whether the order in which products are presented by a fintech assistant is based on the product's alignment with his or her needs or different considerations. Different fintech advisors may order the lists they show consumers using different criteria. A product may be at the top of the advisor's recommendations because the sponsoring company has paid the advisor to list it at the top, or the sponsoring company may pay the fintech assistant a high fee, contingent upon the consumer signing up for the product. Alternatively, a fintech advisor may change the order of the loan offers or credit cards based on the likelihood that the consumer will be approved. Moreover, in some cases, the absence of lead generation fees for a particular product may impact whether that product is on the list shown to consumers at all. There appears to be a wide variety of practices regarding the prominence and placement of advertising and other disclosures relative to the advice and recommendations such firms provide. Overall, fintech assistants have increasingly improved the disclosures that explain to consumers how they get paid, but this is still a work in progress. The good news is that these challenges are not new. The experience with internet search engines outside of financial products, such as Google, Bing, and Yahoo!, as well as with other product comparison sites, such as Travelocity and Yelp, may provide useful guidance. As consumers and businesses have adapted to the internet, we have, collectively, adopted norms and standards for how we can expect search and recommendation engines to operate. In particular, we generally expect that search results will be included and ranked based on what's organically most responsive to the search--unless it is clearly labeled otherwise.36Accordingly, when we search for a product, we now know to look for visual cues that identify paid search results, usually in the form of a text label like "Sponsored" or "Ad", different formatting, and visually separating advertising from natural search results.37Even when an endorsement is made in a brief Twitter update, we now expect disclosures to be clear and conspicuous.38 As fintech advisors evolve to engage consumers in new ways, disclosure methodologies will no doubt be expected to adapt as well. For instance, some personal financial management tools now interact with consumers via text message. If consumers move to a world in which most of their interactions with their advisors occur via text-messaging "chatbots"--or voice communication--I am hopeful that industry, regulators, consumers, and other stakeholders will work together to adapt the norms to distinguish between advice and sponsored recommendations. The Data RelationshipWhile the lead generation revenue model presents some familiar issues that are readily apparent, under the hood, fintech relationships raise even more complex issues for consumers in knowing who they are providing their data to, how their data will be used, for how long, and what to expect in the case of a breach or fraud. Let me briefly touch on each issue in turn. Often, when a consumer signs up with a fintech advisor or other fintech app, they are asked to log into their bank account in order to link the fintech app with their bank account data. In reviewing apps' enrollment processes, it appears that consumers are often shown log-in screens featuring bank logos and branding, prompting consumers to enter their online banking logins and passwords. In many cases, the apps note that they do not store the consumers' banking credentials. When the consumer logs on, he or she is often not interfacing with a banks' computer systems, but rather, providing the bank account login and password to a data aggregator that provides services to the fintech app. In many cases, the data aggregator may store the password and login and then use those credentials to periodically log into the consumer's bank account and copy available data, ranging from transaction data, to account numbers, to personally identifiable information. In other cases, things work differently under the hood. Some banks and data aggregators have agreed to work together to facilitate the ability to share data with outside developers in authorized ways. These agreements may delineate what types of data will be shared, and authorization credentials may be tokenized so that passwords are never stored by the aggregator.39 It is often hard for the consumer to know what is actually happening under the hood of the financial app they are accessing. In most cases, the log in process does not do much to educate the consumer on the precise nature of the data relationship. Screen scraping usually invokes the bank's logo and branding but infrequently shows the logo or name of the data aggregator. In reviewing many apps, it appears that the name of the data aggregator is frequently not disclosed in the fintech app's terms and conditions, and a consumer generally would not easily see what data is held by a data aggregator or how it is used. The apps, websites, and terms and conditions of fintech advisors and data aggregators often do not explain how frequently data aggregators will access a consumer's data or how long they will store that data.40 Recognizing this is a relatively young field, but one that is growing fast, there are a myriad of questions about the consumer's ability to opt out and control over data that will need to be addressed appropriately. In examining the terms and conditions for a number of fintech apps, it appears that consumers are rarely provided information explaining how they can terminate the collection and storage of their data. For instance, when a consumer deletes a fintech app from his or her phone, it is not clear this would guarantee that a data aggregator would delete the consumer's bank login and password, nor discontinue accessing transaction information. If a consumer severs the data access, for instance by changing banks or bank account passwords, it is also not clear how he or she can instruct the data aggregator to delete the information that has already been collected. Given that data aggregators often don't have consumer interfaces, consumers may be left to find an email address for the data aggregator, send in a deletion request, and hope for the best. If things go wrong, consumers may have limited remedies. In reviewing terms, it appears that many fintech advisors include contractual waivers that purport to limit consumers' ability to seek redress from the advisor or an underlying data aggregator. In some cases, the terms and conditions assert that the fintech developer and its third-party service providers will not be liable to consumers for the performance of or inability to use the services. It is not uncommon to see terms and conditions that limit the fintech adviser's liability to the consumer to $100. Traditionally, under the Electronic Funds Transfer Act and its implementing Regulation E, consumers have had protections to mitigate their losses in the event of erroneous or fraudulent transactions that would otherwise impact their credit and debit cards, such as data breaches. Those protections are not absolute, however.41In particular, if a consumer gives another person an "access device" to their account and grants them authority to make transfers, then the consumer is "fully liable" for transfers made by that person, even if that person exceeds his or her authority, until the consumer notifies the bank.42As the industry matures, the various stakeholders will need to develop a shared understanding of who bears responsibility in the event of a breach.43 Shared Responsibility and Shared Benefit Moving ForwardSo what can be done to make sure consumers have the requisite information and control to remain squarely in the driver's seat? Establishing and implementing new norms is in the shared interest of all of the participants in the fintech stack. For instance, in the case of credit cards, mortgages, and many other products, it is often banks or parties closely affiliated with banks that pay fees to fintech advisors to generate leads for their products, pursuant to a contract. Through these contractual relationships with fintech advisors, banks have considerable influence in the lead generation relationship, including through provisions describing how a sponsored product should be described or displayed. Banks have a stake in ensuring that their vendors and third-party service providers act appropriately, that consumers are protected and treated fairly, and that the banks' reputations aren't exposed to unnecessary risk.44Likewise, some of the leading speech-only financial products are currently credit card and bank products.45Accordingly, banks have incentives to invest in innovating the way they disclose information to consumers, as they also invest in new ways of interacting with them. As for consumers' relationships with data aggregators, there's an increasing recognition that consumers need better information about the terms of their relationships with aggregators, more control over what is shared, and the ability to terminate the relationship.46We have spoken to data aggregators who recognize the importance of finding solutions to many of the complex issues involved with the important work of unlocking the potential of the banking stack to developers. And while there are some difficult issues in this space, other issues seem relatively straightforward. It shouldn't be hard for a consumer to be informed who they are providing their credentials to. Consumers should have relatively simple means of being able to consent to what data are being shared and at what frequency. And consumers should be able to stop data sharing and request the deletion of data that have been stored. Responsibility for establishing appropriate norms in the data aggregation space should be shared, with banks, data aggregators, fintech developers, consumers, and regulators all having a role.47Banks and data aggregators are negotiating new relationships to determine how they can work together to provide consumers access to their data, while also ensuring that the process is secure and leaves consumers in the driver's seat.48In many cases, banks themselves were often the original customers of data aggregators, and many continue to use these services. According to public filings, more than half of the 20 largest banks are customers of data aggregators.49The banks have an opportunity as customers of data aggregation services to ensure that the terms of data provision protect consumers' data and handle it appropriately. Regulators also recognize that there may be opportunities to provide more clarity about how the expectations about third-party risk management would work in this sector, as well as other areas experiencing significant technological change. Through external outreach and internal analysis, we are working to determine how best to encourage socially beneficial innovation in the marketplace, while ensuring that consumers' interests are protected. We recognize the importance of working together and the potential to draw upon existing policies, norms, and principles from other spaces. Consumers may not fully understand the differences in regulations across financial products or types of financial institutions, or whether the rules change when they move from familiar search and e-commerce platforms to the fintech stack. Consumers, as well as the market as a whole, will benefit if regulators coordinate to provide more unified messages and support the development of standards that serve as a natural extension of the common-sense norms that consumers have come to expect in other areas of the commercial internet. ConclusionThe combination of technologies that put vast computing power, rich data sets, and artificial intelligence onto simple smartphone apps together with important research into consumer financial behaviors has great potential to help consumers navigate their complex financial lives more effectively, but there are also important risks. I am hopeful that fintech developers, data aggregators, bank partners, consumers, and regulators will work together to keep consumers in the driver's seat as we move forward with these new technologies. If we work together effectively toward this goal, the fintech stack may be able to offer enormous benefits to the consumers they aim to serve, while appropriately identifying and managing the risks. 1.I am grateful to Kelvin Chen for his assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.See Lael Brainard, "The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech (PDF)," (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation, Washington, D.C., December 2, 2016).Return to text 3.See, e.g., Damaris Olaechea, "Who Issued the First Credit Card?" Nerd Wallet (February 12, 2014), www.nerdwallet.com/blog/credit-cards/issued-first-credit-card/.Return to text 4.See, e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,The Consumer Credit Card Market(PDF), Executive Summary December 2015, and Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2017,www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/householdcredit/data/pdf/HHDC_2017Q2.pdf.Return to text 5.See J.D. Power, "Attractive Rewards and Benefits Drive Credit Card Selection, Satisfaction and Spend," press release, August 20, 2015, www.jdpower.com/sites/default/files/2015137_U.S._Credit_Card_Study_PR_Final.pdf.Return to text 6.See, e.g., Jeanine Skowronski, "Why 5 Percent Cash Back Is an Overrated Selling Point,"American Banker, November 6, 2013, www.americanbanker.com/opinion/why-5-cash-back-is-an-overrated-selling-point. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,The Consumer Credit Card Market(PDF), section 7, December 2015.Return to text 7.See, e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,The Consumer Credit Card Market(PDF), section 6, December 2015.Return to text 8.Id at section 5.1.2.Return to text 9.In 2007 researchers at Carnegie Mellon estimated that it would take the average consumer 244 hours a year just to read the privacy policies of the websites that he viewed that year. Aleecia McDonald and Lorrie Faith Cranor,TheCost of Reading Privacy Policies,"I/s: A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information Society(2008), pre-press version available athttp://lorrie.cranor.org/pubs/readingPolicyCost-authorDraft.pdf.Return to text 10.Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households(PDF), (2015).Return to text 11.See, e.g., Michael Corkery and Stacy Cowley, "Household Debt Makes a Comeback in the U.S.,"New York Times, May 17, 2017, www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/business/dealbook/household-debt-united-states.html; See Alexei Alexandrov and Sergei Koulayev, "No Shopping in the U.S. Mortgage Market: Direct and Strategic Effects of Providing Information," Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Office of Research Working Paper No. 2017-01 (Washington: CFPB, April 7, 2017), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2948491. ("[M]any consumers do not seem to realize that there is price dispersion. . . . In one of our counterfactuals, we show that eliminating non-price preferences results in savings of about $9 billion dollars a year.")Return to text 12.See, e.g., Michael Corkery and Stacy Cowley, "Household Debt Makes a Comeback in the U.S.,"New York Times, May 17, 2017, www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/business/dealbook/household-debt-united-states.html. ("Student borrowers today owe $1.3 trillion, more than double the $611 billion owed nearly nine years ago. About one in 10 student borrowers is behind on repaying the loans, the highest delinquency rate of any type of loan tracked by the New York Fed's quarterly household debt report."); Jesse Bricker, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, Sarah Pack, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A.Windle, "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),"Federal ReserveBulletinvol. 103, no. 3 (September 2017).Return to text 13.Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit(PDF), August 2017. ( "...[D]elinquency rates for student loans are likely to understate effective delinquency rates because about half of these loans are currently in deferment, in grace periods or in forbearance and therefore temporarily not in the repayment cycle. This implies that among loans in the repayment cycle delinquency rates are roughly twice as high." Id. n.2 ).Return to text 14.This can be particularly challenging for older consumers. See, e.g., AARP, "Financial Innovation Frontiers (PDF)," April 2017. ("50+ Consumers Face Unprecedented Financial Complexity.")Return to text 15.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2016(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2017).Return to text 16.Id.Return to text 17.See, e.g., Krista Tippett,On Being, radio interview with Daniel Kahneman, October 5, 2017. ("...[It] is actually completely not possible for a finite human mind to be rational or to obey the axioms of rationality. You'd have to know too much . . . [T]he cognitive rules are, to a large extent, simplifying rules. They are shortcuts.")Return to text 18.See, e.g., David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, "Estimating Discount Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle (PDF)," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13314 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, August 2007).Return to text 19.See, e.g., John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Bridgitt C. Madrian, "Simplification and Saving (PDF)," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12659 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, 2006). ("Many financial decisions that individuals face are complicated and daunting for those who are not financial experts. .By collapsing a multidimensional set of options into a binary choice between the status quo and the pre-selected alternative, this intervention increases participation rates by 10 to 20 percentage points among affected employees."); Sheena S. Iyengar, Wei Jiang, and Gur Huberman, "How Much Choice is Too Much?: Contributions to 401(k) Retirement Plans (PDF)," Pension Research Council Working Paper (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, The Wharton School, PRC, 2003). ("Using data from nearly 800,000 employees, …[our] results confirm that participation in 401(k) plans is higher in plans offering a handful of funds, as compared to plans offering ten or more options.")Return to text 20.See, e.g., Daniel Navarro-Martinez, et al., "Minimum Required Payment and Supplemental Information Disclosure Effects on Consumer Debt Repayment Decisions,"Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 48 (November 2011), http://journals.ama.org/doi/pdf/10.1509/jmkr.48.SPL.S60?code=amma-site. ("They find that while presenting minimum required payment information has a negative impact on repayment decisions, increasing the minimum required level has a positive effect on repayment for most consumers.") See, e.g., Bridgette C. Madrian, "Matching Contributions and Savings Outcomes: A Behavioral Economics Perspective (PDF)," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18220 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, July 2012). ("Indeed, automatic enrollment is an extreme form of simplification; individuals who want to save need not do anything. Psychologists have long recognized that choice complexity can affect decision-making outcomes. One result is procrastination--individuals put off decision making as choices become more complicated.") (Internal citations omitted.)Return to text 21.See, e.g., Dean S. Karlan, et al, "Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Savings," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16205, (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, July 2010). See, e.g., Jialan Wang and Benjamin J. Keys, "Perverse Nudges: Minimum Payments and Debt Paydown in Consumer Credit Cards," Penn Wharton Public Policy Initiative Issue Brief, vol. 2. no. 4 (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, April 2014), https://publicpolicy.wharton.upenn.edu/issue-brief/v2n4.php.Return to text 22.See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack (PDF)," (speech at Northwestern Kellogg Public–Private Interface Conference on New Developments in Consumer Finance: Research and Practice).Return to text 23.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Consumers and Mobile Financial Services 2016(PDF), (Washington, Board of Governors, March 2016). The survey found that 40 percent of the unbanked population and 70 percent of the underbanked and banked populations had access to a smartphone.Return to text 24.See Bank of America,Trends in Consumer Mobility Report, 2015, http://newsroom.bankofamerica.com/files/doc_library/additional/2015_BAC_Trends_in_Consumer_Mobility_Report.pdf. (Finding that 35 percent of survey respondents reported that they reach for their mobile devices first thing, as compared to 10 percent for their significant other.)Return to text 25.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Consumers and Mobile Financial Services 2016(PDF).Return to text 26.Id.Return to text 27.See, e.g., Blair Hanley Frank, "Meet Google's Cool New Natural Language Tool, Parsey McParseface,"Computerworld, May 12, 2016, www.computerworld.com/article/3070059/artificial-intelligence/meet-googles-cool-new-natural-language-tool-parsey-mcparseface.html. See also Google Research Blog, "TensorFlow--Google's Latest Machine Learning System, Open Sourced for Everyone," November 9, 2015, https://research.googleblog.com/2015/11/tensorflow-googles-latest-machine_9.html. Cf. Tom Simonite, "Facebook Quietly Enters Starcraft War for AI Bots, and Loses,"Wired, October 9, 2017, www.wired.com/story/facebook-quietly-enters-starcraft-war-for-ai-bots-and-loses/.Return to text 28.See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack (PDF)," (speech at Northwestern Kellogg Public–Private Interface Conference on New Developments in Consumer Finance: Research and Practice).Return to text 29.See, e.g., Envestnet Yodlee, "Envestnet Yodlee Unveils Personal Financial Wellness Solution Powered by Data Intelligence," news release, June 12, 2017, www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/envestnet--yodlee-unveils-personal-financial-wellness-solution-powered-by-data-intelligence-300472018.html.Return to text 30.See, e.g., Brett Theodos, et al.,An Evaluation of the Impacts and Implementation Approach of Financial Coaching Programs(PDF)(Washington: Urban Institute, October 2015).Return to text 31.Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,The Consumer Credit Card Market(PDF)(Washington: CFPB, December 2015).Return to text 32.Trevor Bakker, Nicole Kelly, Jesse Leary, and Eva Nagypal,Data Point: Checking Account Overdraft(PDF), Consumer Financial Protection Bureau report (Washington: CFPB, July 2014). Likewise, one out of five new payday loans are rolled over six times or more. Kathleen Burke, Jonathan Lanning, Jesse Leary, and Jialan Wang,Data Point: Payday Lending(PDF), Consumer Financial Protection Bureau report (Washington: CFPB, March 2014).Return to text 33.See, e.g., Phil Patton, "Buy Here, and We'll Tell You What You Like,"New York Times, September 22, 1999, https://partners.nytimes.com/library/tech/99/09/biztech/technology/22patt.html?mcubz=1.Return to text 34.See, e.g., John Lanchester, "You Are the Product,"London Review of Books, vol. 39, no. 16-17, August 17, 2017, www.lrb.co.uk/v39/n16/john-lanchester/you-are-the-product. Cf., Monica Anderson, "Key Takeaways on Mobile Apps and Privacy," Pew Research CenterFactTank, November 10, 2015,www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/11/10/key-takeaways-mobile-apps/.Return to text 35.See, e.g., Nathaniel Popper, "Automated Assistants Will Soon Make a Bid for Your Finances,"New York Times, December 7, 2016, www.nytimes.com/2016/12/07/business/dealbook/automated-assistants-will-soon-make-a-bid-for-your-finances.html.Return to text 36.Cf., Federal Trade Commission, "Mary Engle Letter to Search Engine Providers (PDF)," n.4, June 24, 2013; Federal Trade Commission, "FTC Consumer Protection Staff Update Agency's Guidance to Search Engine Industry on the Need to Distinguish Between Advertisements and Search Results," press release, June 25, 2013; Federal Trade Commission, "Commercial Alert Response Letter," June 27, 2002.Return to text 37.Cf., Federal Trade Commission, "Mary Engle Letter to Search Engine Providers (PDF)," n.4, June 24, 2013.Return to text 38.Cf., Federal Trade Commission, "The FTC's Endorsement Guides: What People Are Asking," September 2017, ".com Disclosures: How to Make Effective Disclosures in Digital Advertising (PDF)," March 2013.Return to text 39.See, e.g., Finicity, "Finicity and Wells Fargo Ink Data Exchange Deal," press release, April 4, 2017, www.finicity.com/press-release-finicity-wells-fargo-ink-data-exchange-deal/; Wells Fargo & Co., "Intuit Signs New Data-Exchange Agreement with Wells Fargo," press release, February 3, 2017, www.wellsfargo.com/about/press/2017/intuit-agreement_0203/; Intuit, "Chase, Intuit to Give Customers Greater Control of Their Information," press release, January 25, 2017, www.intuit.com/company/press-room/press-releases/2017/Chase-Intuit-to-Give-Customers-Greater-Control-of-Their-Information/; Wells Fargo & Co., "Wells Fargo, Xero Agree on New Data-Exchange Method," press release, June 7, 2016, www.wellsfargo.com/about/press/2016/new-dataexchange-method_0607/; Silicon Valley Bank, "Xero and Silicon Valley Bank Partner to Offer Innovative Companies Next-Generation Financial Management," press release, July 16, 2014, www.svb.com/News/Company-News/Xero-and-Silicon-Valley-Bank-Partner-to-Offer-Innovative-Companies-Next-Generation-Financial-Management/.Return to text 40.See, e.g., Penny Crosman, "Data-Sharing Debate Grows Contentious as Fintechs Vent Grievances,"American Banker, August 15, 2017, www.americanbanker.com/news/data-sharing-debate-grows-contentious-as-fintechs-vent-grievances.Return to text 41.See 12 CFR section 1005.2(m) (1). (Excluding from the definition of "unauthorized electronic fund transfer" any "electronic fund transfer initiated… [by] a person who was furnished the access device to the consumer's account by the consumer…..")Return to text 42.Comment 2(m)-2 clarifies that if "a consumer furnishes an access device and grants authority to make transfers to a person . . . who exceeds the authority given, the consumer is fully liable for the transfers unless the consumer has notified the financial institution that transfers by that person are no longer authorized."Return to text 43.See Kaitlin Asrow and Beth Brockland,Liability, Transparency and Consumer Control in Data Sharing(Washington: Center for Financial Services Innovation, September 18, 2017). ("There are differing interpretations of how regulations, such as the OCC's Third Party Risk Management guidance, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act's privacy and safeguard rules, and Regulation E liability limits, should be applied to data sharing between financial institutions and third parties like data aggregators and financial technology applications.") See also JPMorgan Chase, "How You Can Protect Yourself," (last visited October 18, 2017), www.chase.com/digital/resources/privacy-security/security/how-you-can-protect>; Liz Weston, "Why Banks Want You to Drop Mint, Other 'Aggregators,'"Reuters, November 9, 2015, www.reuters.com/article/us-column-weston-banks/why-banks-want-you-to-drop-mint-other-aggregators-idUSKCN0SY2GC20151109.Return to text 44.See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk (PDF)," SR letter 13-19/CA letter 13-21, December 5, 2013.Return to text 45.See, e.g., American Express, "Introducing the Amex Skill for Amazon Alexa" (last visited October 18, 2017), www.americanexpress.com/us/content/alexa/.; Leena Rao, "American Express Debuts Its First Amazon Alexa Skill,"Fortune, May 11, 2017, http://fortune.com/2017/05/11/american-express-alexa-skill/; Capital One, "CapitalOne is on Amazon Echo" (last visited October 18, 2017), www.capitalone.com/applications/alexa/.Return to text 46.See, e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, "Consumer Protection Principles: Consumer-Authorized Financial Data Sharing and Aggregation (PDF)," October 18, 2017; Kaitlin Asrow and Beth Brockland,Liability, Transparency and Consumer Control in Data Sharing,Center for Financial Services Innovation, September 18, 2017.Return to text 47.Cf. Kaitlin Asrow and Beth Brockland,Liability, Transparency and Consumer Control in Data Sharing,Center for Financial Services Innovation, September 18, 2017.Return to text 48.See, e.g., Penny Crosman, "Data-Sharing Debate Grows Contentious as Fintechs Vent Grievances,"American Banker,August 15, 2017, www.americanbanker.com/news/data-sharing-debate-grows-contentious-as-fintechs-vent-grievances.Return to text 49.Envestnet, Inc., Form 10-K, March 17, 2017, www.envestnet.com/report/2016/download/Envestnet-2016AnnualReport-Form10-K.pdf.Return to text