The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Reserve Board on Thursday communicated updated expectations for the next resolution plans of two domestic banks, CIT and Citizens Financial Group. The expectations are similar to those communicated to 16 domestic firms in March 2017. Resolution plans, required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. The two firms' next resolution plans are due on December 31, 2018. The agencies are tailoring their expectations for the firms by limiting the amount of information the firms are expected to submit in their next plans. As with the expectations issued to the 16 domestic firms in March 2017, the agencies are requiring the firms to focus on progress made in addressing service disruptions and firm employee departures during a potential resolution. In reviewing the two firms' 2016 resolution plans, the agencies did not identify any deficiencies or shortcomings, which are weaknesses that the agencies would have required the firms to address in a resubmission or the next regular submission. The Federal Reserve Board is also releasing the individual feedback letters for the two firms. Board Votes
The Secure Payments Task Force will conclude its efforts in March with a final publication consisting of a collection of educational materials outlining the lifecycles and security profiles of today's primary payment methods, the Federal Reserve announced on Thursday. Task force participants will transition into the Federal Reserve's FedPayments Improvement Community, established to provide stakeholders with opportunities to engage in the Federal Reserve's ongoing payment improvement initiatives. As described in the September release ofFederal Reserve Next Steps in the Payments Improvement Journey, the enhanced FedPayments Improvement Community is designed to allow payments industry participants to tailor their involvement in Federal Reserve efforts based on interest, expertise and availability. As part of the community, task force participants will have opportunities to participate in work groups as they are established, to provide input into payments improvement efforts, and to attend online and in-person events. "The Federal Reserve is grateful for the commitment demonstrated by these 200 industry leaders, and we are proud of the important work they've done to identify and establish payment security priorities," said Esther George, president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, who is leading the Federal Reserve's payments improvement initiatives. "There is more work ahead, and we are counting on the payments community to continue to bring dedication and expertise to the pursuit of a more secure payment system." Established in June 2015 in support of the Federal Reserve'sStrategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System,the task force has engaged more than 200 financial institutions, consumer groups, payment service providers, financial technology firms, merchants, government agencies, and others interested in payment security improvement efforts. "The task force has been a useful forum for bringing all voices to the table to discuss the very real and challenging security threats we face in the payment system," said Ken Montgomery, the Federal Reserve's payments security strategy leader and chief operating officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. "This transition recognizes the intensity of the task force work effort over the last three years and provides greater flexibility for large numbers of stakeholders to continue participating in our improvement efforts." Since its establishment, the Secure Payments Task Force has: "The work completed in the past three years facilitates understanding and adoption of today's best practices and lays important groundwork for future collaboration to address payment system vulnerabilities," Montgomery said. Later this year, the Federal Reserve expects to initiate new collaborative industry work groups to advance the work begun by the task force, informed by a planned study to analyze payment fraud and security vulnerabilities, assess potential approaches to mitigate them, and identify misalignment of incentives that may hinder progress. The Federal Reserve has a wide-ranging participatory role in the payments system, helping to ensure efficiency, integrity and accessibility. The Federal Reserve promotes these qualities as a leader, catalyst for change and provider of payment services to financial institutions and the U.S. Treasury.Additional information about the Federal Reserve'sStrategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System, is available atwww.FedPaymentsImprovement.org. Dan WassmannFederal Reserve Bank of Chicago(312) 322-2374[email protected] Susan StawickBoard of Governors(202) 452-3128[email protected] Doug TillettFederal Reserve Bank of Chicago(312) 322-5201(office)(312) 493-8088 (mobile)[email protected]
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the March 20-21 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the March 20-21 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application under section 10(e) of the Home Owners' Loan Act by The Charles Schwab Corporation, San Francisco, California, to acquire Charles Schwab Trust Bank, Henderson, Nevada. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that it is seeking to permanently bar Nathaniel Frazier and Jeffrey Garrison, former employees of Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, from employment in the banking industry and to impose a fine of $18,936 against Frazier and $9,468 against Garrison. Frazier, a former branch manager at Regions Bank, and Garrison, a former financial services specialist at Regions Bank, are alleged to have made false entries in Regions Bank's records, by improperly inflating credit applicants' reported income and, in Garrison's case, opening credit card accounts without customer authorization. The Federal Reserve Board's enforcement action alleges that Frazier's and Garrison's conduct constituted violations of law and unsafe or unsound banking practices. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Friday that it will not object to the capital plan resubmitted by Capital One Financial Corporation, as a result of progress in addressing deficiencies in last year's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). Last June, the Board required Capital One to resubmit its capital plan to address deficiencies in its capital planning processes. Those deficiencies included weaknesses in the way the firm shared key capital planning information with its board of directors and senior managers, identified and incorporated its unique and material risks into its capital planning, and forecasted losses and balances under stressful scenarios. The Board will continue to review and assess Capital One's progress in addressing those deficiencies in this year's CCAR submission. CCAR evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest U.S. bank holding companies, and large U.S. operations of foreign firms, using the firms' planned capital actions such as dividend payments and share buybacks and issuances. Strong capital levels act as a cushion to absorb losses and help ensure that banking organizations have the ability to lend to households and businesses even in times of stress. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Capital One Financial Corporation resubmitted capital plan:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: The Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc, Edinburgh, Scotland, The Royal Bank of Scotland plc, Edinburgh, Scotland, The Royal Bank of Scotland N.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands, The Royal Bank of Scotland plc, New York Branch, New York, New York, The Royal Bank of Scotland plc, Connecticut Branch, Stamford, Connecticut, Royal Bank of Scotland NV, New York Branch, New York, New York, and Royal Bank of Scotland NV, Chicago Branch, Chicago, IllinoisCease and Desist Order dated July 26, 2011Terminated March 6, 2018 The enforcement action from July 2011 can be foundhereand other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Trinity Capital Corporation, Los Alamos, New MexicoWritten Agreement dated September 26, 2013Terminated February 27, 2018 The enforcement action from September 2013 can be foundhereand other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Thursday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Minneapolis, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 2 percent to 2-1/4 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday requested comment on amendments to simplify Regulation J (Collection of Checks and Other Items by Federal Reserve Banks and Funds Transfers through Fedwire) and to make it conform more closely with Regulation CC (Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks). The proposed amendments are intended to align the rights and obligations of parties, including the Federal Reserve Banks, with the Board's 2017 amendments to Regulation CC, which reflected the evolution of the nation's check collection system from one that is largely paper-based to one that is virtually all electronic. The proposed amendments would clarify and simplify provisions of Regulation J, remove obsolete provisions, and improve consistency between Regulation J and Regulation CC. The proposed amendments would also clarify that electronically-created items (check-like items created in electronic form that never existed in paper form) are not "items" that the Reserve Banks are authorized to handle under Regulation J. The Board has also proposed amending Regulation J to clarify that financial messaging standards for Fedwire funds transfers, such as the international common format standard ISO 20022, do not confer or connote legal status or responsibilities with respect to Fedwire funds transfers. Comments on the proposed amendments are requested within 60 days of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that it is seeking to permanently bar Raysol Villalobos (a/k/a Ray Galvan), a former employee of Frost Bank, San Antonio, Texas, from employment in the banking industry and to impose a $9,819 fine on him and require him to pay $35,000 in restitution to Frost Bank. Villalobos, a former personal banker at Frost Bank, is alleged to have misappropriated approximately $30,000 from a bank customer's safe deposit box. The Federal Reserve Board's enforcement action alleges that Villalobos' conduct constituted violations of law and unsafe or unsound banking practices. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Ltd., Beijing, People's Republic of China andIndustrial and Commercial Bank of China Ltd., New York Branch, New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated March 12, 2018 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Recent data suggest that growth rates of household spending and business fixed investment have moderated from their strong fourth-quarter readings. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have continued to run below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have increased in recent months but remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The economic outlook has strengthened in recent months. The Committee expects that, with further gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace in the medium term and labor market conditions will remain strong. Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to move up in coming months and to stabilize around the Committee's 2 percent objective over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but the Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Thomas I. Barkin; Raphael W. Bostic; Lael Brainard; Loretta J. Mester; Randal K. Quarles; and John C. Williams. Implementation Note issued March 21, 2018
The Federal Reserve System on Friday released the 2017 combined annual audited financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as statements for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. An independent public accounting firm engaged by the Board has issued unqualified opinions on the financial statements and on the Board's and the Bank's internal controls over financial reporting. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2017 earnings were approximately $80.7 billion. The Reserve Banks provided for remittances to the U.S. Treasury of $80.6 billion in 2017. Interest income on securities acquired through open market operations totaled $113.6 billion, an increase of $2.5 billion from the previous year. Interest expense on depository institutions' reserve balances and term deposits during the year was $25.8 billion, an increase of $13.8 billion from the previous year. Interest expense on securities sold under agreements to repurchase was $3.4 billion, an increase of $2.2 billion from the previous year. Gains from the daily revaluation of foreign currency denominated investments were $1.9 billion. Reserve Bank operating expenses were $6.8 billion, including assessments of $2 billion for Board expenses, currency costs, and the operations of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. The audited financial statements provide a significant amount of information about the assets, liabilities, and earnings of the Reserve Banks and the Board as of December 31, 2017, including information about the composition, fair value, and earnings related to the $4.4 trillion of U.S. Treasury securities, government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) debt securities, and federal agency and GSE mortgage-backed securities acquired through open market operations. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York provides additional detailed information about open market operations and securities holdings on an ongoing basis on its website atwww.newyorkfed.org/markets/pomo_landing.html. Total Reserve Bank assets as of December 31, 2017, were approximately $4.4 trillion, which was similar to the balance on December 31, 2016. The Board engages KPMG LLP, an independent public accounting firm, to conduct annual audits of these financial statements in accordance with auditing standards issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, and, for the Board of Governors audit only, the Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards. The public accounting firm also conducts audits of internal controls over financial reporting for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. The Federal Reserve is unique among large central banks in requesting an external audit of its internal controls over financial reporting. The Federal Reserve System financial statements are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve announced today that work will begin this month on a new study that will measure fraud and associated costs in the U.S. payments system and identify the causes and contributing factors to fraud. The study is part of the Federal Reserve's ongoing effort to improve and support payment security throughout the industry, as outlined in theFederal Reserve Next Steps in the Payment Improvement Journeypaper released last year. The Boston ConsultingGroup (BCG), a global management consulting firm, will conduct the study, which is expected to be completed in four to six months. The study will systematically and objectively measure payment fraud and identify and provide insight on payment security vulnerabilities. The Federal Reserve expects the results of the study will help inform its ongoing collaboration with the industry to enhance end-to-end payment security. "The vast number of participants and complex nature of the payments industry make it challenging to determine where the greatest opportunities exist for significantly mitigating fraud," said Ken Montgomery, the Federal Reserve's payments security strategy leader and chief operating officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. "We hope to bring greater insight to the challenge with a comprehensive view of payment fraud data and payment security vulnerabilities that will help inform next steps for ongoing industry collaboration." BCG was chosen through a competitive bidding process that considered a number of factors including expertise, ability to conduct an independent assessment and proposed assessment approach. Dan WassmannFederal Reserve Bank of Chicago(312) 322-2374[email protected] Susan StawickFederal Reserve Board(202) 452-2955[email protected] Doug TillettFederal Reserve Bank of Chicago(312) 493-8088[email protected]
Governor Lael Brainard At the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York I appreciate the invitation from the Money Marketeers to discuss the path ahead for our economy and monetary policy.1 Many of the forces that acted as headwinds to U.S. growth and weighed on policy in previous years are generating tailwinds currently. Today many economies around the world are experiencing synchronized growth, in contrast to the 2015­-16 period when important foreign economies experienced adverse shocks and anemic demand. The International Monetary Fund revised up its outlook for the world economy in January, continuing a recent pattern of upward revisions, in contrast to a string of downward revisions in 2015 and 2016.2Stronger economies abroad should increase demand for America's exports and boost the foreign earnings of U.S. companies. The upward revisions to the foreign economic outlook are also pulling forward expectations of monetary policy tightening abroad and contributing to an appreciation of foreign currencies and increases in U.S. import prices. By contrast, foreign currencies weakened in the earlier period, pushing the dollar higher and U.S. import prices lower. Since the end of 2016, a broad index of the exchange value of the dollar has depreciated nearly 8 percent, whereas it appreciated by 25 percent from mid-2014 to 2016. In recent quarters, the combination of higher oil prices and robust global demand has been providing strong support to business investment--in contrast to the sharp pullback from 2015 to 2016. Business spending on fixed investment rose at more than a 6 percent pace in 2017. This rise followed two years of weak growth, dragged down by declines in the drilling and mining sector. Financial conditions are currently supportive of economic growth despite the recent choppiness in financial markets and some tightening since the beginning of the year. Various measures of equity valuations remain elevated relative to historical norms even after recent movements, and corporate bond spreads remain quite compressed.3This compares with the period from mid-2014 through the second half of 2016, when equity prices were flat and the dollar rose steeply. The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's National Financial Conditions Index provides a useful summary statistic.4According to this measure, financial conditions tightened significantly from the middle of 2014 to early 2016. By comparison, financial conditions today remain near the accommodative end of the range since the financial crisis, even with the recent tightening in conditions. The most notable tailwind is the shift in America's fiscal policy stance from restraint to substantial stimulus in an economy close to full employment. In the earlier period, the economy had just weathered a challenging adjustment to a sharp withdrawal of fiscal support. Today, from a position near full employment, the economy is poised to absorb $1-1/2 trillion in personal and corporate tax cuts and a $300 billion increase in federal spending. Estimates suggest December's tax legislation could boost the growth rate of real gross domestic product (GDP) as much as 1/2 percentage point this year and next.5On top of that, the recently agreed-to budget deal is likely to raise federal spending by around 0.4 percent of GDP in each of the next two years.6 Achieving Our Inflation Objective and Sustaining Full EmploymentAlthough the economy is currently around full employment and has been expanding at an above-trend pace, inflation has remained subdued for quite some time. Over the past year, overall PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation was 1.7 percent, and core PCE inflation was 1.5 percent--not very different from the average level of core inflation over the past five years. The persistence of subdued inflation, despite an unemployment rate that has moved below most estimates of its natural rate, suggests some risk that underlying inflation may have softened. While transitory factors no doubt played a role in last year's step-down in core PCE inflation, various empirical analyses conclude that persistent factors are at play in the stubbornly low level of core inflation. According to a variety of measures, underlying inflation--the slow-moving trend that exerts a pull on wage and price setting--may be running below levels that are consistent with the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent inflation objective.7For example, some survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations are currently lower than they were before the financial crisis, as are most estimates based on statistical filters. Inflation compensation has moved up recently, but is still running somewhat below levels that prevailed before the crisis. Thus, it is important for monetary policy to ensure that underlying inflation is re-anchored firmly at 2 percent. At the same time, it is important for monetary policy to sustain full employment. It is difficult to know with precision how much slack remains in the labor market. If the unemployment rate were to continue to fall in the coming year at the same pace as in the past couple of years, it would reach levels not seen since the late 1960s. On the other hand, the employment-to-population ratio for prime-age workers remains more than 1 percentage point below its pre-crisis level. If substantially more workers could be drawn into the labor force, it would be possible for the labor market to firm notably further without generating imbalances. But it is an open question as to what portion of the prime-age Americans who are out of the labor force may prove responsive to tight labor market conditions because declining labor force participation among prime-age workers predates the crisis, especially for men. In one encouraging development, the strong labor market has pulled some discouraged workers back into the labor force and into productive employment over the past few years. Also encouraging, our Beige Book and workforce surveys indicate that employers are casting a wider net to find job candidates and investing more in on-the-job training. Navigating Monetary PolicyAlthough last year we faced a disconnect between the continued strengthening in the labor market and the step-down in inflation, mounting tailwinds at a time of full employment and above-trend growth tip the balance of considerations in my view. With greater confidence in achieving the inflation target, continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to be appropriate. Although experience in other countries suggests it can prove difficult to raise an underlying inflation trend that has been running below policymakers' target for several years, stronger tailwinds may help re-anchor inflation expectations at the symmetric 2 percent objective. Of course, it is conceivable we could see a mild, temporary overshoot of the inflation target over the medium term. If such a mild, temporary overshoot were to occur, it would likely be consistent with the symmetry of the FOMC's target and could help nudge underlying inflation back to our target.8Recent research has highlighted the downside risks to inflation and to longer-run inflation expectations that are posed by the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates, and it suggests the importance of ensuring underlying inflation does not slip below target in today's new normal.9 We also seek to sustain full employment, and we will want to be attentive to imbalances that could jeopardize this goal. If the unemployment rate continues to decline on the current trajectory, it could fall to levels that have been rarely seen over the past five decades. Historically, such episodes have tended to see elevated risks of imbalances, whether in the form of high inflation in earlier decades or of financial imbalances in recent decades. One of the striking features of the current recovery has been the absence of an acceleration in inflation as the unemployment rate has declined, a development that is consistent with a flat Phillips curve.10Although wage gains have seen some recent improvements, they continue to fall short of the pace seen before the financial crisis.11 However, we do not have extensive experience with an economy at very low unemployment rates and cannot be sure how it might evolve. In particular, we will want to remain attentive to the risk of financial imbalances. While asset valuations appear to be elevated, overall risks to the financial system remain moderate because household borrowing is moderate, risks associated with liquidity and maturity transformation have declined, and, importantly, the banking system appears to be well capitalized.12History suggests, however, that a booming economy can lead to a relaxation in lending standards, and the attendant excessive borrowing can complicate the task of monetary policy. We will need to be vigilant. ConclusionWhat do these considerations imply for the path of monetary policy? Continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to remain appropriate to ensure inflation rises sustainably to our target and to sustain full employment, keeping in mind that interest rate normalization is well under way and balance sheet runoff is set to reach its steady-state pace later this year.13Of course, we should be ready to adjust the path of policy in either direction if developments turn out differently than expected. In many respects, the macro environment today is the mirror image of the environment we confronted a couple of years ago. In the earlier period, strong headwinds sapped the momentum of the recovery and weighed down the path of policy. Today, with headwinds shifting to tailwinds, the reverse could hold true. ReferencesBlanchard, Olivier (2016). "The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the '60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief PB16-1. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, January. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017). "FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, June 14. -------- (2018a). "Federal Open Market Committee reaffirms its "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy," press release, January 31. -------- (2018b).Monetary Policy Report (PDF). Washington: Board of Governors, February 23. Brainard, Lael (2015). "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, December 1. -------- (2016). "The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12. -------- (2017). "Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5. Congressional Budget Office (2018).Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018: Cost Estimate. (PDF)Washington: CBO, February 8. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317-396. Nakata, Taisuke, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016). "The Risk-Adjusted Monetary Policy Rule," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-061. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013). "The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping? (PDF)" chapter 3 inWorld Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.Washington: International Monetary Fund, April. 1.I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.See various issues of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)World Economic OutlookandWorld Economic Outlook (WEO) Updates.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors (2018b).Return to text 4.The National Financial Conditions Index is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's website athttps://www.chicagofed.org/publications/nfci/index. Other indexes of financial conditions, such as the indexes published by the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City and St. Louis, tell a similar story.Return to text 5.For example, the IMF 2018WEO Updates(see note 2) estimates that the tax cut legislation will raise the level of U.S. GDP 1-1/4 percent by 2020.Return to text 6.The Congressional Budget Office (2018) estimates that increased spending caps will allow additional spending worth about 3/4 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2019.Return to text 7.See Brainard (2017).Return to text 8.See Board of Governors (2018a).Return to text 9.See, for example, Kiley and Roberts (2017), Nakata and Schmidt (2016), and Brainard (2015, 2016).Return to text 10.See Blanchard (2016) and Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013).Return to text 11.Over the 12 months through January, average hourly earnings were up 2.9 percent relative to a year earlier, the highest 12-month change in almost nine years. The employment cost index rose 2.6 percent last year.Return to text 12.See Board of Governors (2018b).Return to text 13.As laid out in Board of Governors (2017), the caps determining the degree of reinvestment of maturing securities in the System Open Market Account are increasing gradually. The caps on the monthly runoff in the portfolio are expected to reach their maximum levels of $30 billion for Treasury securities and $20 billion for agency debt and mortgage-backed securities later this year. The actual pace of runoff will vary, however, depending on the volume of securities maturing in any given month.Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, D.C. Thank you very much to the Institute of International Bankers for inviting me to speak here today. Among my first areas of focus when I was a very young lawyer starting out in my career well over 30 years ago was providing advice to foreign banks and financial firms operating in the United States, and I learned then just how integral, essential, and welcome a part your firms play in our domestic financial sector. Non-U.S. firms serve as an important source of credit to U.S. households and businesses and contribute materially to the strength and liquidity of U.S. financial markets, so it is critical--not just as a matter of fairness but as a matter of our domestic interest--that we as regulators ensure that they operate in a fair and open financial services sector. I view that as an important part of my job. So today I want to share my perspective on the appropriate regulatory environment for foreign banks operating in the United States, as well as some thoughts on specific elements of that regime. Before doing that though, we should take stock of the pre-crisis history of foreign firms operating in the United States. First, the financial crisis revealed that in times of stress, international banking firms with large and complex local operations can contribute to instability in those local markets and can require extraordinary support from local authorities. Second, a number of foreign financial institutions expanded the size and complexity of their U.S. operations at a rousing pace and scale prior to the crisis, and we did not adjust our local regulatory and supervisory approaches to address the increased risk associated with this expansion. As a result, the difficulties faced by the U.S. operations of non-U.S. banks during the crisis mirrored that of their similarly sized domestic counterparts, underscoring a need for increased resiliency of both domestic firms and the U.S. operations of foreign banks. To bolster that resiliency, the environment for foreign banks operating in the United States underwent a number of changes. While there are important differences, those changes for foreign firms broadly parallel many of the changes instituted for domestic firms. My Federal Reserve colleagues and I have termed these the core post-crisis regulatory reforms: capital, liquidity, stress testing, and resolution planning.1Of course, the obvious and most prominent difference for foreign firms--as attendees of this conference certainly know--was the introduction of the intermediate holding company (IHC) structure, to which the post-crisis regulatory reforms apply. In my estimation, these reforms have gone a long way toward meeting our goal of a more resilient financial system. That said, we are now at a point--with ten years of experience in setting up and living with the body of post-crisis regulation--where it is both relevant and timely to examine the post-crisis reforms and identify what is working well and what can be improved. If none of the regulatory measures implemented up to now were capable of improvement, this would be the first project of this scale and complexity conducted that had been done exactly right the first pass through. If there was still work to be done after Hammurabi, there is probably still some work to be done now after Dodd and Frank. In particular, as I have said elsewhere, we should be looking to see where we can achieve our regulatory objectives in ways that maintain our measures' effectiveness, but improve their efficiency, transparency, and simplicity. As part of that effort, we will consider additional tailoring and flexibility of our regulations in light of their impact on foreign banking organizations (FBOs) based on lessons learned over the past several years. To illustrate how I am thinking about these issues, I want to focus in my remarks today on two specific regulatory examples. These are, of course, not an exhaustive list of work to be done in the regulation of FBOs, but they tend to be near the top of the feedback list from both the industry and supervisors. First, I will discuss the application of enhanced prudential standards to FBOs, including our flexibility in implementing certain aspects of these standards. I will also offer some initial thoughts on opportunities for further tailoring that regime for FBOs. Second is the Volcker rule. I will provide some of my initial thinking on how we might be able to improve the Volcker rule, both generally and in its application to FBOs in particular. Enhanced Prudential StandardsIn implementing enhanced prudential standards for foreign banks with a large U.S. presence, we sought to ensure that firms hold sufficient local capital and liquidity--and have a risk management infrastructure--that is commensurate with the risks in their U.S. operations.2And in general, that approach is meeting many of the broad goals the Federal Reserve set out to achieve. Today, foreign banks with large U.S. operations are less fragmented, maintain local capital and liquidity buffers that align to the size and riskiness of their U.S. footprint, and operate on equal footing with their domestic counterparts. Our current approach aligns with other jurisdictions that host a large and complex foreign bank presence. For example, the European subsidiaries of U.S. banking firms have long been subject to Basel-based standards imposed by the European Union and the United Kingdom as host regulators. In addition, European regulators are contemplating a holding company structure for the local operations of foreign banks to reduce fragmentation and ensure effective local supervision, similar in many ways to Federal Reserve rules. In adopting the enhanced prudential standards, however, the Board has acknowledged both the uniqueness of FBOs--as the U.S. operations are a small part of a larger firm--and the diversity of foreign bank operations in the United States. The Board contemplated from the outset that circumstances may require application of the rule's requirements to be adjusted in light of an individual firm's structure or risk profile. The Board has exercised this authority in the past, and I want to stress that we will continue to provide flexibility where appropriate to accommodate these differences. For instance, in implementing enhanced risk management standards, we have focused on outcomes--a strong control environment for foreign bank operations in the United States--while providing some flexibility in how those outcomes are achieved. We have allowed the global risk committee to serve as the risk committee for the U.S. operations rather than require the creation of a standalone committee. Further, for foreign banks with large U.S. branches but no IHC, the Board has acknowledged the challenges associated with the location of the risk committee. The Board has accordingly allowed risk committees at U.S. holding companies as well as managerial committees located in the United States, provided that the global board provided appropriate oversight.3We are committed to continuing this outcomes-focused approach and to refining it where needed. Further, we recognize that effective stress testing regimes can take many different forms, specifically when interpreting the home-country stress testing requirements of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The Board has acknowledged, for example, that a foreign bank's internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) may meet the minimum standards, provided that the firm's ICAAP is on a consolidated basis and reviewed by the home country regulator. In addition, while we believe that the IHC requirement serves a valuable role in ensuring consistency of regulation across U.S. operations of an FBO, the Board has reserved authority to approve multiple IHCs if circumstances warrant based on the FBO's activities, scope of operations, structure, home country regulatory framework, or similar considerations. For example, the Board's enhanced prudential standards rule contemplates allowing multiple IHCs in cases where home country legal requirements inhibit the combination of certain bank and nonbank operations. In practice, and in several instances, the Board has permitted a foreign bank to maintain certain U.S. subsidiaries outside of its IHC, so long as the foreign bank did not have practical control over that subsidiary.4In addition, the Board recently approved an application by a foreign bank for a second IHC. Part of our rationale for approving the dual IHC structure was the enhancement of recovery and resolution options of the global firm. In granting the exception, the Board applied enhanced prudential standards to the two IHCs in the same manner that would apply to a single IHC, to maintain a level playing field and align incentives for the safe and sound operation of both IHCs. This approach allows us more flexibility in addressing firm-specific structure needs, while maintaining the goals of the enhanced prudential standards more generally. We will continue to consider future applications based on the merits of the case. Finally, to the extent that foreign banks have decided to reduce the scope of their U.S. operations to reduce the application of some of the enhanced prudential standards, the Board has accommodated requests for extended transition periods, so as to avoid unnecessary investments in infrastructure that ultimately would not be required by regulation. We are committed to tailoring our regulatory and supervisory regimes to align with the risk posed by financial institutions to the U.S. financial system. We are also continuing to evaluate whether our rules are sensitive to changes in the risk profile of banking organizations. We want our rules both to increase in stringency as firms' risks grow and, just as important, to decrease in stringency when firms have actively reduced their risk profiles. The Volcker RuleLet me turn now to the Volcker rule. Not to put too fine a point on it, but I believe the regulation implementing the Volcker rule is an example of a complex regulation that is not working well. The fundamental premise of the Volcker rule is simple: banks with access to the federal safety net--Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance and the Federal Reserve discount window--should not engage in risky, speculative trading for their own account. Whatever one's view of this basic premise, it is the law of the land. Taking that premise as a given, we have to ask how to improve the framework of the implementing regulation to make it more workable and less burdensome in practice from both a compliance and supervisory perspective. I think we all can agree that the implementing regulation is exceedingly complex. As one example of specifics, among many, the statute and implementing regulation's approach to defining "market making-related activities" rests on a number of complex requirements that are difficult or impossible to verify objectively in real time. As a result, banks spend far too much time and energy contemplating whether particular transactions or positions are consistent with the Volcker rule. Some of you may quite sensibly be asking, "If the deficiencies of the regulation are so apparent, how did we get here?" Despite the best of intentions in crafting the regulations, no one seems to be happy with the complex rule we wound up with. This has a very positive consequence: I have heard nothing but support from all of my regulatory colleagues for the proposition that the regulation is overly complex and would benefit from streamlining and simplifying to improve its workability in practice. We are actively working with our fellow regulators in seeking ways to further tailor and to reduce burden, particularly for firms that do not have large trading operations and do not engage in the sorts of activities that may give rise to proprietary trading. We also appreciate the broad extraterritorial impact of the rule in its current form for foreign banks' operations outside of the United States. To that end, we have, with the full cooperation of all five Volcker regulatory agencies, picked back up the process that was begun last fall to engage in a rulemaking process subject to the Administrative Procedures Act and develop a proposal for public comment that would make material changes to the Volcker rule regulations. In that process we will take account of our own experience with the regulations since implementation, and we also want to take account of the views of market participants and other interested parties with views on the Volcker rule, including what is working and what is not. We expect this process will proceed with dispatch. We must also work within the confines of the statute. For example, a number of my current and former Federal Reserve Board colleagues have expressed support for Congress providing an exemption from the Volcker rule for community banks, which is something I also support.5Short of a statutory exemption, we can only do our best to mitigate burden on community banks that generally do not engage in the types of activities the Volcker rule was intended to cover.6Statutory changes likely would make our work of streamlining more straightforward and complete, but we have a fair bit that we can accomplish even absent such changes. What are some of the improvements that we are thinking about that would be possible within the regulation itself? As an initial matter, it should be clearer and more transparent what is subject to the Volcker rule's implementing regulation and what is not. The definition of key terms like "proprietary trading" and "covered fund" should be as simple and clear as possible. It should not be a guessing game or require hours of legal analysis of complex banking and securities regulations to determine if a particular entity is a covered fund. It should not happen--although ithashappened--that our supervised firms come to us and ask questions about whether a particular derivative trade is subject to the rule, and we cannot give them our own answer or a consistent answer across the five responsible agencies. Supervisors need to be able to provide clear and transparent guidance on what is covered by the Volcker rule and what is not. This would benefit not only the firms, but the supervisors at the agencies as well. Again, a good example is the exemption for market making-related activities, which is one of the key exemptions from the prohibition on proprietary trading. The rule contains a gaggle of complex regulatory requirements, but the statute contains merely one--that the market making-related activities are designed not to exceed the reasonably expected near-term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties, otherwise known as RENT'D.7We are considering different ways to use a clearer test for RENT'D. We want banks to be able to engage in market making and provide liquidity to financial markets with less fasting and prayer about their compliance with the Volcker rule. As I noted earlier, we also understand that the Volcker rule has had an extraterritorial impact on FBOs. With respect to foreign banks, there are at least a few places where we would like to revisit the application of the final rule based on concerns raised by market participants and others over the past four years of implementation. In particular, there are certain foreign funds--funds that are organized outside the United States by foreign banks in foreign jurisdictions and offered solely to foreign investors--that are subject to the Volcker rule due to Bank Holding Company Act control principles. Last summer, the banking agencies, in consultation with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, issued guidance that effectively stayed enforcement of the Volcker rule to these foreign funds in light of the technical and complex issues they raise.8I expect we would continue this period of stay while we continue to consider these important issues. The statute also contains exemptions for FBOs to allow foreign banks to continue trading and engaging in covered fund activities solely outside the United States. The regulation again has a complex series of requirements that a foreign bank must meet to make use of these exemptions. We have heard from a number of foreign banks that complying with these requirements is unworkable in practice, and we are considering ways to address this impracticality. One possibility that has been suggested by market participants is a simple approach that focuses on the risk of the booking location. Of course, we would have to consider whether this is possible in light of the language of the statute and principles of competitive equity, but the suggestion is illustrative of the possibility of a more workable approach. As a final but no less important matter, we are considering broad revisions to the Volcker rule compliance regime. We would like Volcker rule compliance to be similar to compliance in other areas of our supervisory regime. As I noted earlier, we appreciate the broad extraterritorial impact of the rule in its current form on foreign banks' operations outside of the United States. Accordingly, we will be looking for ways to reduce the compliance burden of the Volcker rule for foreign banks with limited U.S. operations and small U.S. trading books. ConclusionAs I have described previously, the Federal Reserve is actively reviewing post-crisis financial reforms in an effort to better understand which reforms are working well and which ones can be improved to reduce regulatory burden and improve the efficiency, transparency, and simplicity of the regulatory framework without compromising a safe and sound financial system. In that effort, we recognize the importance of foreign banks to the U.S. economy and have a strong interest in ensuring our regulations are appropriately tailored to their U.S. footprint and risks to U.S. financial stability. Our goal is to maintain a regulatory framework that helps to ensure a strong and stable banking system in an efficient manner that does not result in excessively burdensome costs to the banking industry or the economy as a whole. The areas I have discussed today are important components of the exercise of improving our regulations as they apply to FBOs, and are part of a larger overall agenda to critically evaluate and improve our regulations to promote financial stability while fostering the conditions for solid economic activity. Some of these exercises will require more effort and time than others, but each one of them is a high priority for us at the Federal Reserve. I look forward to hearing your views as we make progress toward these improvements. 1.See Randal K. Quarles, "Early Observations on Improving the Effectiveness of Post-Crisis Regulation (PDF)," (speech at the American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Annual Meeting, Washington, January 19, 2018).Return to text 2.The U.S. intermediate holding company structure provided for consistent application of capital, liquidity, and other prudential requirements and consistent supervision across the U.S. subsidiary operations of an FBO.See12 USC 5365; Enhanced Prudential Standards for Bank Holding Companies and Foreign Banking Organizations, 79 Fed. Reg. 17,240 (March 27, 2014).Return to text 3.See 12 CFR 252.155(a)(3) (requiring an FBO with U.S. branches and agencies and combined U.S. assets of $50 billion or more to maintain its risk committee as a committee of the board of directors of its U.S. intermediate holding company (as applicable) or as a committee or the global board of directors (or equivalent thereof)); see also General Counsel opinion letters to Cooperatieve Rabobank U.A. and Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group, Inc., each dated October 19, 2016, related to the risk committee requirement.Return to text 4.For instance, if the subsidiary was wholly owned by a joint venture between the foreign bank and the third party.Return to text 5.See, e.g., Jerome H. Powell, "Regulation and Supervision of Community Banks," (speech at the Annual Community Bankers Conference, New York, NY, May 14, 2015). ("I believe community banks should not face significant burdens from complying with these requirements, so I support raising the asset threshold for both the Volcker rule and incentive compensation rules, perhaps to $10 billion. In the event where the actions of a community bank might raise concerns in either of these areas, that could be addressed through our normal examination process."); see also Daniel K. Tarullo, "Departing Thoughts," (speech at The Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, April 4, 2017). ("The third problem, also in the statute, is that the Volcker rule applies to a much broader group of banks than is necessary to achieve its purpose. As I have said before, the concerns underlying the Volcker rule are simply not an issue at community banks.")Return to text 6.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "The Volcker Rule: Community Bank Applicability (PDF)," news release. December 10, 2013.Return to text 7.See 12 U.S.C. 1851(d)(1)(B); 12 CFR 248.4(b).Return to text 8.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Statement regarding Treatment of Certain Foreign Funds under the Rules Implementing Section 13 of the Bank Holding Company Act (PDF)," July 21, 2017.Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the HOPE Global Forums Annual Meeting, Atlanta, Georgia Good evening. Thank you to John Bryant and Operation HOPE for inviting me today to open the HOPE Global Forums.1I commend our hosts for bringing together such an impressive group of speakers and attendees, diverse in their perspectives, yet all of whom share the vital goal of advancing economic opportunity and inclusion. It is fitting that this event is being held on the 50th anniversary of several notable events, including the publication of Dr. Martin Luther King's last book,Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community, which urged unity in order to create equal opportunity, and the enactment of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, which enshrined our nation's commitment to equal access to housing. These milestones remind us of the progress we have made to date as well as the challenges that remain, and inspire us to persist in our efforts. The conference has a robust agenda ahead. Over the next few days, you will be discussing many issues relating to financial inclusion--such as housing, small businesses, workforce participation, and other topics--to which we at the Federal Reserve share a commitment, and that we view as critical to our mission. Our economy is stronger when everyone has a chance to contribute fully and share in our national prosperity. And I personally believe that financial inclusion helps us realize a founding notion of our country--that this is a place where opportunity, innovation, and productivity are encouraged and rewarded. I'm particularly pleased to see on the conference agenda a number of sessions on issues to which we, at the Federal Reserve, devote considerable attention: access to credit and financial inclusion for consumers and small businesses. Conversations like these are enormously important to understanding the challenges Americans face and why a multitude of voices and approaches are needed to address them. In my remarks today, I'd like to focus on the consumer protection and credit accessibility aspects of financial inclusion, and some of the ways that the Federal Reserve promotes a fair and transparent consumer financial services marketplace. In recent speeches, I have emphasized my view that we should aim for an effective safety and soundness regulatory approach that is as efficient, transparent, and simple as feasible.2I consider these principles to apply equally to our consumer protection supervision program; that is, we should also strive to promote consumer protection with as much efficiency, transparency, and simplicity as possible. I believe that a commitment to these principles is not only compatible with financial inclusion, but in fact helps promote it. Regulatory burden can make it harder for institutions to serve their customers and communities. This is especially the case for community banks and minority depository institutions (or MDIs), which play an important role in serving the needs of their local communities, including historically underserved populations. I'd also like to share some thoughts on an area to which I have devoted a good portion of my career: the importance of small business access to credit, which is a critical part of financial inclusion and a catalyst for economic growth in local communities. Financial InclusionLet me start with the foundation of why financial inclusion is important. In broad terms, financial inclusion means access to affordable financial products and services that meet the needs of individuals and businesses and that are delivered in a responsible and sustainable way.3At the Federal Reserve, we recognize the influence that financial inclusion has on the broader economic performance of our country.4Inclusion is essential to advancing the Federal Reserve's goal of promoting maximum employment, as well as supporting the stability of the financial system. Likewise, we support and share your goal of ensuring a fair and transparent marketplace for financial products and services--including credit--that can provide a pathway toward economic prosperity for all Americans. Overall, our economy is performing well, and unemployment is low. However, many households and communities continue to face financial challenges.5Consider that more than two-thirds of white households own their homes as compared to less than half of African Americans and Hispanics.6And consider that all important human asset: education. One-third of white adults have at least a bachelor's degree as compared to one in four African Americans and 17 percent of Hispanics.7This matters because the advantages of a college degree for accumulating income and wealth are lifelong and inter-generational.8We likewise see evidence of financial disparities in the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking and Survey of Consumer Finances.9 When individuals have unequal or insufficient access to financial products and services, such as credit, they may be deprived of a chance to fund an education, finance a business, or pursue homeownership--opportunities that can provide greater financial security for themselves and their families and future generations. And as a nation, we are deprived of the benefits of their potential contributions to the economy. Consumer ProtectionIn the context of my earlier discussion of financial inclusion, federal consumer protection laws are critical to ensuring consumers are treated fairly when offered financial products and services. Discrimination and deception have no place in a fair and transparent marketplace. These practices can close off opportunities and limit consumers' ability to improve their economic circumstances, including through access to homeownership and education. The Federal Reserve's consumer compliance supervisory program reflects our commitment to promoting financial inclusion and ensuring that the financial institutions under our jurisdiction fully comply with applicable federal consumer protection laws and regulations. Let me give two examples involving the Federal Trade Commission Act's prohibition against unfair or deceptive practices in products and services that will undoubtedly be familiar to the audience--student financial aid and mortgage lending. In the last few years, the Federal Reserve has addressed deceptive practices in these areas through public enforcement actions that have collectively benefited hundreds of thousands of consumers and provided millions of dollars in restitution. In the financial aid context, our actions required restitution for students who were not given full information about the potential fees and limitations associated with opening deposit accounts for their financial aid refunds.10And in mortgage lending, our action required restitution by a bank that had given borrowers the option to pay an additional amount to purchase discount points to lower their mortgage interest rate, but that did not actually provide the reduced rate to many of those borrowers.11 As we mark the 50th anniversary of the Fair Housing Act, the fair lending laws remain critical in fostering vibrant communities and a fair and transparent consumer financial services marketplace. For all state member banks, we enforce the Fair Housing Act, and for banks of $10 billion dollars or less in assets, we also enforce the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. Our examiners evaluate fair lending risk at every consumer compliance exam. While we find that the vast majority of our institutions comply with the fair lending laws, we are committed to identifying and remedying violations when they occur. Pursuant to the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, if we determine that a bank has engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination, we refer the matter to the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ). Federal Reserve referrals have resulted in DOJ public actions in critical areas, such as redlining and mortgage-pricing discrimination. For example, in our redlining referrals, the Federal Reserve found that the banks treated majority-minority areas less favorably than non-minority ones, such as through lending patterns, marketing, and Community Reinvestment Act assessment-area delineations. For our mortgage-pricing discrimination referrals, the Federal Reserve found that the banks charged higher prices to African American or Hispanic borrowers than it charged to non-Hispanic white borrowers and that the higher prices could not be explained by legitimate pricing criteria.12 Efficiency, Simplicity, and Transparency of Consumer Compliance SupervisionConsumers deserve to be treated fairly, regardless of the size of the banking institution. Yet, we can achieve this goal and still reduce regulatory burden through a balanced program of tailored and risk-focused supervision. Accordingly, we continue to seek opportunities to promote efficient, simple, and transparent supervision where possible, so that the institutions we supervise can focus on finding solutions that work for all consumers and communities. In an effort to promote consumer compliance, our community bank supervisory program focuses our examinations on the areas of highest consumer risk. This has improved the efficiency and effectiveness of our examinations and reduced regulatory burden for many community banks. Banks and consumers benefit when supervision is timely and effective. Put simply, our role as supervisors should not be to play "gotcha" with our banks, but to support their compliance efforts. The Interagency Consumer Compliance Ratings System, published in November 2016, is an example of this approach.13This guidance provides incentives for institutions to focus on managing their consumer compliance risks, preventing consumer harm, and helping to create a culture that identifies and corrects problems. Another example of how we support our institutions is how we work with MDIs, which as I noted earlier, play an important role in serving the needs of their local communities. We have dedicated Reserve Bank staff who are in frequent contact with MDI leadership. Based on what we've learned in the course of this outreach, we have expanded our Partnership for Progress--a program for outreach and technical assistance to MDIs14--to include staff from our Community Development function, and we have enhanced our MDI-related programing. Our commitment to transparency also includes a robust outreach program for banks. This includesConsumer Compliance Outlook, a widely subscribed Federal Reserve System publication focused on consumer compliance issues, and its companion webinar series,Outlook Live.15For example, in 2017, we sponsored an interagency webinar on fair lending supervision with almost 6,000 registrants, a substantial share of which were community banks.16 Small Business Access to CreditAt the Federal Reserve, we view small business credit from several perspectives. For the economy, small businesses need adequate and affordable credit in order to form, grow, and succeed; otherwise they may underperform, slowing growth and employment. For many small business owners, personal and business finances are intertwined. A well-functioning housing finance market is vital for small business owners who may draw upon the equity in their homes to fund their businesses. Student loans may be needed to help fund the education that is important for both small business owners and their employees to boost profits and productivity. And, short-term credit matters for day-to-day management of cash flow, while longer-term credit is essential for capital investments. So, entrepreneurs--just like consumers--need access to a variety of credit sources. Recently, I had the pleasure of meeting a group of small businesses from across the country. By "small," I mean some of these companies have just a handful of employees. The group included owners of a catering company from Dallas, a mechanical engineering company from Philadelphia, a marketing consulting firm from Cleveland, a combination bar and bakery from Brooklyn, and a gluten-free bakery from my hometown, Salt Lake City. They shared with me the joys of running their own businesses, of creating jobs, and of providing for their families as well as creating opportunities for their employees. They also spoke of their challenges, which I'm sure are familiar to many of you in this room. For one, the owners wear many hats, including CEO, chief operating officer, chief finance officer, head of sales and marketing, and some--quite literally--chief bottle washer. They also spoke of the day-to-day difficulties of finding, training, and retaining employees. And, they raised the challenges they often face in gaining access to working capital, the lifeblood to sustaining and growing their businesses. The anecdotes I heard touched on three related trends we have been observing in the small business credit environment. First, although lending standards have eased since the recession and the financial condition of businesses has improved, some small business credit needs, especially for the smallest of firms and minority small business owners, continue to go unmet. According to a 2016 Small Business Credit Survey conducted by our 12 Federal Reserve Banks, some small businesses still face persistent credit gaps, even though they often seek credit in small amounts. Of the firms that apply for credit, more than two-thirds apply for less than $100,000, with substantial numbers of these applying for less than $25,000.17However, smaller firms often struggle to qualify for bank credit, and among firms that were denied, low credit scores and insufficient credit history were the most frequently cited reasons. In addition, our survey suggests that some low-credit-risk minority- and women-owned firms are less likely than low-risk white-owned and male-owned firms to receive financing; and if they are approved, it is for less than the amount sought.18 Second, there have been shifts in the composition of commercial bank lending to small businesses. Large banks' share of small business lending has grown, especially among the smallest loans. This represents a change from 20 years ago when small businesses relied more on a relationship with local community banks for access to credit. For loans under $100,000, small banks of less than $1 billion in assets now hold a 19 percent share, down from 60 percent two decades ago. Today, it is the largest banks--those with greater than $50 billion in assets--that account for more than 60 percent. Some of this trend may be due to industry consolidation, which has reduced the number of very small banks. The composition of credit offered also is shifting. Loans entail high fixed costs that are roughly the same regardless of whether a loan is for $100,000 or $1 million, reducing the profitability of smaller-dollar loans.19Our data suggest that the growing share of small business lending at larger banks may be partly due to their use of automated underwriting for credit cards.20By providing credit cards, banks are expanding credit available to small businesses; however, some small business advocates note that this form of credit is generally more expensive and lacks the flexibility of other products.21For example, personal or business credit cards may be suitable for purchasing supplies, but not for payroll. In addition, this automated approach may be more "cookie cutter," meaning that firms that don't meet standard lending criteria may not qualify.22 These developments have created a space for the third trend we have been observing--the emergence of nonbank online alternative lenders that provide small-dollar business credit. For example, some of the large technology firms are providing credit, at a rapidly growing pace, to their built-in customer base of merchants. Several of the businesses I met with mentioned they had turned to nonbank online lenders after being turned down by banks. Some online lenders obtain access to a prospective borrower's accounting software, merchant accounts, shipping, and payroll data in real time in order to underwrite businesses. Business owners can receive funds in a couple of days or even hours. This emergence of online lenders is part of a broader evolution of financial technology--or "fintech"--as seen in a wide range of products and services for both consumers and small businesses. I'm not surprised to see this important topic on your conference agenda. The use of fintech to expand access to credit has great promise and also associated risks. For example, online origination platforms and more sophisticated algorithms may enable credit to be underwritten and delivered in a manner that is still prudent but with greater efficiency, convenience, and lower processing costs. And as regulators, we do not want to unnecessarily restrict innovations that can benefit consumers and small businesses. At the same time, our interest is in ensuring that banks understand and manage their risks when introducing new technologies or partnering with fintech companies, and that consumers and small businesses remain protected.23This is why the Federal Reserve has been engaged in a broad and multidisciplinary effort to develop a robust understanding of the technologies and activities in this space, in order to study fintech's opportunities and risks, and assess policy and supervisory implications.24 Fintech is also one of the factors driving calls for regulators to modernize the Community Reinvestment Act, or CRA, as technology changes how financial products and services are accessed. As I'm sure most of you know, the CRA is an important law that recognizes banks' affirmative obligation to meet the credit needs of the communities they serve, including low- and moderate-income communities. The CRA promotes financial inclusion by encouraging banks to extend mortgages, small business loans, and other types of credit as well as to provide investments and other services in communities where they take deposits, consistent with safe and sound banking operations. The arrival of new financial technologies, along with significant industry consolidation and other structural changes, has changed the way that financial services are delivered to consumers and the ways in which banks lend in communities. We continue to study these shifts, and share the common goal of improving the current supervisory and regulatory framework for CRA to further the statute's core objective of promoting access to credit and financial inclusion. ConclusionFinally, I'll note that we will continue to learn about issues concerning financial inclusion through our research, such as by collecting new data in our Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking and Survey of Consumer Finances that I mentioned earlier. The information we gather helps us better understand factors affecting consumers and households, including low- and moderate-income and historically underserved populations. We also continue to convene experts and practitioners from industry, academia, and community-based organizations to help provide context on what we are seeing in the data, to identify emerging issues, and to consider where there may be data gaps and opportunities for additional research. In addition to yielding important insights that inform our policymaking, we hope these efforts can support the conversations you are having at conferences like this one. Thank you, again, for inviting me to speak at your conference as we mark the notable anniversaries that this year brings. Together, our work clearly has a great deal of synergy, and I thank you for your efforts. Making the economy work for the benefit of all Americans, including lower-income communities, is of the utmost importance. 1.The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.See, e.g. Randal K. Quarles, "Early Observations on Improving the Effectiveness of Post-Crisis Regulation" (speech at the American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Annual Meeting, Washington, DC, January 19, 2018).Return to text 3."Financial Inclusion," World Bank, last modified April 5, 2017.Return to text 4.See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "Why Opportunity and Inclusion Matter to America's Economic Strength" (speech at the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, May 22, 2017); Janet L. Yellen, "Perspectives on Inequality and Opportunity from the Survey of Consumer Finances" (speech at the Conference on Economic Opportunity and Inequality, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA, October 17, 2014); Ben S. Bernanke, "The Level and Distribution of Economic Well-Being" (speech before the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, NE, February 6, 2007).Return to text 5.The Board'sMonetary Policy Report (PDF)has included a discussion of the economic experiences of major demographic groups. See, e.g., "Have the Gains of the Economic Expansion Been Widely Shared?" inMonetary Policy Report(Washington: Board of Governors, June 21, 2016), p. 6.Return to text 6.According to the U.S. Census Bureau's "Quarterly Residential Vacancies and Homeownership" statistics for the fourth quarter of 2017, the homeownership rates by race were 72.7 percent for non-Hispanic white households; 42.1 percent and 46.6 percent for black and Hispanic households, respectively; and 58.2 percent for Asian, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islanders. Seewww.census.gov/housing/hvs/files/currenthvspress.pdf.Return to text 7.U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2017 Annual Social and Economic Supplement, "Educational Attainment in the United States: 2017," December 14, 2017.Return to text 8.William R. Emmons, Ana H. Kent, and Lowell R. Ricketts,The Demographics of Wealth: How Education, Race and Birth Year Shape Financial Outcome (PDF), Essay No. 1 (St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, February 2018).Return to text 9.For example, data from our Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) show that in 2016, only about half of white households had three months of emergency savings, but this was the case for less than two-fifths of black and Hispanic households. The 2016 SHED is atwww.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm. See also the Survey of Consumer Finances atwww.federalreserve.gov/econres/scfindex.htm.Return to text 10.In the Matter ofCole Taylor Bank, Docket Nos. 14-021-E-SMB, 14-021-CMP-SMB (July 1, 2014); In the Matter ofHigher One, Inc., Docket Nos. 15-026-E-I, 15-026-CMP-I (December 23, 2015); In the Matter ofCustomers Bank, Docket Nos. 15-027-B-SM, 15-027-CMP-SM (December 6, 2016).Return to text 11.In the Matter ofPeoples Bank, Docket No. 17-041-B-SM (November 28, 2017).Return to text 12.See, e.g., DOJ settlements withMidwest BankCentre;SunTrust Mortgage Inc.; andCountrywide Financial Corporation. More information about recent referrals to the DOJ can be found in the Federal Reserve's annual report atwww.federalreserve.gov/publications/2016-ar-consumer-and-community-affairs.htm#14890.Return to text 13.Seewww.ffiec.gov/press/PDF/FFIEC_CCR_SystemFR_Notice.pdf.Return to text 14.See the partnership's website atwww.fedpartnership.gov.Return to text 15.Seehttps://consumercomplianceoutlook.org/andhttps://consumercomplianceoutlook.org/outlook-live/.Return to text 16.Federal Reserve System,"2017 Interagency Fair Lending Hot Topics,"Outlook Livewebinar series, November 16, 2017.Return to text 17.While there are many working definitions of "small," figures from the Small Business Credit Survey (SBCS) use firms with less than 500 employees as a proxy for small businesses. Some 28 percent are seeking credit in amounts less than $25,000 and 42 percent reported seeking between $25,000 and $100,000. The SBCS is available atwww.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/smallbusiness/2016/SBCS-Report-EmployerFirms-2016.pdf.Return to text 18.According to special analyses of the Joint Federal Reserve Banks' Small Business Credit Survey, among low- credit-risk firms, 60 percent of minority firms that were approved received only partial funding, whereas 68 percent of low-risk, non-minority firms were approved for the full amount of financing requested. Women-owned firms also reported a funding gap. Among low-credit-risk firms, 48 percent of women-owned firms received all of the financing requested, compared to 57 percent of men-owned firms. Reports are available atwww.newyorkfed.org/smallbusiness/small-business-credit-survey-employer-firms-2016.Return to text 19.BAI Banking Strategies, "Making Small Loans Profitably," July 7, 2015.Return to text 20.Based on Federal Reserve analysis of FR-Y14 data for scored loans and cards (i.e., underwritten by owner's personal credit) for 2007 to 2016.Return to text 21.Record of Meeting (PDF), Community Advisory Council and the Board of Governors, May 26, 2017, p. 2.Return to text 22.See Rebel A. Cole, Lawrence G. Goldberg, and Lawrence J. White, "Cookie Cutter vs. Character: The Micro Structure of Small Business Lending by Large and Small Banks,"Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis39, no. 2 (June 2004): 227–51. Also see Karen Gordon Mills and Brayden McCarthy, "The State of Small Business Lending: Innovation and Technology and the Implications for Regulation," Working Paper No. 17-042, (Harvard Business School, December 1, 2016), p. 36.Return to text 23.See, e.g., Carol A. Evans, "Keeping Fintech Fair: Thinking about Fair Lending and UDAP Risks,"Consumer Compliance Outlook(Second Issue 2017).Return to text 24.See Lael Brainard, "The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech" (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC, December 2, 2016).Return to text