Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Housing Finance AgencyOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--Five federal agencies approved final amendments to swap margin requirements to conform with recent rule changes that impose new restrictions on certain qualified financial contracts of systemically important banking organizations (QFC Rules). Under the amendments, legacy swaps entered into before the applicable compliance date will not become subject to the margin requirements if they are amended solely to comply with the requirements of the QFC Rules. The amendments harmonize the definition of "Eligible Master Netting Agreement" in the swap margin rule with recent changes to the definition of "Qualifying Master Netting Agreement" in the respective capital and liquidity regulations of the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) by recognizing the restrictions that were adopted by these agencies with respect to the QFC Rules. The swap margin rule was issued in November 2015 by the Farm Credit Administration, the FDIC, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the Federal Reserve, and the OCC and established minimum margin requirements for swaps and security-based swaps that are not cleared through a clearinghouse. The margin requirements are designed to help ensure the safety and soundness of swap entities and reduce risks to the stability of the financial system associated with non-cleared swaps activity. The final amendments are effective 30 days after the publication date in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF
Five federal financial regulatory agencies on Tuesday extended until October 17, 2018, the comment period for a proposed rule to simplify and tailor compliance requirements for the "Volcker rule." The Volcker rule generally restricts banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading and from owning or controlling hedge funds or private equity funds. With the extension, the Federal Reserve Board, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission will have provided interested parties with approximately four and a half months from the date the proposal was released to the public to submit comments. The proposal was released by the agencies in early June with a 60-day comment period that began after publication in theFederal Registeron July 17. Federal RegisterNotice:PDF|HTML
WASHINGTON--Five federal agencies today issued a joint statement explaining the role of supervisory guidance for regulated institutions. The statement from the agencies--the Federal Reserve Board, the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency--confirms that supervisory guidance does not have the force and effect of law, and the agencies do not take enforcement actions based on supervisory guidance. The joint statement explains that supervisory guidance can outline the agencies' supervisory expectations or priorities and articulate the agencies' general views regarding appropriate practices for a given subject area. SR 18-5/CA 18-7 Letter: Interagency Statement Clarifying the Role of Supervisory Guidance
Three federal banking agencies on Tuesday invited public comment on a proposal to modify the agencies' capital rules for high volatility commercial real estate exposures, as required by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The proposal also asks for comment on certain terms contained in the revised definition of high volatility commercial real estate. The changes, when finalized, would apply to all banking organizations subject to the agencies' capital rules. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Chairman Jerome H. Powell At Rhode Island Business Leaders Day, Washington, D.C. Good afternoon. Thank you, Senator Reed, for the kind words and the opportunity to be a part of the annual Rhode Island Business Leaders Day. And thank you, all, for sticking with the program for the last speaker of the day. The Federal Open Market Committee, the body within the Federal Reserve that sets monetary policy, just concluded a meeting yesterday. I plan to talk briefly about how my colleagues and I see the economy evolving and our role in keeping it healthy. Importantly, I want to hear from you. I very much appreciate your views, as business people, of economic conditions where you live and work. And, of course, I will be happy to respond to questions. Our economy is strong. Growth is running at a healthy clip. Unemployment is low, the number of people working is rising steadily, and wages are up. Inflation is low and stable. All of these developments are very good signs. Of course, that is not to say that everything is perfect. The benefits of this strong economy have not reached all Americans. Many of our country's economic challenges are beyond the scope of the Fed, but we are doing all we can to keep the economy strong and moving forward. That is the best way we can promote an environment in which every American has the opportunity to succeed. Each time we meet, we face the same question: How can we set monetary policy to best support job growth and low, steady inflation? For many years, this question called for very low interest rates to help an economy that had been damaged by the deep financial crisis that gripped the world 10 years ago. As the economy has steadily gained strength, the Fed has been gradually returning interest rates closer to the levels that are normal in a healthy economy. We took another step on that path yesterday, with a quarter-point increase in short-term interest rates. These rates remain low, and my colleagues and I believe that this gradual return to normal is helping to sustain this strong economy for the longer-run benefit of all Americans. As I mentioned, 10 years have now passed since the depths of the financial crisis‑‑a painful part of our history that cost many Americans their jobs, their homes, and, for some, their hopes and dreams. In addition to holding interest rates low to support the recovery, we have taken many steps to make the financial system safer. In particular, we are holding the largest banks to much higher standards in the amount of capital and liquidity they hold and in the ways they assess and manage the risks they take. I am confident that the system today is stronger and in a far better position to support the financial needs of households and businesses through good times and bad. We continue to work to sustain these fundamental improvements while also ensuring that regulation is both effective and efficient. Thank you. I am happy to take your questions.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemConference of State Bank SupervisorsFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the CurrencyNational Credit Union Administration The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the state regulators recognize the serious impact of Hurricane Florence on the customers, members, and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found atwww.fema.gov. Lending:Financial institutions should work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by Hurricane Florence. Prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas should not be subject to examiner criticism. Modifications of existing loans should be evaluated individually to determine whether they represent troubled debt restructurings. This evaluation should be based on the facts and circumstances of each borrower and loan, which requires judgment, as not all modifications will result in a troubled debt restructuring. In supervising institutions affected by Hurricane Florence, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances these institutions face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound practices as well as in the public interest. Temporary Facilities:The agencies understand that many financial institutions may face staffing, power, telecommunications, and other challenges in re-opening facilities after Hurricane Florence. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the primary federal and/or state regulator will expedite, as appropriate, any request to operate temporary facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by Hurricane Florence. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal and/or state regulator will suffice initially to start the approval process, with necessary written notification being submitted shortly thereafter. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by Hurricane Florence may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations, as applicable. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by Hurricane Florence that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of the effects of Hurricane Florence. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions, as applicable, may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, institutions should review the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected by Hurricane Florence. Institutions should monitor municipal securities and loans affected by Hurricane Florence. Appropriate monitoring and prudent efforts to stabilize such investments are encouraged. For more information, refer to theInteragency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster, which is available as follows: CSBS:https://www.csbs.org/interagency-supervisory-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disasterFDIC:https://www.fdic.gov/news/news/financial/2017/fil17062.htmlFRB:https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1714a1.pdfOCC:https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2017/bulletin-2017-61.htmlNCUA:https://www.ncua.gov/Resources/Documents/SL-17-02-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster-enclosure.pdf
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the September 25-26 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the September 25-26 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Compass Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, to establish a branch in Houston, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by HarborOne Mutual Bancshares and HarborOne Bancorp, Inc., both of Brockton, Massachusetts, to acquire Coastway Bancorp, Inc. ("Coastway"), and thereby indirectly acquire Coastway's subsidiary bank, Coastway Community Bank, both of Warwick, Rhode Island. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application by Origin Bank, Choudrant, Louisiana, to establish a branch in Houston, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) and the president and vice president of the council for 2019. The CDIAC advises the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues of interest to community depository institutions. Members are selected from representatives of commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils serves on the CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. Further information on the CDIAC can be found here:http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htm. Christopher D. Maher, president and chief executive officer of OceanFirst Financial Corporation and OceanFirst Bank, Toms River, N.J., will serve as CDIAC president in 2019. Joe Quiroga, president and chief executive officer of Texas National Bank, Edinburg, Texas, will serve as vice president. The other members of the CDIAC in 2019 are: Alvin J. CowansPresident and Chief Executive OfficerMcCoy Federal Credit UnionOrlando, Fla. Robert A. DeAlmeidaPresident and Chief Executive OfficerHamilton BankTowson, Md. Brad KoehnRegional PresidentMidwest BankLincoln, Neb. Shari LavenChief Executive OfficerViking BankAlexandria, Minn. Christopher J. Murphy IIIChairman and Chief Executive Officer1st Source Corporation and 1st Source BankSouth Bend, Ind. Tyrone E. MusePresident and Chief Executive OfficerVisions Federal Credit UnionEndicott, N.Y. T. Michael PricePresident and Chief Financial OfficerFirst Commonwealth Financial Corp.Indiana, Pa. Richard M. SanbornPresident and Chief Executive OfficerSeacoast Commerce Bank and Seacoast Commerce Banc HoldingsSan Diego, Calif. Dorothy A. SavareseChairman, President, and Chief Executive OfficerCape Cod 5Orleans, Mass. Ann WellsChief Executive OfficerCommonwealth Bank & Trust CompanyLouisville, Ky. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Beach Community Bancshares, Inc., Fort Walton Beach, FloridaWritten Agreement dated June 1, 2010Terminated September 14, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Higher One, Inc., New Haven, ConnecticutCease and Desist Order dated December 23, 2015 (PDF)Terminated September 10, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: OSB Community Bank, Brooklyn, MichiganWritten Agreement dated July 30, 2015Terminated August 30, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Presidential Holdings, Inc., Bethesda, MarylandSupervisory Agreement, issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision, dated May 3, 2010 (PDF)Terminated September 25, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Thursday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Minneapolis, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 2-1/2 percent to 2-3/4 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved final amendments to the liability provisions of Regulation CC, which governs availability of funds and collection of checks. These amendments continue the Board's efforts to update Regulation CC to reflect the evolution of the nation's check collection system from one that is largely paper-based to one that is virtually all electronic. In today's check collection environment, original paper checks may be unavailable for inspection in certain disputes between banks. When the original check is not available, the final amendments update Regulation CC to include a presumption that a substitute or electronic check was altered in certain cases of doubt. The presumption applies only to disputes between banks and only when one bank has transferred an electronic or substitute check to the other bank. As with existing rules under Regulation CC, the parties may, by mutual agreement, vary the effect of the amendments' provisions. In addition, the final amendments clarify that the presumption does not apply if it is contrary to another federal statute or regulation, such as the U.S. Department of the Treasury's rules regarding U.S. Treasury checks. The amendments become effective January 1, 2019. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday requested public comment on a proposal to amend Regulation H (Membership of State Banking Institutions in the Federal Reserve System) and Regulation K (International Banking Operations) to repeal provisions that incorporate the Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act (S.A.F.E. Act). The proposal reflects the transferal of the Board's rulemaking authority for the S.A.F.E. Act to the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Bureau). Entities that were subject to the Board's rules are now subject to the Bureau's rules. The S.A.F.E. Act mandates a nationwide licensing and registration system for residential mortgage loan originators. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act transferred rulemaking authority for the S.A.F.E. Act to the Bureau from the Board, the other federal banking agencies, and the Farm Credit Administration. Because the Bureau has already issued a final rule that is substantially identical to the Board's regulations that incorporate the S.A.F.E. Act, the Board is proposing to repeal its versions of those regulations. Comments on the attached proposal must be submitted within 60 days from the date of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Household spending and business fixed investment have grown strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remain near 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. Risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2 to 2-1/4 percent. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman; John C. Williams, Vice Chairman; Thomas I. Barkin; Raphael W. Bostic; Lael Brainard; Richard H. Clarida; Esther L. George; Loretta J. Mester; and Randal K. Quarles. Implementation Note issued September 26, 2018
No content found
Chairman Powell swears in Richard H. Clarida as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and as Vice Chairman. Click here for more high-resolution photos. Richard H. Clarida took the oath of office on Monday as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and as Vice Chairman. The oath of office was administered by Chairman Jerome H. Powell in the Board Room. President Trump on April 16, 2018, announced his intention to nominate Dr. Clarida to an unexpired term as a Board member, ending on January 31, 2022, and to a four-year term as Vice Chairman. He was confirmed to both positions by the United States Senate on August 28, 2018. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Richard H. Clarida's biography
Governor Lael Brainard At the Detroit Economic Club, Detroit, Michigan It is a pleasure to be in Detroit. I started my career working here in the Motor City, and I have followed the fortunes of this area with interest ever since. A few years ago, I visited some of Detroit's neighborhoods with our local officials at a time when damage from the crisis was still pervasive.While challenges remain in many of the city's neighborhoods, since that time the metropolitan area overall has seen signs of a rebound in business activity and investment, and the unemployment rate has continued to trend downward, recently falling to 4.3 percent.1 This is similar to the nation's economy more broadly. While challenges remain for many, aggregate growth is strong, and the economy is meeting our full employment and inflation objectives. Given the outlook, it comes as no surprise that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has been gradually raising interest rates from crisis-era lows and sees further gradual increases as likely to be appropriate in its most recent statement.2Before discussing the outlook, it might be useful to first explore some concepts that are important in informing the path of rates. What Is the Neutral Rate of Interest?In thinking about how we should set the federal funds rate, many policymakers and economists find the concept of the neutral rate of interest to be a useful frame of reference. So, what does the neutral rate mean? Intuitively, I think of the nominal neutral interest rate as the level of the federal funds rate that keeps output growing around its potential rate in an environment of full employment and stable inflation.3 Focusing first on the "shorter-run" neutral rate, this does not stay fixed, but rather fluctuates along with important changes in economic conditions. For instance, legislation that increases the budget deficit through tax cuts and spending increases can be expected to generate tailwinds to domestic demand and thus to push up the shorter-run neutral interest rate. Heightened risk appetite among investors similarly can be expected to push up the shorter-run neutral rate. Conversely, many of the forces that contributed to the financial crisis--such as fear and uncertainty on the part of businesses and households--can be expected to lower the neutral rate of interest, as can declines in foreign demand for U.S. exports. In many circumstances, monetary policy can help keep the economy on its sustainable path at full employment by adjusting the policy rate to reflect movements in the shorter-run neutral rate. In this context, the appropriate reference for assessing the stance of monetary policy is the gap between the policy rate and the nominal shorter-run neutral rate. So far, I have been focusing on the shorter-run neutral rate of interest that is responsive to headwinds or tailwinds to demand. The longer-run equilibrium rate is a related concept. The underlying concept of the "longer run" generally refers to the output growing at its longer-run trend, after transitory forces reflecting headwinds or tailwinds have played out, in an environment of full employment and inflation running at the FOMC objective.4 The longer-run federal funds rate estimated by FOMC participants in their Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) meets the definition of a longer-run equilibrium rate of interest.5It is worth highlighting that the longer-run federal funds rate is the only neutral interest rate reported in the FOMC projections. But the shorter-run neutral rate, rather than the longer-run federal funds rate, is the relevant benchmark for assessing the near-term path of monetary policy in the presence of headwinds or tailwinds. Estimating the Neutral Rate of InterestSimilar to other equilibrium macroeconomic concepts such as potential gross domestic product (GDP) and the natural rate of unemployment, the shorter- and longer-run levels of the neutral rate are not directly observable, so they must be estimated or inferred from the movements of variables that are observed, such as market interest rates, inflation, the unemployment rate, and GDP.6In recent years, considerable work has derived estimates of the longer-run equilibrium rate, in some cases using statistical techniques that can be thought of as capturing the highly persistent component of the neutral rate. The central tendency of those estimates suggests that the longer-run trend rate is in the range of 2.5 to 3.5 percent in nominal terms.7This range lines up well with the most recent median estimate of the longer-run federal funds rate in the FOMC SEP, which is just below 3 percent. By these estimates, the longer-run neutral rate has fallen considerably from the estimated range in earlier decades of 4 to 5 percent.8 Turning to the shorter-run neutral rate, although the estimates are model dependent and uncertain, we can make some general inferences about its recent evolution that are largely independent of the details of specific models.9Estimates suggest the shorter-run neutral rate tends to be cyclical, falling in recessions and rising during expansions, and our current expansion appears to be no exception.10 Last year, the unemployment rate returned to pre-crisis levels, which required real interest rates that were below zero for nearly 10 years.11This year, the unemployment rate has fallen further, and job market gains have gathered strength, at the same time that the federal funds rate has increased. This combination suggests that the short-run neutral interest rate likely has also increased. If, instead, the neutral rate had remained constant as the federal funds rate increased, we would have expected to see labor market gains slow. That inference is consistent with the formal model estimates, which indicate that the shorter-run neutral rate has gone up as the expansion has advanced. This is also suggested by the observation that overall financial conditions, as measured by a variety of indexes, have remained quite accommodative during a period when the federal funds rate has been moving higher. In the latest FOMC SEP median path, by the end of next year, the federal funds rate is projected to rise to a level that exceeds the longer-run federal funds rate during a time when real GDP growth is projected to exceed its longer-run pace and unemployment continues to fall. The shift from headwinds to tailwinds may be expected to push the shorter-run neutral rate above its longer-run trend in the next year or two, just as it fell below the longer-run equilibrium rate following the financial crisis. Notably, the sizable fiscal stimulus in the pipeline is likely to continue to bolster the short-run neutral rate over the next two years. The relatively rich level of current asset valuations relative to historical levels is another factor that could push the short-run neutral rate above its longer-run value. As was noted in the recent FOMC minutes, corporate credit spreads are very narrow, and equity valuations are elevated relative to historical patterns, even after taking into account the low level of interest rates.12Business and consumer confidence is high, which is also consistent with a higher shorter-run neutral rate of interest. The OutlookHaving provided some context for how we might assess policy, I will turn to some observations on the outlook. By any measure, overall growth in the second quarter was strong. Real GDP increased at a 4-1/4 percent annual rate, a very rapid pace nine years into the expansion. Looking ahead, it seems likely that growth will remain solid. Confidence is high, private domestic demand momentum is solid, and recent fiscal stimulus will continue to work its way through the economy, at least for the next year or so. The labor market is also strong. So far this year, payroll gains have averaged more than 200,000 per month, a step-up from the 2017 pace and well above estimates of the pace necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force. Among prime-age workers, the employment-to-population ratio is 79.3 percent, up almost 1 percentage point over the past year. These developments are heartening, suggesting the tight labor market is providing employment opportunities to more Americans. Nonetheless, this is still about 1 percentage point below its previous cyclical peak, suggesting there may be some room for further gains. In another encouraging development, wage gains in the August report reached their highest level since the depth of the financial crisis, although wage growth remains moderate by historical standards. While a variety of wage measures have accelerated over the past year and there is anecdotal evidence of worker shortages in some sectors and regions, there is no evidence of rapid acceleration in the aggregate wage indicators. At 3.9 percent, the August unemployment rate was about 1/2 percentage point lower than the previous year. If unemployment continues to decline at the same rate as we have seen over the past year, we will soon see unemployment rates not seen since the 1960s. Historically, the few periods when resource utilization has been at similarly tight levels have tended to see elevated risks of either accelerating inflation or financial imbalances.13For instance, the inflation process may change in unexpected ways. So far, the data on inflation remain encouraging, providing little signal of an outbreak of inflation to the upside, on the one hand, and some reassurance that underlying trend inflation may be moving closer to 2 percent, on the other. Core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices have increased 2 percent over the past 12 months, consistent with the FOMC's objective. Survey measures of inflation expectations remain stable in the lower end of the historical ranges, while market-based measures of inflation compensation remain stable at levels above the lows seen in 2016. With various measures of underlying trend inflation having come in below our 2 percent objective over a sustained period, it is important to sustainably achieve inflation around 2 percent to prevent an erosion of underlying trend inflation the next time the economy faces a downturn and the federal funds rate hits its lower limit.14 The past few times unemployment fell to levels as low as those projected over the next year, signs of overheating showed up in financial-sector imbalances rather than in accelerating inflation. The Federal Reserve's assessment suggests that financial vulnerabilities are building, which might be expected after a long period of economic expansion and very low interest rates. Rising risks are notable in the corporate sector, where low spreads and loosening credit terms are mirrored by rising indebtedness among corporations that could be vulnerable to downgrades in the event of unexpected adverse developments. Leveraged lending is again on the rise; spreads on leveraged loans and the securitized products backed by those loans are low, and the Board's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices suggests that underwriting standards for leveraged loans may be declining to levels not seen since 2005. While tightening resource utilization and loose financial conditions present upside risks, recent foreign developments present downside risks. Trade policy has introduced uncertainty. Growth in Europe and Japan has moderated from its strong pace of last year, and political risks have reemerged in countries such as Italy. China is contending with deleveraging and deceleration as well as a challenging trade environment. As U.S. growth has pulled away from foreign growth, in part reflecting fiscal policy divergence, expectations of monetary policy divergence strengthened, contributing to upward pressure on the dollar earlier this year. The resulting currency adjustments are compounding challenges faced by some emerging market economies, along with a complicated and unpredictable trade environment and gradually increasing interest rates. Although capital flow reversals have been contained to several notably vulnerable countries so far, I am attentive to the risk that a pullback from emerging markets could broaden. The Path of PolicyWhat are the implications for policy? Over the next year or two, barring unexpected developments, continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to be appropriate to sustain full employment and inflation near its objective. With government stimulus in the pipeline providing tailwinds to demand over the next two years, it appears reasonable to expect the shorter-run neutral rate to rise somewhat higher than the longer-run neutral rate. Further out, the policy path will depend on how the economy evolves. These developments raise the prospect that, at some point, the Committee's setting of the federal funds rate will exceed current estimates of the longer-run federal funds rate. Indeed, the median projection in the SEP has this property. This raises the possibility of a flattening or inversion of the yield curve in the event that term premiums do not rise from their currently very low levels.15 Like many of you, I am attentive to the historical observation that inversions of the yield curve between the 3-month and 10-year Treasury rates have had a relatively reliable track record of preceding recessions in the United States.16But unlike these historical episodes, today the current 10-year yield is very low at around 3 percent, which is well below the average of 6-1/4 percent during the decades before the crisis. Part of the reason the 10-year Treasury yield is unusually low is that market expectations of interest rates in the longer run are themselves quite low, as discussed earlier. Another important reason the 10-year Treasury yield is very low is that the term premium has fallen to levels that are very low by historical standards. According to one estimate from Federal Reserve staff, the term premium has been slightly negative until very recently and remains very low.17By contrast, it was close to 100 basis points when the spread between the 3-month and 10-year Treasury yields was at its peak of 325 basis points in early 2010. This may temper somewhat the conclusions that we can draw from historical yield curve relationships characterized by a substantially higher term premium. If the term premium remains very low, any given amount of monetary policy tightening will lead to an inversion sooner so that even a modest tightening that might not have led to an inversion historically could do so today. One reason the term premium may be lower than in the past is the changed correlation between stock and bond returns, likely associated with changes in expected inflation outcomes.18The other driver of the low level of the term premium globally is the asset purchases of central banks in several major economies.19In this case, if the term premium rises as the effect of asset purchase programs diminishes, the effect may be to forestall an inversion of the long-dated yield curve. It is worth highlighting that the flattening yield curve suggested by the SEP median is associated with a policy path calibrated to sustain full employment and inflation around target. So, while I will keep a close watch on the yield curve as an important signal on financial conditions, I will want to interpret yield curve movements as one of several considerations informing appropriate policy. Indeed, the possibility that the projected policy path may have unintended consequences is one of the compelling reasons for raising interest rates gradually. The gradual pace of interest rate increases anticipated in the SEP median path should give us some time to assess the effects of our policies as we proceed. While the information available to us today suggests that a gradual path is appropriate, we would not hesitate to act decisively if circumstances were to change. If, for example, underlying inflation were to move abruptly and unexpectedly higher, it might be appropriate to depart from the gradual path. Stable inflation expectations is one of the key achievements of central banks in the past several decades, and we would defend it vigorously. ConclusionOur challenge is to sustain full employment and inflation at 2 percent, which is likely to warrant continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate. With fiscal stimulus in the pipeline and financial conditions supportive of growth, the shorter-run neutral interest rate is likely to move up somewhat further, and it may well surpass the longer-run equilibrium rate for some period. Beyond the near term, how much the neutral rate is likely to rise and whether it flattens or moderates further out will depend on a variety of developments--such as whether fiscal stimulus is extended or expires, whether foreign and trade risks grow or recede, and whether financial system vulnerabilities extend. As such, the gradual pace of rate increases implicit in the SEP's median policy path incorporates a degree of caution, which is appropriate, in my view. References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018a). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, August 1. -------- (2018b). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 31-August 1, 2018," press release, August 22. Brainard, Lael (2015). "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. -------- (2017). "Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5. -------- (2018). "Navigating Monetary Policy as Headwinds Shift to Tailwinds," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, March 6. Chen, Andrew, Eric Engstrom, and Olesya Grishchenko (2016). "Has the Inflation Risk Premium Fallen? Is It Now Negative?" FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 4. Curcuru, Stephanie E., Michiel De Pooter, and George Eckerd (2018). "Measuring Monetary Policy Spillovers between U.S. and German Bond Yields (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1226. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Curcuru, Stephanie E., Steven B. Kamin, Canlin Li, and Marius Rodriguez (2018). "International Spillovers of Monetary Policy: Conventional Policy vs. Quantitative Easing (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1234. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Cúrdia, Vasco (2015). "Why So Slow? A Gradual Return for Interest Rates," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-32. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October. Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, Matthew Cocci, Sara Shahanaghi, and Micah Smith. (2015). "Why Are Interest Rates So Low?"Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May 20. Edge, Rochelle M., Michael T. Kiley, and Jean-Philippe Laforte (2008). "Natural Rate Measures in an Estimated DSGE Model of the U.S. Economy,"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,vol. 32 (August), pp. 2515-35. Estrella, Arturo, and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997). "The Predictive Power of the Term Structure of Interest Rates in Europe and the United States: Implications for the European Central Bank,"European Economic Review,vol. 41 (July), pp. 1375‑401. Favara, Giovanni, Simon Gilchrist, Kurt F. Lewis, and Egon Zakrajšek (2016). "Recession Risk and the Excess Bond Premium," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 8. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108 (May), pp. S59-75. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Johansson, Peter, and Andrew Meldrum (2018). "Predicting Recession Probabilities Using the Slope of the Yield Curve," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 1. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Kim, Don H., and Jonathan H. Wright (2005). "An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-33. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September (revised December 2011). Laubach, Thomas and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest (PDF),"Review of Economics and Statistics 85(4), 1063-1070. Lewis, Kurt F., and Francisco Vazquez-Grande (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: A Note on Transitory Shocks (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Li, Canlin, and Min Wei (2013). "Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 9 (March), pp. 3-39. Lubik, Thomas A. and Christian Matthes (2015). "Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches," Richmond Fed Economic Brief, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Oct, pages 1-6. Powell, Jerome H. (2018). "Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 24. Wolters Kluwer (2018). Blue Chip Economic Indicators, vol. 43 (September 10). Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "The Outlook for the Economy," speech delivered to Providence Chamber of Commerce, Providence, Rhode Island, May 22. -------- (2016). "The Outlook, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered to The Economic Club of New York, March 29. -------- (2017). "Statement," testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, February 14. 1. I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors (2018a).Return to text 3. The closely related concept of the natural rate of interest--the rate of interest at which investment and savings are equilibrated at full employment--is originally attributed to Swedish economist Knut Wicksell. The natural rate and the neutral rate are closely related concepts whose technical differences matter for economic theory and estimation, but less for the intuitive discussion here.Return to text 4. See Brainard (2015).Return to text 5. As defined in the FOMC SEP, "Longer-run projections represent each participant's assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy." See the most recent SEP, an addendum to the minutes of the June 2018 FOMC meeting, available in a July 5, 2018, press release on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20180705a.htm.Return to text 6. See Powell (2018).Return to text 7. See Kiley (2015); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Laubach and Williams (2003) (current estimates available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/economists/williams/data/Laubach_Williams_current_estimates.xlsx); Lewis and Vazquez-Grande (2017); and Lubik and Matthes (2015).Return to text 8. A variety of hypotheses have been advanced to explain this decline, including slower labor force growth, slower productivity growth, and an increase in savings propensities. See Kiley (2015) and Brainard (2015).Return to text 9. Estimates of real natural rates of interest based on dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models include Del Negro and others (2015) and Edge, Kiley, and Laforte (2008).Return to text 10. See, for example, Cúrdia (2015) and Del Negro and others (2015).Return to text 11. See Yellen (2015, 2016, 2017).Return to text 12. See Board of Governors (2018b).Return to text 13. See Brainard (2018).Return to text 14. See Brainard (2017).Return to text 15. The standard expectations hypothesis model decomposes longer-term interest rates into a component that represents the influence of expectations of future short-term interest rates and a "term premium." Most estimates of the term premium, which are model-based, suggest that term premiums have been very low recently, and some suggest that term premiums are roughly zero across the yield curve. If term premiums remain low and stable, the component associated with expectations of future short-term interest rates will dominate movements in long-term interest rates.Return to text 16. See Estrella and Mishkin (1997); Johansson and Meldrum (2018); and Favara and others (2016) for more recent analysis.Return to text 17. See Kim and Wright (2005). The latest update is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/researchdata/feds200533.xls.Return to text 18. See Chen, Engstrom, and Grishchenko (2016).Return to text 19. See, for example, Li and Wei (2013); Curcuru, De Pooter, and Eckerd (2018); and Curcuru and others (2018).Return to text