Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Thank you to Brookings for inviting me to speak today. It is an honor and pleasure to talk to you about the next chapter in stress testing, particularly before this extremely distinguished audience of Brookings scholars that includes former Chairs, Vice Chairs, and senior leaders of the Federal Reserve who did the hard foundational work of developing and implementing this new approach to the assessment of bank resiliency. In these circumstances, my discussing changes to our stress testing regime could sound uncomfortably close to the serene arrogance of Alfonso X of Castile, who famously said that "Had I been present at the creation, I would have given some useful hints for the better ordering of the universe." My thoughts today, however, are not a call to rewrite Genesis, but rather a recognition that our stress testing regime--like the banking and financial system that it evaluates--will and should evolve as we continue to learn from experience in the management of this tool. In the best traditions of the Federal Reserve, this evolution should be grounded in rigorous analysis of the facts and a commitment to continual improvement of our methods. In my remarks today, I will begin with what has been successful about the stress tests and why those elements should remain. I will then spend some time discussing some of the changes we have proposed to our stress testing program, and how we are now thinking about moving forward with those changes. After that, I will discuss the tension between, on the one hand, providing additional information to the firms, while, on the other hand, ensuring that the tests remain effective. And last, I will close with some thoughts on the "qualitative" element of our stress testing program. The adjustments I will discuss are intended to increase both the transparency and the efficiency of the stress testing regime. Enhanced transparency goes to the very core of democratic accountability and the rights of all U.S. citizens--including the management and shareholders of the institutions that are subject to the stress tests--to understand the requirements to which they are subject. It also helps ensure the continued credibility of our regime. BackgroundLet me begin with a short discussion of the core elements of our stress testing program. As you know, one of the most visible aspects of our stress testing program is that the firms and the public receive an independent view of the capital adequacy of the largest banks. The results are based on our own models and provide a consistent yardstick to measure resiliency across the banking system. But the stress test conducted by the Federal Reserve is only one part of our stress testing regime. Just as important, we require each firm to run its own stress test, using its own models and a stressful scenario that reflects the firm's assessment of its idiosyncratic risks and key vulnerabilities. Underpinning a firm's stress test is the firm's ability to identify and measure risks under normal and stressful conditions and the strength of the firm's internal processes, and we use the supervisory process to ensure that the firms' stress testing practices employ sound methodologies. The combination of the Federal Reserve's common yardstick, the firm's own stress tests, and supervisory oversight over the firms' practices has resulted in a meaningful increase in the post-stress resiliency of large financial institutions. All of these core components will remain in place. Further, the changes I'll speak about today are not intended to alter materially the overall level of capital in the system or the stringency of the regime. A healthy U.S. economy relies on a strong, well-capitalized banking system that can weather stressful events and continue lending to households and businesses. The U.S. banking organizations subject to the 2018 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)--the Fed's evaluation of capital adequacy for large holding companies--have increased the dollar amount of their common equity tier 1 (CET1) capital from around $500 billion in 2009 to more than $1.2 trillion as of the second quarter of this year, and have more than doubled CET1 risk-based capital ratios from approximately 5 percent to over 12 percent over the same period. While the regime has been successful overall, I believe it is prudent to review all our practices to ensure that they are as efficient and transparent as possible and that they remain appropriate in light of changes in the industry that have been achieved. For instance, as firms become more resilient, they may no longer need to build capital to support their current level of risk taking, but rather move into the mode of retaining the capital they have already built. Firms have also significantly improved their risk management, providing room to adjust our approach to assessing capital planning practices. Finally, as we make changes to our regime, the issue of volatility in the stress test results becomes more pronounced. As I'll discuss, we are considering how to balance the need to preserve the dynamism in stress testing with the need to ensure that firms have sufficient notice regarding the capital requirements to which they are held. Stress Capital BufferMany of you are familiar with the Federal Reserve's proposal to integrate the stress test with the regulatory capital rule--known as the stress capital buffer (SCB).1I believe the SCB proposal represents an important milestone as we enter the next chapter of our stress testing regime. For those who are not familiar with the SCB, let me provide a little background about how our capital rule currently works, and how it would be modified by the SCB. As devoted readers of our capital rules may know, our regulatory capital rule includes both minimum capital requirements and a buffer that sits on top of those minimum requirements. The buffer serves as an early warning to a firm and to supervisors, and it requires the firm to reduce its capital distributions as the firm approaches the minimum requirements. Under the current capital rule, all firms are subject to a fixed buffer requirement of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets--the largest firms are also subject to a global systemically important bank surcharge and potential countercyclical capital buffer. For large firms, the SCB would replace the fixed 2.5 percent risk-based buffer with a firm-specific buffer the size of which would be based on the firm's stress test results. In this way, we are integrating the automatic restrictions on capital distributions in the current capital rule with the output of the most dynamic tool we have for assessing risk--the stress test--to create a more robust and dynamic regulatory capital regime. The SCB would also result in a more transparent and simplified system of regulatory capital requirements, because a firm will be held to a single, integrated capital regime. When we made our SCB proposal last April, we had aimed to make the SCB final for the 2019 stress test cycle. However, the comments we received have been extensive and thoughtful, and have raised issues that require a carefully considered response. While I don't believe these issues will prevent us from ultimately implementing the SCB, they have flagged certain elements of the regime that could benefit from further refinement. Accordingly, I expect we will adopt a final rule in the near future that will settle the basic framework of the SCB, but re-propose certain elements. To enable this process to run its course, I expect that the first SCB would not go into effect before 2020. For 2019, I expect CCAR will remain in place for firms with over $250 billion in assets or that are otherwise complex; however, we will consider whether we can move forward with any aspects of the SCB proposal for CCAR 2019, such as assumptions related to balance sheet growth. I will also ask the Board to exempt firms with less than $250 billion in assets from the CCAR quantitative assessment and supervisory stress testing in 2019 in light of the every-other-year cycle contemplated in the tailoring proposal that the Board approved two weeks ago.2 Returning to the SCB proposal, I would like to give you a sense of the comments we received and our approach to addressing those concerns. The issue foremost on my mind is the volatility of the stress test results. One concern frequently expressed is that the results of the supervisory stress test can lead to capital requirements that change significantly from year to year, which limits a firm's ability to manage its capital effectively. Some amount of volatility is necessary to preserve the dynamism of the stress test--by nature, the stress test will differ year-over-year based on macroeconomic conditions and contemporary understanding of salient risks in the economy. In addition, the stress test results are sensitive to changes in a firm's balance sheet, which means that a firm's capital requirements will evolve as the firm's activities and exposure evolve. However, I do think there is an important balance to be struck between preserving this dynamism and ensuring that firms have sufficient notice regarding the capital requirements to which they are held. In the first years after the financial crisis, as the banking system was dramatically ramping up the total amount of capital in the system, this volatility was less of a management problem: until we reached reasonably full capitalization, each year every bank needed to increase its capital. If one year that increment was a little higher or a little lower than the previous year, that was simply a modest difference of velocity, not direction. At the current juncture, however, both our system as a whole and each of the largest banks in that system are fully meeting their capital requirements. In these circumstances, having a highly variable capital requirement presents a significant management challenge. We are considering ways of preserving the dynamism of stress testing while reducing its volatility, and plan to seek comment on a proposal in this area in the not-too-distant future. In addition, we are also exploring ways of improving our approach to measuring risks in the trading book. Firms' trading books are dynamic and complex, as firms hold both long and short positions. Many have noted that a single market shock does not adequately capture risks in firms' trading book, and we agree with those comments. We are exploring ways to incorporate multiple market shocks in our stress test without adding volatility to the results and without increasing the compliance burden. We are also considering adjusting another element of the SCB proposal in order to provide more notice to firms. Currently, and under the SCB proposal, a firm must decide whether to increase or decrease its planned dividends and share repurchases for the upcoming year without knowledge of a key constraint: the results of the stress test. In other words, we require a firm to give us a formal plan for dividends and stock repurchases without knowing what its effective capital requirement is. If it guesses wrong, it could be publicly shamed for failing the stress test (if its dividends are too high relative to capital), or penalized in the markets for inadequate distribution of income (if its dividends are too low relative to capital). Now, while this might at first blush appear to be pointless and obdurate cruelty, the reasoning behind the practice was initially perfectly sensible: it reflected the view that firms should think rigorously about their capital uses and needs in developing their capital distribution plans, rather than rely primarily on the results of the supervisory stress test to guide those plans. Now that we all have several years' experience with this system, however, firms have told us that they would be able to engage in more thoughtful capital planning if they had knowledge of that year's stress test results before finalizing their distribution plans for the upcoming year. I am sympathetic to their concerns, and will ask the Board to adjust the operation of the rule so that firms know their SCB before they decide on their planned distributions for the coming year. This adjustment in sequence will also help firms manage volatility in the SCB. We expect firms to continue to maintain robust stress testing practices and use those results to inform their capital distribution plans, and we will continue to use the supervisory process to reinforce this expectation. The comments also highlighted an issue with how the capital buffers operate today, which is amplified by the inherent volatility of the SCB. As I noted earlier, a firm operating in its capital buffer is required to reduce its capital distributions so that it can build capital over time. By design, the buffer was intended to apply increasingly stringent limitations as the firm's capital ratios decline. But, in our current world in which a healthy and profitable banking system is seeking to maintain its capital levels rather than continue to increase them, a bank will appropriately and safely tend to distribute much or all of its income in any given year. In that case, the operation of the buffer would not result in a proportional restriction of income as the firm's capital eases, but could be a sudden cessation of all dividends if the firm dips into the buffer by even a small amount, even if the changes in its capital levels are quite minor. We are considering adjustments that would make the rules more consistent with the graduated intent. We plan to work with the other banking agencies to consider how best to effect this change. There are two additional elements of the SCB proposal that I believe would benefit from modification. First, the SCB proposal would have included four quarters of dividends in a firm's SCB, in recognition of the fact that firms experience market pressure to hold dividends constant, even under stress. In my view, there may be ways of encouraging greater reliance on less sticky repurchases while providing more flexibility in the regime, and we are exploring alternatives. Last, the SCB proposal would have included a post-stress leverage requirement. As the Federal Reserve has long maintained, leverage requirements are intended to serve as a backstop to the risk-based capital requirements. By definition, they are not intended to be risk-sensitive. Thus, I am concerned that explicitly assigning a leverage buffer requirement to a firm on the basis of risk-sensitive post-stress estimates runs afoul of the intellectual underpinnings of the leverage ratio, and I would advocate removing this element of the stress capital buffer regime. Of course, leverage ratios, including the enhanced supplementary leverage requirements, would remain a critical part of our regulatory capital regime, and we will maintain the supervisory expectation that firms have sufficient capital to meet all minimum regulatory requirements. Together, the adjustments we are contemplating to the SCB offer promise in improving the efficiency, coherence, and transparency of the regulatory capital regime while maintaining the overall level of capital in the system and the core principles of the regime that have proven successful. That being said, we welcome a continued dialogue with the public as we implement these changes, and through that implementation, we will ensure that we maintain the incentives for effective stress testing practices that exist today. TransparencyTransparency of the stress test and its inputs and outputs is key to the credibility of the stress test, and there are several initiatives underway to provide additional transparency regarding the supervisory stress test models and scenario design process. We believe that the adjustments under development strike the right balance of advancing transparency, while maintaining incentives for firms to think critically about their own risks. I expect that soon you will see the Federal Reserve issue a policy statement describing governing principles around the supervisory stress testing process. As a part of that statement, I would expect a commitment to disclose additional detail about supervisory stress test models and results and to publish portfolios of hypothetical loans and associated loss rates. I expect that we will begin providing some of this additional detail starting in early 2019, and that these changes will allow firms to benchmark the results of their own models against those of the supervisory models. However, our commitment to transparency does not end there. We are currently considering options to provide additional transparency regarding scenarios and scenario design and I expect that the Board will seek comment on the advisability of, and possible approaches to, gathering the public's input on scenarios and salient risks facing the banking system each year. Such a proposal may also provide additional details about the scenario design features that underpins each year's scenarios, and a range of other enhancements. Additional transparency regarding the stress test scenarios serves multiple purposes: it both provides additional due process to affected participants, and provides additional sources of insight--including from academics and thought leaders like many of you in this room--that could be used to inform a given year's scenario. Increased transparency could also enable us to be more nimble in our scenario design to the extent we uncover through external input new salient risks that we have not previously considered. As we develop proposals, a key consideration is to ensure that we maintain incentives for firms to conduct their own stress tests rigorously and thoughtfully. Firms have indicated that additional disclosure about models would not affect their own stress tests. We expect them to make good on that representation, as the Federal Reserve's stress test is not, and cannot be, a full picture of a firm's resiliency in light of its idiosyncratic risks. For example, there is some risk that firms will use knowledge from additional transparency about the stress test to engage in transactions that are solely designed to reduce losses in the test, but that do not truly reduce risk in their portfolios. As supervisors, however, this is something that we can guard against through the regular examination process. We will closely monitor changes in firms' portfolios and take appropriate actions to ensure firms are holding sufficient capital, and have sufficient controls and governance, in light of the risk characteristics of their activities. Qualitative ObjectionBefore I close, I would like to say a few words about the role of the qualitative objection in our new chapter of stress testing. As originally conceived, CCAR had both a quantitative component--based on the supervisory stress test--and a qualitative component--based on the Federal Reserve's assessment of a firm's stress testing practices. In 2017, the Federal Reserve eliminated the qualitative objection as part of CCAR for large and noncomplex firms, in part because of improvements in risk management at these firms.3By incorporating supervisory stress testing into the regulatory capital regime and introducing an automatic penalty if a firm falls below its SCB-derived capital requirement, the SCB proposal will eliminate the quantitative objection from CCAR. The natural next question is: has the CCAR qualitative objection for the largest firms also run its course? In my view, the time has come to normalize the CCAR qualitative assessment by removing the public objection tool, and continuing to evaluate firms' stress testing practices through normal supervision. In such an environment, firms would remain subject to the same supervisory expectations, and examiners would continue to conduct rigorous horizontal and firm-specific assessments of a firm's capital positions and capital planning, tailored to the risk profile of the firm. While much of the examination work would center on a firm's capital plan submissions, examination work would continue on a year-round basis, taking into account the firm's management of other financial risks. The evaluation of the firm's capital position and capital planning would culminate in a rating of the firm's capital position and planning. Firms with deficient practices would receive supervisory findings through the examination process, and would be at risk of a ratings downgrade or enforcement action if those deficiencies were sufficiently material. ConclusionAs we begin the next chapter in stress testing, my objective is to ensure the continued credibility of the program by increasing its transparency, simplicity, and stability while maintaining the strength of the supervisory and internal stress testing elements that are central to the program today. These adjustments will be coupled with our continued commitment to strong supervision and our expectation that financial institutions ensure they are managing their risks and holding sufficient capital to continue operations through times of stress. 1.Amendments to the Regulatory Capital, Capital Plan, and Stress Test Rules (PDF), 83 Fed. Reg. 18,160 (April 25, 2018).Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles," news release, October 31, 2018.Return to text 3. The capital planning evaluation remains as part of the normal supervisory process for these firms.Return to text
Federal Reserve Board of GovernorsBureau of Consumer Financial Protection WASHINGTON, D.C.--The Federal Reserve Board and the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Bureau) today announced the dollar thresholds in Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) that will apply for determining exempt consumer credit and lease transactions in 2019. These thresholds are set pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) amendments to the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act that require adjusting these thresholds annually based on the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). If there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the Federal Reserve Board and the Bureau will not adjust this exemption threshold from the prior year. However, in years following a year in which the exemption threshold was not adjusted, the threshold is calculated by applying the annual percentage change in CPI-W to the dollar amount that would have resulted, after rounding, if the decreases and any subsequent increases in the CPI-W had been taken into account. Transactions at or below the thresholds are subject to the protections of the regulations. Based on the annual percentage increase in the CPI-W as of June 1, 2018, the protections of the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act generally will apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases of $57,200 or less in 2019. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property (such as mortgages) are subject to the Truth in Lending Act regardless of the amount of the loan. Although the Dodd-Frank Act generally transferred rulemaking authority under the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to the Bureau, the Federal Reserve Board retains authority to issue rules for certain motor vehicle dealers. Therefore, the agencies are issuing these notices jointly. The attached notices will be published shortly in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF
Bureau of Consumer Financial ProtectionFederal Reserve Board of GovernorsOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON, D.C.--The Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced that the threshold for exempting loans from special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans during 2019 will increase from $26,000 to $26,700. The threshold amount will be effective January 1, 2019, and is based on the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) as of June 1, 2018. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 amended the Truth in Lending Act to add special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans, including a requirement that creditors obtain a written appraisal based on a physical visit to the home's interior before making a higher-priced mortgage loan. The rules implementing these requirements contain an exemption for loans of $25,000 or less and also provide that the exemption threshold will be adjusted annually to reflect increases in the CPI-W. If there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the agencies will not adjust this exemption threshold from the prior year. However, in years following a year in which the exemption threshold was not adjusted, the threshold is calculated by applying the annual percentage change in CPI-W to the dollar amount that would have resulted, after rounding, if the decreases and any subsequent increases in the CPI-W had been taken into account. The attached notice will be published shortly in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF
The three federal banking agencies today invited public comment on a proposal to reduce regulatory reporting burden on small institutions by expanding the number of regulated institutions eligible for streamlined reporting. The proposal would implement section 205 of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The proposal would permit insured depository institutions with total assets of less than $5 billion that do not engage in certain complex or international activities to file the most streamlined version of the Call Report, the FFIEC 051 Call Report. The agencies also are proposing to reduce by approximately 37 percent the number of existing data items reportable in the FFIEC 051 Call Reports for the first and third calendar quarters. The Federal Reserve Board and the OCC also are proposing similar reduced reporting for certain uninsured institutions that they supervise with less than $5 billion in total consolidated assets that meet the same criteria. All institutions, regardless of size, submit a quarterly Call Report that includes data used by regulators to monitor the condition, performance, and risk profile of individual institutions and the industry as a whole. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after the proposal's publication in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemBureau of Consumer Financial Protection WASHINGTON, D.C. -- The Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection and the Federal Reserve Board today jointly proposed amendments to Regulation CC that would implement a statutory requirement to adjust for inflation the amount of funds depository institutions must make available to their customers. The amendments would apply in circumstances ranging from next business day withdrawal of certain check deposits to setting the threshold amount for determining whether an account has been repeatedly withdrawn. Regulation CC implements the Expedited Funds Availability Act of 1987 (EFA Act). The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) amended the EFA Act to grant the Bureau and the Board joint rulemaking authority for funds-availability schedules, disclosure policies, payment of interest, and other EFA Act provisions implemented by Regulation CC. The Dodd-Frank Act amendments require that the EFA Act's dollar amounts be inflation adjusted every five years by the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). The first set of proposed adjustments are detailed in the attached Federal Register notice. To help ensure that institutions have sufficient time to implement the adjustments, the agencies propose a compliance date that would be at least 12 months after publication of a final rule in the Federal Register. The agencies also propose to implement in Regulation CC, EFA Act amendments made by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, which include extending coverage of the EFA Act to American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and Guam. Finally, the agencies are providing an additional opportunity for public comment on certain funds-availability amendments in subpart B of Regulation CC that the Board published in 2011 regarding funds availability schedule provisions and associated definitions. In taking this step, the agencies have not made a decision on whether to make any aspects of the 2011 proposal final. Reopening the comment period will provide the agencies with up-to-date public views to consider. The agencies are accepting comments on all aspects of the proposed amendments for 60 days following publication in the Federal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Three federal banking agencies on Wednesday invited public comment on a proposal that would simplify regulatory capital requirements for qualifying community banking organizations, as required by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The proposal would provide regulatory burden relief to qualifying community banking organizations by giving them an option to calculate a simple leverage ratio, rather than multiple measures of capital adequacy. Under the proposal, a community banking organization would be eligible to elect the community bank leverage ratio framework if it has less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets, limited amounts of certain assets and off-balance sheet exposures, and a community bank leverage ratio greater than 9 percent. A qualifying community banking organization that has chosen the proposed framework would not be required to calculate the existing risk-based and leverage capital requirements. A firm would also be considered to have met the capital ratio requirements to be well capitalized for the agencies' prompt corrective action rules provided it has a community bank leverage ratio greater than 9 percent. The proposal was jointly issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "An International Perspective on the Future of Bank Stress Testing" Symposium sponsored by Harvard Law School Program on International Financial Systems, Cambridge, Massachusetts Professor Scott, and our hosts from Harvard and the Program on International Financial Systems, thank you for the chance to participate in today's meeting. Looking around the room, I see a mix of past and current colleagues, from academics, to supervisors and central bankers, to researchers and practitioners in industry. All of you have seen, felt, and lived different aspects of the transition to the post-crisis regulatory framework, and I am grateful to hear your perspectives on such a critical aspect of it. In the depths of the financial crisis, the first regulatory stress tests were designed under intense scrutiny with high-stakes consequences. Their contribution--an independent public view of the capital adequacy of the largest firms--helped reinforce the banking system at a critical juncture. Since then, stress testing has meaningfully increased the post-stress resiliency of large financial institutions, and become a critical tool in keeping the system strong. Those accomplishments are real, and we should aim to do more than simply preserve them. Now is a prudent time to consolidate the gains we have made, and to promote the efficiency and transparency of our processes. Today, I will review some of our efforts along those lines, focusing on proposed changes to our stress-testing program. These changes, which I described in more detail in remarks last week, are intended to improve the program, maintaining its dynamism and flexibility while providing adequate notice to regulated firms, without altering materially the stringency of the tests or the overall level of capital in the system.1 I share these views with a deep appreciation of the decades of international experience represented in this room. The crisis came with a reminder that the financial system is global, that risks in one country can quickly spread to another, and that in keeping the system and the economy safe, we have no choice but to work together. I look forward to hearing your thoughts on the changes I outline, and on how to improve our stress testing processes in the years ahead. Stress Capital BufferMany of you are familiar with the Federal Reserve's proposed stress capital buffer (SCB), which would replace the current fixed buffer requirement of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets with one based on each firm's stress test results.2I believe the proposal represents an important milestone in crafting an integrated capital regime, and in keeping with its importance, we have received extensive and thoughtful public comments, identifying elements of it that could benefit from further refinement. I described several of these elements last week, including my views on some areas which I believe we should revisit: improving measurement of risks in the trading book; encouraging less sticky forms of capital distribution without requiring dividend pre-funding; and reevaluating the interaction of the capital buffer with capital distributions. Today, I want to highlight three elements in particular. Foremost among these is the volatility of stress test results. Some volatility in annual results is necessary to preserve the dynamism of the stress test, and to reflect changes in macroeconomic conditions, salient economic risks, and the composition of firm balance sheets. However, when the largest banks in the system are fully meeting their capital requirements, a highly variable capital requirement from year to year can present a significant management challenge. I believe there is an important balance to strike in this area, which will let us preserve dynamism while reducing volatility, and we plan to seek comment on a relevant proposal in the not-too-distant future. The second is the sequencing of stress test results with capital plan submissions. Currently, and under the SCB proposal, a firm must decide whether to increase or decrease its planned dividends and share repurchases for the upcoming year without knowledge of a key constraint: the results of the stress test. Initially, this phasing reflected the view that firms should think rigorously about their capital uses and needs, rather than relying primarily on the results of the supervisory stress test to guide those plans. However, now that we all have several years' experience with this system, firms have told us that they would be able to engage in more thoughtful capital planning if they had knowledge of that year's stress test results before finalizing their distribution plans for the upcoming year. I am sympathetic to their concerns, and will ask the Board to adjust the operation of the rule, so that firms know their SCB before they decide on their planned distributions for the coming year. Of course, we expect firms to continue to maintain robust stress testing practices and use those results to inform their capital distribution plans, and we will continue to use the supervisory process to reinforce this expectation. The third is the post-stress leverage requirement. As the Federal Reserve has long maintained, leverage requirements are intended to serve as a backstop to the risk-based capital requirements. By definition, they are not intended to be risk-sensitive. Thus, I am concerned that explicitly assigning a leverage buffer requirement to a firm on the basis of risk-sensitive post-stress estimates runs afoul of the intellectual underpinnings of the leverage ratio, and I would advocate removing this element of the stress capital buffer regime. Of course, leverage ratios, including the enhanced supplementary leverage requirements, would remain a critical part of our regulatory capital regime, and we will maintain the supervisory expectation that firms have sufficient capital to meet all minimum regulatory requirements. To give these issues the careful consideration they deserve, I expect we will adopt a final rule in the near future, settling the basic SCB framework while re-proposing certain elements. I expect that the first SCB would not go into effect before 2020, and that CCAR will remain in place in 2019 for firms with over $250 billion in assets or that are otherwise complex. However, we will consider whether we can move forward with any aspects of the SCB proposal for CCAR 2019, such as assumptions related to balance sheet growth, and I will ask the Board to exempt firms with less than $250 billion in assets from the CCAR quantitative assessment and supervisory stress testing in 2019. TransparencyIn the meantime, several initiatives are also underway to provide additional transparency into stress testing. I expect you will soon see the Federal Reserve issue a policy statement describing governing principles around the supervisory stress testing process--and with it, a commitment to disclosing additional detail about supervisory stress test models and results, along with portfolios of hypothetical loans and associated loss rates. I expect we will begin providing some of this additional detail starting in early 2019. I also expect the Board will seek comment on the advisability of, and possible approaches to, gathering public input on scenarios and salient risks facing the banking system each year. Transparency matters not only because it provides additional due process to affected participants; it also creates an opportunity for broader, more insightful comments from the public. As a result, it can allow us to be more nimble and better informed in our scenario design. However, we want to maintain incentives for firms to conduct their own stress tests rigorously and thoughtfully, and avoid the risk that firms will use this new information to engage in transactions that are solely designed to reduce losses in the test without reducing actual risk. Firms have indicated that additional disclosure about models would not affect their own stress tests. We expect them to make good on that representation, as the Federal Reserve's stress test is not, and cannot be, a full picture of a firm's resiliency in light of its idiosyncratic risks. We are confident that we can address these concerns through the regular examination process, by closely monitoring changes in firms' portfolios and ensuring sufficient capital, controls, and governance in light of the risk characteristics of their activities. Qualitative ObjectionI also want to reiterate a point regarding the role of the qualitative objection. The Federal Reserve eliminated this element of CCAR for large and noncomplex firms in 2017, in part because of improvements in risk management at those firms.3In my view, the time has come to normalize the CCAR qualitative assessment by removing the public objection tool, and continuing to evaluate firms' stress testing practices through normal supervision. While supervisory assessments would continue to center on a firm's capital plan submissions, examination work would continue on a year-round basis, taking into account the firm's management of other financial risks, and culminating in a rating of the firm's capital position and planning. Firms with deficient practices would receive supervisory findings through the examination process, and would be at risk of a ratings downgrade or enforcement action if those deficiencies were sufficiently material. ConclusionThese changes are aimed at preserving the foundation laid over nearly a decade of stress testing experience, including by many of the people in this room. Our goal is to bolster the program's credibility by increasing its transparency, simplicity, and stability, while maintaining the strength of the supervisory and internal stress testing elements that are central to the program today. These adjustments will be coupled with our continued commitment to strong supervision, and our expectation that financial institutions manage their risks and hold sufficient capital to continue operations through times of stress. I look forward to hearing your insights into these changes, and I thank you for your time. 1. See Randal K. Quarles (2018), "A New Chapter in Stress Testing," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, November 9.Return to text 2.Amendments to the Regulatory Capital, Capital Plan, and Stress Test Rules (PDF), 83 Fed. Reg. 18,160 (April 25, 2018).Return to text 3. The capital planning evaluation remains as part of the normal supervisory process for these firms.Return to text
Vice Chairman Richard H. Clarida At The Clearing House and The Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, New York I am delighted to be speaking at this annual conference of the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute. Today I will discuss recent economic developments and the economic outlook before going on to outline my thinking about the connections between data dependence and monetary policy. I will close with some observations on the implications for U.S. monetary policy that flow from this perspective.1 Recent Economic Developments and the Economic OutlookU.S. economic fundamentals are robust, as indicated by strong growth in gross domestic product (GDP) and a job market that has been surprising on the upside for nearly two years. Smoothing across the first three quarters of this year, real, or inflation-adjusted, GDP growth is averaging an annual rate of 3.3 percent. Private-sector forecasts for the full year--that is, on a fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter basis--suggest that growth is likely to equal, or perhaps slightly exceed, 3 percent. If this occurs, GDP growth in 2018 will be the fastest recorded so far during the current expansion, which in July entered its 10th year. If, as I expect, the economic expansion continues in 2019, this will become the longest U.S. expansion in recorded history. Likewise, the labor market remains healthy. Average monthly job gains continue to outpace the increase needed to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force over the longer run, with payrolls rising by 250,000 in October. And, at 3.7 percent, the unemployment rate is the lowest it has been since 1969. In addition, after remaining stubbornly sluggish throughout much of the expansion, nominal wage growth is picking up, with various measures now running in the neighborhood of 3 percent on an annual basis. The inflation data in the year to date for the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) have been running at or close to our 2 percent objective, including on a core basis‑‑that is, excluding volatile food and energy prices. While my base case is for this pattern to continue, it is important to monitor measures of inflation expectations to confirm that households and businesses expect price stability to be maintained. The median of expected inflation 5-to-10 years in the future from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers is within--but I believe at the lower end of--the range consistent with price stability. Likewise, inflation readings from the TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) market indicate to me that financial markets expect consumer price index (CPI) inflation of about 2 percent to be maintained. That said, historically, PCE inflation has averaged about 0.3 percent less than CPI inflation, and if this were to continue, the readings from the TIPS market would indicate that expected PCE inflation is running at somewhat less than 2 percent. What might explain why inflation is running at or close to the Federal Reserve's long-run objective of 2 percent, and not well above it, when growth is strong and the labor market robust? According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, productivity growth in the business sector, as measured by output per hour, is averaging 2 percent at an annualized rate this year, while aggregate hours worked in the business sector have risen at an average annual rate of 1.8 percent through the third quarter. This decomposition--in which the growth in output is broken down into measures of aggregate supply, the growth of aggregate hours and the growth of output per hour--suggests that the growth rates of productivity and hours worked in 2018 each have been exceeding their respective longer-run rates as estimated by the Congressional Budget Office.2In other words, while growth in aggregate demand in 2018 has been above the expected long-run growth rate in aggregate supply, it has not been exceeding this year's growth inactualaggregate supply. Ultimately, hours growth will likely converge to a slower pace because of demographic factors. But how rapidly this happens will depend in part on the behavior of labor force participation. And recent years' developments suggest there may still be some further room for participation in the job market‑‑especially in the prime-age group of 25-to-54-year-olds‑‑to rise. Labor participation by prime-age women has increased around 2 percentage points in the past three years and is now at its highest level in a decade. That said, it is still 1-1/2 percentage points below the peak level reached in 2000. Labor force participation among 25- to 54-year-old men has risen by roughly 1 percentage point in the past several years. But it is still 2 percentage points below levels seen a decade ago, and it is 3 percentage points below the levels that prevailed in the late 1990s. As for productivity growth, there is considerable uncertainty about how much of the rebound in productivity growth that we have seen in recent quarters is cyclical and how much is structural. I believe both factors are at work. The structural, or trend, component of productivity growth is a function of capital deepening through business investment as well as a multifactor component sometimes referred to as the "Solow residual." Initial estimates from the recent GDP release indicate that equipment and software investment in the third quarter moderated from the rapid pace recorded in the first half of the year. One data point does not make a trend, but an improvement in business investment will be important if the pickup in productivity growth that we have seen in recent quarters is to be sustained. As for the economic outlook, in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) released in September, participants had a median projection for real GDP growth of 3.1 percent in 2018 and 2-1/2 percent in 2019. The unemployment rate was expected to decline to 3‑1/2 percent next year. And, for total PCE inflation, the median projection remains near 2 percent. With a robust labor market and inflation at or close to our 2 percent inflation goal and based on the baseline economic outlook for 2019 I have just laid out, I believe monetary policy at this stage of the economic expansion should be aimed at sustaining growth and maximum employment at levels consistent with our inflation objective. At this stage of the interest rate cycle, I believe it will be especially important to monitor a wide range of data as we continually assess and calibrate whether the path for the policy rate is consistent with meeting our dual-mandate objectives on a sustained basis. Data Dependence of Monetary Policy: What It Means and Why It Is ImportantEconomic research suggests that monetary policy should be "data dependent."3And, indeed, central banks around the world, including the Federal Reserve, often describe their policies in this way. I would now like to discuss how I think about two distinct roles that data dependence should play in the formulation and communication of monetary policy. It is important to state up-front that data dependence is not, in and of itself, a monetary policy strategy. A monetary policystrategymust find a way to combine incoming dataanda model of the economywitha healthy dose of judgment--and humility!--to formulate, and then communicate, a path for the policy rate most consistent with our policy objectives. In the case of the Fed, those objectives are assigned to us by the Congress, and they are to achieve maximum employment and price stability. Importantly, because households and firms must make long-term saving and investment decisions and because these decisions‑‑directly or indirectly‑‑depend on the expected future path for the policy rate, the central bank should find a way to communicate and explain how incoming data are or are not changing the expected path for the policy rate consistent with best meeting its objectives.4Absent such communication, inefficient divergences between public expectations and central bank intentions for the policy rate path can emerge and persist in ways that are costly to the economy when reversed. Within this general framework, let me now consider two distinct ways in which I think that the path for the federal funds rate should be data dependent. U.S. monetary policy has for some time and will, I believe, continue to be data dependent in the sense that incoming data reveal at the time of each Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting wherethe economy isat the time of each meeting relative to the goals of monetary policy. This information on where the economy is relative to the goals of monetary policy is an important input into the policy decision. If, for example, incoming data in the months ahead were to reveal that inflation and inflation expectations are running higher than projected at present and in ways that are inconsistent with our 2 percent objective, then I would be receptive to increasing the policy rate by more than I currently expect will be necessary. Data dependence in this sense is easy to understand, as it is of the type implied by a large family of policy rulesin which the parameters of the economy are known.5 But what if key parameters that describe the long-run destination of the economy are unknown?This is indeed the relevant case that the FOMC and other monetary policymakers facein practice.The two most important unknown parameters needed to conduct‑‑and communicate‑‑monetary policy are the rate of unemployment consistent with maximum employment,u*, and the riskless real rate of interest consistent with price stability,r*. As a result, in the real world, monetary policy should, I believe, be data dependent in a second sense: that incoming data can reveal at each FOMC meeting signals that will enable it toupdateitsestimatesofr* andu* in order to obtain its best estimate of wherethe economy is heading.6And, indeed, as indicated by the SEP, FOMC participants have, over the past nearly seven years, revised their estimates of bothu* andr* substantially lower as unemployment fell and real interest rates remained well below prior estimates of neutral without the rise in inflation or inflation expectations those earlier estimates would have predicted. And these revisions tou* andr* almost certainly did have an important influence on the path for the policy rate that was actually realized in recent years.7I would expect to revise my estimates ofr* andu* as appropriate if incoming data on future inflation and unemployment diverge materially and persistently from my baseline projections today. Consequences for Monetary PolicyWhat does this mean for the conduct of monetary policy? As the economy has moved to a neighborhood consistent with the Fed's dual-mandate objectives, risks have become more symmetric and less skewed to the downside than when the current rate cycle began three years ago. Raising rates too quickly could unnecessarily shorten the economic expansion, while moving too slowly could result in rising inflation and inflation expectations down the road that could be costly to reverse, as well as potentially pose financial stability risks. Although the real federal funds rate today is just below the range of longer-run estimates presented in the September SEP, it is much closer to the vicinity ofr* than it was when the FOMC started to remove accommodation in December 2015. How close is a matter of judgment, and there is a range of views on the FOMC. As I have already stressed,r* andu* are uncertain, and I believe we should continue to update our estimates of them as new data arrive. This process of learning aboutr* andu* as new data arrive supports the case for gradual policy normalization, as it will allow the Fed to accumulate more information from the data about the ultimate destination for the policy rate and the unemployment rate at a time when inflation is close to our 2 percent objective. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I am most grateful to Brian Doyle and Edward Nelson of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. See the Congressional Budget Office's August 2018 projections for the nonfarm business sector athttps://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2018-08/51137-2018-08-potentialgdp.xlsx.Return to text 3. The seminal reference is John B. Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-RochesterConference Series on Public Policy,vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. See also Richard Clarida, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999), "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661-707; Richard Clarida, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000), "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147-80; Michael Woodford (2003),Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press); and Lars E.O. Svensson (2015), "Forward Guidance,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 11 (September), pp. 19-64.Return to text 4. For example, long-term bond yields can be written as the sum of the expected path of the policy rate plus a term premium. The exchange rate between two countries can be written as the sum of the policy rate path differential between two countries plus a risk premium. So even for households and firms that do not directly care about the policy rate path, they do care about long-term bond yields and exchange rates that reflect this path.Return to text 5. See the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018),Monetary Policy Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, July), pp. 37-41, or the webpage "Monetary Policy Principles and Practice" available on the Federal Reserve Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/monetary-policy-principles-and-practice.htmfor a discussion of the policy rate paths implied by five different policy rules using parameter values typically assumed in the literature.Return to text 6. If the economy can be described by a linear model in which the only two unknown parameters arer* andu* and the shocks that hit the economy are normal, Kalman filtering can be used to derive a closed form mathematical expression for how to update one's estimate ofr* andu* as new macro data arrive. But, in practice, "the" model of the economy is neither known, nor linear, and the shocks that strike it are not normal. Thus, monetary policy in practice is, of necessity, as much or more an art than a science.Return to text 7. That was my inference as one who was a Fed watcher until September 17, 2018. It has also been the inference of some private-sector forecasters as well as some other FOMC participants. For example, see Janet L. Yellen (2017), "The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemCalifornia Department of Business OversightConference of State Bank SupervisorsFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the California Department of Business Oversight recognize the serious impact of the California wildfires on the customers, members, and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found atwww.fema.gov. Lending:Financial institutions should work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by the California wildfires. Prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas should not be subject to examiner criticism. Modifications of existing loans should be evaluated individually to determine whether they represent troubled debt restructurings. This evaluation should be based on the facts and circumstances of each borrower and loan, which requires judgment, as not all modifications will result in a troubled debt restructuring. In supervising institutions affected by the wildfires, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances these institutions face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound practices as well as in the public interest. Temporary Facilities:The agencies understand that many financial institutions may face staffing, power, telecommunications, and other challenges in re-opening facilities after the wildfires. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the primary federal and/or state regulator will expedite, as appropriate, any request to operate temporary facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by the wildfires. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal and/or state regulator will suffice initially to start the approval process, with necessary written notification being submitted shortly thereafter. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by wildfires may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations, as applicable. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by the wildfires that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of the effects of the wildfires. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions, as applicable, may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, institutions should review the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected by the wildfires. Institutions should monitor municipal securities and loans affected by the wildfires. Appropriate monitoring and prudent efforts to stabilize such investments are encouraged. For more information, refer to the Interagency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster available from each regulator. CSBS:https://www.csbs.org/interagency-supervisory-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster FDIC:https://www.fdic.gov/news/news/financial/2017/fil17062.html FRB:https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1714a1.pdf OCC:https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2017/bulletin-2017-61.html NCUA:https://www.ncua.gov/Resources/Documents/SL-17-02-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster-enclosure.pdf
Yale University won the 15th annual national College Fed Challenge. Yale University won the 15th annual national College Fed Challenge on Thursday, a competition that encourages students to learn about the U.S. economy, monetary policymaking, and the role of the Federal Reserve System. The team, from New Haven, Connecticut, represented the Boston Federal Reserve District and included Ramiz Colak, Sienna Gough, Rohit Goyal, David Rubio, and Lydia Wickard. The team's faculty adviser was William English. The finals were held in the Board Room at the Board of Governors as the capstone to five district competitions held around the country. The other national finalists were second place: Rutgers University, with honorable mentions for Princeton University, University of Wisconsin-Madison, and Virginia Commonwealth University. College Fed Challenge is a team competition for undergraduate students. Teams analyze economic and financial conditions and formulate a monetary policy recommendation, modeling the Federal Open Market Committee. "The College Fed Challenge, now in its 15th year, provides a forum for students to take their studies from the theoretical to the practical as they weigh a real-life set of facts and circumstances and make a judgment about the optimal path for monetary policy," said Federal Reserve Board Chairman Jerome H. Powell. "It is my hope that the experience of preparing for the competition might inspire these young adults to explore careers in economics or finance." Teams competing in the College Fed Challenge finals gave 15-minute presentations and answered questions for a panel of judges. Teams were evaluated on economic analysis, responses to judges' questions, teamwork, and presentation. The judges were Ellen Meade, Special Adviser to the Board and Division of Monetary Affairs; Anna Paulson, Senior Vice President, Financial Markets Finance at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago; and Giorgio Topa, Vice President, Research Economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The teams competed in their local Reserve Bank Districts, and the top teams moved on to the finals in Washington, D.C. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the applications by Comerica Bank, Dallas, Texas, to establish a branch in Houston and a branch in Dallas, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced plans to recognize the exemplary work of Federal Reserve System staff with the presentation of a newly created Janet L. Yellen Award for Excellence in Community Development. The award is intended to honor former Chair Yellen's commitment to ensuring that the perspectives of consumers and communities informed Federal Reserve research, policy, and action. It will be presented annually to System staff who provide leadership and demonstrate outstanding achievement in community development activities that further the System's responsibilities and goals. "During her tenure as chair of the Federal Reserve, Janet Yellen elevated the importance of economic and financial inclusion as well as the community development function," said Federal Reserve Board Chairman Jerome H. Powell. "She often reminded us that an inclusive economy is a vibrant economy. It is a legacy that my colleagues and I are honored to carry forward." The inaugural Janet L. Yellen Award, to be presented on December 3, will go to Ariel Cisneros of the Federal Reseve Bank of Kansas City. Ariel is being recognized in appreciation and acknowledgement for his work in developing innovative and impactful community development resources and programs to benefit low- to moderate-income communities. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: McHenry Bancorp, Inc., McHenry, IllinoisOrder to Cease and Desist, issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated March 26, 2010 (PDF)Terminated November 1, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the approval of fee schedules, effective January 2, 2019, for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to depository institutions (priced services). The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 100.9 percent of their priced services costs in 2019. The Reserve Banks expect to fully recover actual and imputed expenses, including profit that would have been earned if a private-sector firm provided the services. Overall, the Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 2.5 percent average price increase. The Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 4.0 percent average price increase for check-clearing customers; a 2.0 percent average price increase for Fedwire®Funds customers; and a 6.0 average price increase for Fedwire®Securities customers. The fees will remain unchanged for the Reserve Banks' FedACH®Services and National Settlement Service. Lastly, the Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes will result in a 7.5 percent average price increase for FedLine®Solutions customers. The 2019 fee schedule for each of the priced services is available on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial services website at FRBservices.orgSM. The Board also approved the 2019 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) of $17.8 million for Reserve Bank priced services. The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and profit that would have been earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve establish fees to recover the costs of providing priced services, including imputed costs, over the long run, to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector service providers. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved final amendments to simplify Regulation J (Collection of Checks and Other Items by Federal Reserve Banks and Funds Transfers through Fedwire) and to make it conform more closely with Regulation CC (Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks). The amendments align the rights and obligations of parties, including the Federal Reserve Banks, with the Board's 2017 amendments to Regulation CC, which reflected the evolution of the nation's check collection system from one that is largely paper-based to one that is virtually all electronic. The amendments also clarify and simplify provisions of Regulation J, remove obsolete provisions, and improve consistency between Regulation J and Regulation CC. Finally, the amendments clarify that electronically-created items (check-like items created in electronic form that never existed in paper form) are not "items" that the Reserve Banks are authorized to handle under Regulation J. The Board has also amended Regulation J to clarify that financial messaging standards for Fedwire funds transfers, such as the international common format standard ISO 20022, do not confer or connote legal status or responsibilities with respect to Fedwire funds transfers. The amendments become effective as of January 1, 2019. The Board'sFederal Register noticeis attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday finalized a new supervisory rating system for large financial institutions that is aligned with the core areas most important to supporting a large firm's safety and soundness and U.S. financial stability. The Board's post-crisis supervisory program for large financial institutions focuses on capital, liquidity, and the effectiveness of its governance and controls. In each of those areas, supervisors will use the new rating system to assign a confidential rating to the firms. The new rating system will apply to all domestic bank holding companies and non-insurance, non-commercial savings and loan holding companies with $100 billion or more in total consolidated assets, which is a change from the $50 billion threshold originally proposed. The new rating system will also apply to U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banking organizations with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets as proposed. The Federal Reserve will continue to apply its existing rating system for bank holding companies with less than $100 billion in total consolidated assets. The existing rating system will also be adopted for non-insurance, non-commercial savings and loan holding companies with less than $100 billion in total consolidated assets. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced it has fined Société Générale S.A. of Paris, France, $81.3 million for the firm's unsafe and unsound practices primarily related to violations of U.S. sanctions against Cuba. The Federal Reserve fined Société Générale for having insufficient policies and procedures to ensure that the activities conducted at its offices outside of the United States complied with U.S. sanctions laws. The Federal Reserve's order requires Société Générale to implement an enhanced program to ensure global compliance with U.S. sanctions administered by the U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control. The Federal Reserve's order also prohibits Société Générale from re-employing the individuals involved in the past actions or retaining them as consultants or contractors, and will require the firm to fully cooperate, and provide substantial assistance, in any ongoing investigations related to the individuals involved in the misconduct in this case. The Federal Reserve's order is being taken in conjunction with actions by the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control, the New York County District Attorney's Office, and the New York Department of Financial Services for violations of U.S. sanctions requirements and various New York state laws. The penalties issued by all of the agencies total $1.34 billion. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: MyBank, Belen, New MexicoOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated November 26, 2018 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: The First State Bank of Dongola, Dongola, IllinoisOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated November 7, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on November 28 intends to begin publishing a semiannual report presenting the Board's view of the outlook for U.S. financial stability. The Financial Stability Report will include a summary of the Board's framework for assessing the resilience of the U.S. financial system and a discussion of key indicators related to the main financial stability vulnerabilities tracked by the Board: asset valuations, borrowing by businesses and households, leverage in the financial sector, and funding risks. The report is intended to help the public and market participants understand and evaluate the Board's assessment of financial stability conditions. "We learned from the financial crisis that a resilient financial system is critical for a healthy economy," said Governor Lael Brainard, Chair of the Board's Committee on Financial Stability. "The publication of the Financial Stability Report will be an important step in providing the public with more information about the Board's assessment of financial stability." The Board's report will be similar to those published by other central banks and will complement the annual report of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, which is chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury and includes the Federal Reserve Board Chairman and other financial regulators. While the report will provide additional information on the Board's assessment of financial stability conditions, it will not include policy matters such as the annual determination of whether to activate the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The Board plans to conduct its annual review of the CCyB in January. The Board intends to publish future semiannual financial stability reports in the spring and fall. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released results of a survey of senior financial officers at banks regarding their reserve balance management strategies and practices. The Senior Financial Officer Survey has been used on occasion by the Board to obtain information about deposit pricing and behavior, bank liability management, the provision of financial services, and reserve management strategies and practices. The most recent survey was conducted in collaboration with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York between August 29, 2018, and September 12, 2018, and includes responses from banks that held roughly two-thirds of total reserve balances at the time of the survey. Information about the survey is available on the Board'swebsite. The September 2018 survey is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Senior Financial Officer Survey (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on November 9 at 12:00 p.m. EST will publish its inauguralSupervision and Regulation Report, which will summarize current banking system conditions and the Board's recent supervisory and regulatory actions. The report is being published in conjunction with appearances before Congress by Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles on November 14 and 15 and is intended to explain the Board's recent supervisory and regulatory actions. "One thing this inaugural report will show is that the banking system is currently performing quite well," Vice Chairman Quarles said. "A decade after the financial crisis, firms of all sizes are healthy, with strong loan growth and return on equity." The report will contain quantitative and qualitative information about the current state of the banking system, including aggregate information about the ratings of all holding companies supervised by the Board, as well as trends across firms of all sizes. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined. Household spending has continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment has moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remain near 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. Risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2 to 2-1/4 percent. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman; John C. Williams, Vice Chairman; Thomas I. Barkin; Raphael W. Bostic; Lael Brainard; Richard H. Clarida; Mary C. Daly; Loretta J. Mester; and Randal K. Quarles. Implementation Note issued November 8, 2018
The Federal Reserve next year will review the strategies, tools, and communication practices it uses to pursue its congressionally-assigned mandate of maximum employment and price stability. The review will include outreach to a broad range of interested stakeholders. "With labor market conditions close to maximum employment and inflation near our 2 percent objective, now is a good time to take stock of how we formulate, conduct, and communicate monetary policy," said Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome H. Powell. As part of the outreach effort, the Federal Reserve System will sponsor a research conference June 4-5, 2019, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with speakers and panelists from outside the System. Additionally, Reserve Banks will host a series of public events around the country to hear from a wide range of stakeholders. Beginning around the middle of 2019, Federal Reserve policymakers will discuss the perspectives offered during the outreach events as part of their review of how to best pursue the Fed's statutory mandate. At the end of the process, policymakers will assess the information and perspectives gathered during the year of review and will report their findings. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Chairman Jerome H. Powell swears in Michelle W. Bowman, accompanied by Wes Bowman, as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Michelle W. Bowman took the oath of office on Monday as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The oath of office was administered by Chairman Jerome H. Powell in the Board Room. Ms. Bowman was accompanied by her husband and her two children. On April 16, 2018, President Trump announced his intention to nominate Ms. Bowman to an unexpired term as a Board member, ending on January 31, 2020. She was confirmed by the United States Senate on November 15, 2018. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Michelle W. Bowman's biography
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on November 7-8, 2018. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's web site athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 7-8, 2018:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Vice Chairman for Supervision Quarles submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on November 15, 2018. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, other members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's regulation and supervision of the financial system. My testimony today covers two main topics: our efforts to improve regulatory transparency, including the report accompanying my submission to the committee, and our progress in making the post-crisis regulatory framework simpler and more efficient. The Role of Transparency in Regulation and SupervisionI am mindful that this semiannual testimony--like my position as Vice Chairman for Supervision--is grounded in Congress's efforts to strengthen and improve the nation's regulatory framework following the financial crisis. This testimony reflects a critical element of those efforts: the desire, and the need, for greater transparency. Transparency is part of the foundation of public accountability and a cornerstone of due process. It is also key to a well-functioning regulatory system and an essential aspect of safety and soundness, as well as financial stability. Transparency provides financial firms clarity on the letter and spirit of their obligations; it provides supervisors with the benefit of exposure to a diversity of perspectives; and it provides markets with insight into the condition of regulated firms, fostering market discipline. Transparency increases public confidence in the role of the financial system to support credit, investment, and economic growth. The Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps since my last testimony to further increase transparency, and to provide more information about our supervisory activities to both regulated institutions and the public. For example, the Board recently improved its supervisory ratings system for large financial institutions.1Ratings are an essential vehicle for supervisory feedback--a clear, concise way to convey whether a firm meets expectations, with tangible, predictable consequences for those that fall short. Our ratings system for large institutions had remained unchanged since 2004, even as our supervision of those institutions evolved significantly after the crisis. The new rating system will better align ratings for these firms with the supervisory feedback they receive, and will focus firms on the capital, liquidity, and governance issues most likely to affect safety and soundness. The banking agencies also recently clarified that supervisory guidance is a tool to enhance the transparency of supervisory expectations, and should never be the basis of an enforcement action.2Guidance--a valuable tool for examiners to help evaluate firms and explain supervisory findings--should always be based on concerns for safety and soundness or compliance at a particular firm. However, guidance is not legally enforceable, and Federal Reserve examiners will not treat it that way. Finally, we expect shortly to make final a set of measures to increase visibility into the Board's supervisory stress testing program. The enhanced disclosures will include more granular descriptions of our models; more information about the design of our scenarios; and more detail about the outcomes we project, including a range of loss rates for loans held by firms subject to the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. The disclosures will provide a more complete picture of the stress testing process, and facilitate thoughtful comments from academics and other members of the public, while mitigating the risk of convergence on a single model. As a result, we believe the disclosures will improve our work, making the tests more reliable, visible, and credible. We will continue our efforts toward greater transparency in stress testing over the next several years, including by disclosing descriptions of additional material models and modeled loss rate disclosures for loan and non-loan portfolios. Semiannual Review of the Safety and Soundness of the U.S. Banking SystemThe report that accompanies my testimony today is another tool to keep Congress, and the public, informed about our work, the banking system, and the role of both in supporting the broader economy.3The report focuses on the Federal Reserve's prudential supervisory activities.4As the report shows, the banking sector remains in strong condition, in line with strong U.S. economic performance, with lending growth, fewer nonperforming loans, and strong overall profitability. Large institutions are well capitalized and liquid, and their capital planning and liquidity-risk-management processes are improving. Ninety-nine percent of regional and community banks are currently well capitalized, and supervisory recommendations made to smaller firms during the financial crisis have largely been closed. We are, however, very much aware of the dangers of complacency, and our report lists several priority areas of risk we will continue to monitor closely in the coming year, including cyber and information technology risks at supervised firms of all sizes. Improvements in Regulatory EfficiencyImproving regulatory efficiency is another core element of our current regulatory efforts. Tailoring regulation and supervision to risk has been a programmatic goal of Federal Reserve policy for more than two decades. The motivations are clear: supervisory resources are not limitless, and supervision is not costless, either to the public or to supervised institutions. Activities and firms that pose the greatest risk should receive the most scrutiny, and where the risk is lower, the regulatory burden should be lower as well. This principle guided Congress and the federal banking agencies in designing the post-crisis regulatory framework, which imposed greater restrictions on larger, more systemically important firms and less intrusive requirements on smaller ones. It has also guided our implementation of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA, or the Act).5On this front, we have made substantial progress: The Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) have also continued the work to significantly reduce the reporting burden on community banking organizations, altering reporting frequencies, items, and thresholds, while preserving the data necessary for effective oversight.9The agencies recently issued a proposal to reduce further reporting requirements for small depository institutions in the first and third quarters of the year. Under the proposal, around 37 percent of data items would not be required in those quarters. Our most significant step to implement the Act came two weeks ago, when the Board issued two proposals to better align prudential standards with the risk profile of regulated institutions.10These proposals implement changes that Congress enacted this spring in the EGRRCPA. One of the proposals addresses the Board's enhanced prudential standards for large banking firms, and the other is an interagency proposal amending the regulatory capital and liquidity regulations that apply to large banking organizations. Both proposals separate large banking firms into four categories, using size as a relevant but not sufficient factor for increased regulatory requirements. Among the other factors that will now enter into this assessment are nonbank assets, short-term wholesale funding, and off-balance-sheet exposure. The changes would significantly reduce regulatory compliance requirements for firms in the lowest risk category, including most institutions with between $100 billion and $250 billion in assets. Firms with $250 billion or more in assets, or firms with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion that meet a risk threshold, will face reduced liquidity requirements. The proposals would largely maintain existing requirements for the largest and most complex firms. These new categories represent a step forward in regulatory efficiency. They draw on our experience administering enhanced prudential requirements and other post-crisis measures. They recognize that other indicators of risk beyond size are appropriate to consider when determining if more stringent standards should apply to certain firms. They move toward a more risk-sensitive, nuanced framework, where riskier activities and a larger systemic footprint correspond to higher supervisory and regulatory requirements. Apart from the requirements of the Act, we also recently proposed a new approach to calculating credit risk, known as the standardized approach to counterparty credit risk, or SA-CCR. The new approach would better account for the risks associated with derivatives exposures, including market practices that reduce risk, such as netting and initial margin.11We issued a proposal simplifying and tailoring requirements under the Volcker rule, to ensure that the most stringent requirements apply to the firms with the most trading activity, and that compliance is as simple and objective as possible. We also issued a rule limiting the exposure of large firms to a single counterparty, addressing a key source of contagion during the financial crisis. We have received thoughtful input from the public that will help inform our implementation of all of these measures. Finally, we have continued to engage with supervisors and central banks overseas. The ultimate goal of having an efficient and transparent regulatory system is to help the American economy--to enable banking organizations to offer safe, stable financial services to households and businesses around the country. But American businesses compete in a global marketplace, and as the financial crisis showed, when regulatory standards fall in other countries, Americans can pay the price. Engaging overseas, through forums like the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, helps level the playing field--and it helps ensure that all countries, not just the United States, do their part to maintain and protect the global economy. Our work to improve regulatory efficiency is not done, and we expect to make additional progress in the months ahead on a number of issues. In particular, we are working with our counterparts at the OCC and FDIC on a community bank leverage ratio proposal. We expect that this proposal would meaningfully reduce the compliance burden for community banking organizations, while preserving overall levels of capital at small banks and our ability to take prompt action when problems arise. I look forward to continuing our efforts to make our regulatory framework simpler, more transparent, and more efficient--and I look forward to participating in the committee's oversight of those efforts. As Chairman Powell said at his swearing-in: "As a public institution, we must be transparent about our actions so that the public, through its elected representatives, can hold us accountable."12We will continue to do so to the best of our ability. Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board finalizes new supervisory rating system for large financial institutions," news release, November 2, 2018.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies issue statement reaffirming the role of supervisory guidance," news release, September 11, 2018.Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Supervision and Regulation Report," November 9, 2018.Return to text 4. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for timely and effective supervision of consumer protection and community reinvestment laws and regulations. More information about the Federal Reserve's consumer-focused supervisory program can be found in the Federal Reserve's Annual Report to Congress. See section 5, "Consumer and Community Affairs," athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/annual-report.htm. The Federal Reserve also publishes the Consumer Compliance Supervision Bulletin, which shares information about examiners' supervisory observations and other noteworthy developments related to consumer protections. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/consumer-compliance-supervision-bulletin.htm.Return to text 5. EGRRCPA, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board issues interim final rule expanding the applicability of the Board's small bank holding company policy statement," news release, August 28, 2018.Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Statement regarding the impact of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) (PDF)," July 6, 2018.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies propose rule regarding the treatment of high volatility commercial real estate," news release, September 18, 2018.Return to text 9. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies issue proposal to streamline regulatory reporting for qualifying small institutions," news release, November 7, 2018.Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles," news release, October 31, 2018.Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies propose rule to update calculation of derivative contract exposure amounts under regulatory capital rules," news release, October 30, 2018.Return to text 12. Jerome H. Powell, "Remarks at the Ceremonial Swearing-in" (speech at the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC, February 13, 2018).Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Vice Chairman for Supervision Quarles submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on November 15, 2018. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, other members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's regulation and supervision of the financial system. My testimony today covers two main topics: our efforts to improve regulatory transparency, including the report accompanying my submission to the committee, and our progress in making the post-crisis regulatory framework simpler and more efficient. The Role of Transparency in Regulation and SupervisionI am mindful that this semiannual testimony--like my position as Vice Chairman for Supervision--is grounded in Congress's efforts to strengthen and improve the nation's regulatory framework following the financial crisis. This testimony reflects a critical element of those efforts: the desire, and the need, for greater transparency. Transparency is part of the foundation of public accountability and a cornerstone of due process. It is also key to a well-functioning regulatory system and an essential aspect of safety and soundness, as well as financial stability. Transparency provides financial firms clarity on the letter and spirit of their obligations; it provides supervisors with the benefit of exposure to a diversity of perspectives; and it provides markets with insight into the condition of regulated firms, fostering market discipline. Transparency increases public confidence in the role of the financial system to support credit, investment, and economic growth. The Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps since my last testimony to further increase transparency, and to provide more information about our supervisory activities to both regulated institutions and the public. For example, the Board recently improved its supervisory ratings system for large financial institutions.1Ratings are an essential vehicle for supervisory feedback--a clear, concise way to convey whether a firm meets expectations, with tangible, predictable consequences for those that fall short. Our ratings system for large institutions had remained unchanged since 2004, even as our supervision of those institutions evolved significantly after the crisis. The new rating system will better align ratings for these firms with the supervisory feedback they receive, and will focus firms on the capital, liquidity, and governance issues most likely to affect safety and soundness. The banking agencies also recently clarified that supervisory guidance is a tool to enhance the transparency of supervisory expectations, and should never be the basis of an enforcement action.2Guidance--a valuable tool for examiners to help evaluate firms and explain supervisory findings--should always be based on concerns for safety and soundness or compliance at a particular firm. However, guidance is not legally enforceable, and Federal Reserve examiners will not treat it that way. Finally, we expect shortly to make final a set of measures to increase visibility into the Board's supervisory stress testing program. The enhanced disclosures will include more granular descriptions of our models; more information about the design of our scenarios; and more detail about the outcomes we project, including a range of loss rates for loans held by firms subject to the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. The disclosures will provide a more complete picture of the stress testing process, and facilitate thoughtful comments from academics and other members of the public, while mitigating the risk of convergence on a single model. As a result, we believe the disclosures will improve our work, making the tests more reliable, visible, and credible. We will continue our efforts toward greater transparency in stress testing over the next several years, including by disclosing descriptions of additional material models and modeled loss rate disclosures for loan and non-loan portfolios. Semiannual Review of the Safety and Soundness of the U.S. Banking SystemThe report that accompanies my testimony today is another tool to keep Congress, and the public, informed about our work, the banking system, and the role of both in supporting the broader economy.3The report focuses on the Federal Reserve's prudential supervisory activities.4As the report shows, the banking sector remains in strong condition, in line with strong U.S. economic performance, with lending growth, fewer nonperforming loans, and strong overall profitability. Large institutions are well capitalized and liquid, and their capital planning and liquidity-risk-management processes are improving. Ninety-nine percent of regional and community banks are currently well capitalized, and supervisory recommendations made to smaller firms during the financial crisis have largely been closed. We are, however, very much aware of the dangers of complacency, and our report lists several priority areas of risk we will continue to monitor closely in the coming year, including cyber and information technology risks at supervised firms of all sizes. Improvements in Regulatory EfficiencyImproving regulatory efficiency is another core element of our current regulatory efforts. Tailoring regulation and supervision to risk has been a programmatic goal of Federal Reserve policy for more than two decades. The motivations are clear: supervisory resources are not limitless, and supervision is not costless, either to the public or to supervised institutions. Activities and firms that pose the greatest risk should receive the most scrutiny, and where the risk is lower, the regulatory burden should be lower as well. This principle guided Congress and the federal banking agencies in designing the post-crisis regulatory framework, which imposed greater restrictions on larger, more systemically important firms and less intrusive requirements on smaller ones. It has also guided our implementation of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA, or the Act).5On this front, we have made substantial progress: The Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) have also continued the work to significantly reduce the reporting burden on community banking organizations, altering reporting frequencies, items, and thresholds, while preserving the data necessary for effective oversight.9The agencies recently issued a proposal to reduce further reporting requirements for small depository institutions in the first and third quarters of the year. Under the proposal, around 37 percent of data items would not be required in those quarters. Our most significant step to implement the Act came two weeks ago, when the Board issued two proposals to better align prudential standards with the risk profile of regulated institutions.10These proposals implement changes that Congress enacted this spring in the EGRRCPA. One of the proposals addresses the Board's enhanced prudential standards for large banking firms, and the other is an interagency proposal amending the regulatory capital and liquidity regulations that apply to large banking organizations. Both proposals separate large banking firms into four categories, using size as a relevant but not sufficient factor for increased regulatory requirements. Among the other factors that will now enter into this assessment are nonbank assets, short-term wholesale funding, and off-balance-sheet exposure. The changes would significantly reduce regulatory compliance requirements for firms in the lowest risk category, including most institutions with between $100 billion and $250 billion in assets. Firms with $250 billion or more in assets, or firms with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion that meet a risk threshold, will face reduced liquidity requirements. The proposals would largely maintain existing requirements for the largest and most complex firms. These new categories represent a step forward in regulatory efficiency. They draw on our experience administering enhanced prudential requirements and other post-crisis measures. They recognize that other indicators of risk beyond size are appropriate to consider when determining if more stringent standards should apply to certain firms. They move toward a more risk-sensitive, nuanced framework, where riskier activities and a larger systemic footprint correspond to higher supervisory and regulatory requirements. Apart from the requirements of the Act, we also recently proposed a new approach to calculating credit risk, known as the standardized approach to counterparty credit risk, or SA-CCR. The new approach would better account for the risks associated with derivatives exposures, including market practices that reduce risk, such as netting and initial margin.11We issued a proposal simplifying and tailoring requirements under the Volcker rule, to ensure that the most stringent requirements apply to the firms with the most trading activity, and that compliance is as simple and objective as possible. We also issued a rule limiting the exposure of large firms to a single counterparty, addressing a key source of contagion during the financial crisis. We have received thoughtful input from the public that will help inform our implementation of all of these measures. Finally, we have continued to engage with supervisors and central banks overseas. The ultimate goal of having an efficient and transparent regulatory system is to help the American economy--to enable banking organizations to offer safe, stable financial services to households and businesses around the country. But American businesses compete in a global marketplace, and as the financial crisis showed, when regulatory standards fall in other countries, Americans can pay the price. Engaging overseas, through forums like the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, helps level the playing field--and it helps ensure that all countries, not just the United States, do their part to maintain and protect the global economy. Our work to improve regulatory efficiency is not done, and we expect to make additional progress in the months ahead on a number of issues. In particular, we are working with our counterparts at the OCC and FDIC on a community bank leverage ratio proposal. We expect that this proposal would meaningfully reduce the compliance burden for community banking organizations, while preserving overall levels of capital at small banks and our ability to take prompt action when problems arise. I look forward to continuing our efforts to make our regulatory framework simpler, more transparent, and more efficient--and I look forward to participating in the committee's oversight of those efforts. As Chairman Powell said at his swearing-in: "As a public institution, we must be transparent about our actions so that the public, through its elected representatives, can hold us accountable."12We will continue to do so to the best of our ability. Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board finalizes new supervisory rating system for large financial institutions," news release, November 2, 2018.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies issue statement reaffirming the role of supervisory guidance," news release, September 11, 2018.Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Supervision and Regulation Report," November 9, 2018.Return to text 4. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for timely and effective supervision of consumer protection and community reinvestment laws and regulations. More information about the Federal Reserve's consumer-focused supervisory program can be found in the Federal Reserve's Annual Report to Congress. See section 5, "Consumer and Community Affairs," athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/annual-report.htm. The Federal Reserve also publishes the Consumer Compliance Supervision Bulletin, which shares information about examiners' supervisory observations and other noteworthy developments related to consumer protections. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/consumer-compliance-supervision-bulletin.htm.Return to text 5. EGRRCPA, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board issues interim final rule expanding the applicability of the Board's small bank holding company policy statement," news release, August 28, 2018.Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Statement regarding the impact of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) (PDF)," July 6, 2018.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies propose rule regarding the treatment of high volatility commercial real estate," news release, September 18, 2018.Return to text 9. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies issue proposal to streamline regulatory reporting for qualifying small institutions," news release, November 7, 2018.Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles," news release, October 31, 2018.Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies propose rule to update calculation of derivative contract exposure amounts under regulatory capital rules," news release, October 30, 2018.Return to text 12. Jerome H. Powell, "Remarks at the Ceremonial Swearing-in" (speech at the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC, February 13, 2018).Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Vice Chairman for Supervision Quarles submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on November 15, 2018. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, other members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's regulation and supervision of the financial system. My testimony today covers two main topics: our efforts to improve regulatory transparency, including the report accompanying my submission to the committee, and our progress in making the post-crisis regulatory framework simpler and more efficient. The Role of Transparency in Regulation and SupervisionI am mindful that this semiannual testimony--like my position as Vice Chairman for Supervision--is grounded in Congress's efforts to strengthen and improve the nation's regulatory framework following the financial crisis. This testimony reflects a critical element of those efforts: the desire, and the need, for greater transparency. Transparency is part of the foundation of public accountability and a cornerstone of due process. It is also key to a well-functioning regulatory system and an essential aspect of safety and soundness, as well as financial stability. Transparency provides financial firms clarity on the letter and spirit of their obligations; it provides supervisors with the benefit of exposure to a diversity of perspectives; and it provides markets with insight into the condition of regulated firms, fostering market discipline. Transparency increases public confidence in the role of the financial system to support credit, investment, and economic growth. The Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps since my last testimony to further increase transparency, and to provide more information about our supervisory activities to both regulated institutions and the public. For example, the Board recently improved its supervisory ratings system for large financial institutions.1Ratings are an essential vehicle for supervisory feedback--a clear, concise way to convey whether a firm meets expectations, with tangible, predictable consequences for those that fall short. Our ratings system for large institutions had remained unchanged since 2004, even as our supervision of those institutions evolved significantly after the crisis. The new rating system will better align ratings for these firms with the supervisory feedback they receive, and will focus firms on the capital, liquidity, and governance issues most likely to affect safety and soundness. The banking agencies also recently clarified that supervisory guidance is a tool to enhance the transparency of supervisory expectations, and should never be the basis of an enforcement action.2Guidance--a valuable tool for examiners to help evaluate firms and explain supervisory findings--should always be based on concerns for safety and soundness or compliance at a particular firm. However, guidance is not legally enforceable, and Federal Reserve examiners will not treat it that way. Finally, we expect shortly to make final a set of measures to increase visibility into the Board's supervisory stress testing program. The enhanced disclosures will include more granular descriptions of our models; more information about the design of our scenarios; and more detail about the outcomes we project, including a range of loss rates for loans held by firms subject to the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. The disclosures will provide a more complete picture of the stress testing process, and facilitate thoughtful comments from academics and other members of the public, while mitigating the risk of convergence on a single model. As a result, we believe the disclosures will improve our work, making the tests more reliable, visible, and credible. We will continue our efforts toward greater transparency in stress testing over the next several years, including by disclosing descriptions of additional material models and modeled loss rate disclosures for loan and non-loan portfolios. Semiannual Review of the Safety and Soundness of the U.S. Banking SystemThe report that accompanies my testimony today is another tool to keep Congress, and the public, informed about our work, the banking system, and the role of both in supporting the broader economy.3The report focuses on the Federal Reserve's prudential supervisory activities.4As the report shows, the banking sector remains in strong condition, in line with strong U.S. economic performance, with lending growth, fewer nonperforming loans, and strong overall profitability. Large institutions are well capitalized and liquid, and their capital planning and liquidity-risk-management processes are improving. Ninety-nine percent of regional and community banks are currently well capitalized, and supervisory recommendations made to smaller firms during the financial crisis have largely been closed. We are, however, very much aware of the dangers of complacency, and our report lists several priority areas of risk we will continue to monitor closely in the coming year, including cyber and information technology risks at supervised firms of all sizes. Improvements in Regulatory EfficiencyImproving regulatory efficiency is another core element of our current regulatory efforts. Tailoring regulation and supervision to risk has been a programmatic goal of Federal Reserve policy for more than two decades. The motivations are clear: supervisory resources are not limitless, and supervision is not costless, either to the public or to supervised institutions. Activities and firms that pose the greatest risk should receive the most scrutiny, and where the risk is lower, the regulatory burden should be lower as well. This principle guided Congress and the federal banking agencies in designing the post-crisis regulatory framework, which imposed greater restrictions on larger, more systemically important firms and less intrusive requirements on smaller ones. It has also guided our implementation of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA, or the Act).5On this front, we have made substantial progress: The Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) have also continued the work to significantly reduce the reporting burden on community banking organizations, altering reporting frequencies, items, and thresholds, while preserving the data necessary for effective oversight.9The agencies recently issued a proposal to reduce further reporting requirements for small depository institutions in the first and third quarters of the year. Under the proposal, around 37 percent of data items would not be required in those quarters. Our most significant step to implement the Act came two weeks ago, when the Board issued two proposals to better align prudential standards with the risk profile of regulated institutions.10These proposals implement changes that Congress enacted this spring in the EGRRCPA. One of the proposals addresses the Board's enhanced prudential standards for large banking firms, and the other is an interagency proposal amending the regulatory capital and liquidity regulations that apply to large banking organizations. Both proposals separate large banking firms into four categories, using size as a relevant but not sufficient factor for increased regulatory requirements. Among the other factors that will now enter into this assessment are nonbank assets, short-term wholesale funding, and off-balance-sheet exposure. The changes would significantly reduce regulatory compliance requirements for firms in the lowest risk category, including most institutions with between $100 billion and $250 billion in assets. Firms with $250 billion or more in assets, or firms with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion that meet a risk threshold, will face reduced liquidity requirements. The proposals would largely maintain existing requirements for the largest and most complex firms. These new categories represent a step forward in regulatory efficiency. They draw on our experience administering enhanced prudential requirements and other post-crisis measures. They recognize that other indicators of risk beyond size are appropriate to consider when determining if more stringent standards should apply to certain firms. They move toward a more risk-sensitive, nuanced framework, where riskier activities and a larger systemic footprint correspond to higher supervisory and regulatory requirements. Apart from the requirements of the Act, we also recently proposed a new approach to calculating credit risk, known as the standardized approach to counterparty credit risk, or SA-CCR. The new approach would better account for the risks associated with derivatives exposures, including market practices that reduce risk, such as netting and initial margin.11We issued a proposal simplifying and tailoring requirements under the Volcker rule, to ensure that the most stringent requirements apply to the firms with the most trading activity, and that compliance is as simple and objective as possible. We also issued a rule limiting the exposure of large firms to a single counterparty, addressing a key source of contagion during the financial crisis. We have received thoughtful input from the public that will help inform our implementation of all of these measures. Finally, we have continued to engage with supervisors and central banks overseas. The ultimate goal of having an efficient and transparent regulatory system is to help the American economy--to enable banking organizations to offer safe, stable financial services to households and businesses around the country. But American businesses compete in a global marketplace, and as the financial crisis showed, when regulatory standards fall in other countries, Americans can pay the price. Engaging overseas, through forums like the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, helps level the playing field--and it helps ensure that all countries, not just the United States, do their part to maintain and protect the global economy. Our work to improve regulatory efficiency is not done, and we expect to make additional progress in the months ahead on a number of issues. In particular, we are working with our counterparts at the OCC and FDIC on a community bank leverage ratio proposal. We expect that this proposal would meaningfully reduce the compliance burden for community banking organizations, while preserving overall levels of capital at small banks and our ability to take prompt action when problems arise. I look forward to continuing our efforts to make our regulatory framework simpler, more transparent, and more efficient--and I look forward to participating in the committee's oversight of those efforts. As Chairman Powell said at his swearing-in: "As a public institution, we must be transparent about our actions so that the public, through its elected representatives, can hold us accountable."12We will continue to do so to the best of our ability. Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board finalizes new supervisory rating system for large financial institutions," news release, November 2, 2018.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies issue statement reaffirming the role of supervisory guidance," news release, September 11, 2018.Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Supervision and Regulation Report," November 9, 2018.Return to text 4. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for timely and effective supervision of consumer protection and community reinvestment laws and regulations. More information about the Federal Reserve's consumer-focused supervisory program can be found in the Federal Reserve's Annual Report to Congress. See section 5, "Consumer and Community Affairs," athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/annual-report.htm. The Federal Reserve also publishes the Consumer Compliance Supervision Bulletin, which shares information about examiners' supervisory observations and other noteworthy developments related to consumer protections. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/consumer-compliance-supervision-bulletin.htm.Return to text 5. EGRRCPA, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board issues interim final rule expanding the applicability of the Board's small bank holding company policy statement," news release, August 28, 2018.Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Statement regarding the impact of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) (PDF)," July 6, 2018.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies propose rule regarding the treatment of high volatility commercial real estate," news release, September 18, 2018.Return to text 9. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies issue proposal to streamline regulatory reporting for qualifying small institutions," news release, November 7, 2018.Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles," news release, October 31, 2018.Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies propose rule to update calculation of derivative contract exposure amounts under regulatory capital rules," news release, October 30, 2018.Return to text 12. Jerome H. Powell, "Remarks at the Ceremonial Swearing-in" (speech at the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC, February 13, 2018).Return to text
Chairman Jerome H. Powell At The Economic Club of New York, New York, New York It is a pleasure to be back at the Economic Club of New York. I will begin by briefly reviewing the outlook for the economy, and then turn to a discussion of financial stability. My main subject today will be the profound transformation since the Global Financial Crisis in the Federal Reserve's approach to monitoring and addressing financial stability. Today marks the publication of the Board of Governors' firstFinancial Stability Report. Earlier this month, we published our firstSupervision and Regulation Report. Together, these reports contain a wealth of information on our approach to financial stability and to financial regulation more broadly. By clearly and transparently explaining our policies, we aim to strengthen the foundation of democratic legitimacy that enables the Fed to serve the needs of the American public. Outlook and Monetary PolicyCongress assigned the Federal Reserve the job of promoting maximum employment and price stability. I am pleased to say that our economy is now close to both of those objectives. The unemployment rate is 3.7 percent, a 49-year low, and many other measures of labor market strength are at or near historic bests. Inflation is near our 2 percent target. The economy is growing at an annual rate of about 3 percent, well above most estimates of its longer-run trend. For seven years during the crisis and its painful aftermath, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) kept our policy interest rate unprecedentedly low--in fact, near zero--to support the economy as it struggled to recover. The health of the economy gradually but steadily improved, and about three years ago the FOMC judged that the interests of households and businesses, of savers and borrowers, were no longer best served by such extraordinarily low rates. We therefore began to raise our policy rate gradually toward levels that are more normal in a healthy economy. Interest rates are still low by historical standards, and they remain just below the broad range of estimates of the level that would be neutral for the economy‑‑that is, neither speeding up nor slowing down growth. My FOMC colleagues and I, as well as many private-sector economists, are forecasting continued solid growth, low unemployment, and inflation near 2 percent. There is a great deal to like about this outlook. But we know that things often turn out to be quite different from even the most careful forecasts. For this reason, sound policymaking is as much about managing risks as it is about responding to the baseline forecast. Our gradual pace of raising interest rates has been an exercise in balancing risks. We know that moving too fast would risk shortening the expansion. We also know that moving too slowly--keeping interest rates too low for too long--could risk other distortions in the form of higher inflation or destabilizing financial imbalances. Our path of gradual increases has been designed to balance these two risks, both of which we must take seriously. We also know that the economic effects of our gradual rate increases are uncertain, and may take a year or more to be fully realized. While FOMC participants' projections are based on our best assessments of the outlook, there is no preset policy path. We will be paying very close attention to what incoming economic and financial data are telling us. As always, our decisions on monetary policy will be designed to keep the economy on track in light of the changing outlook for jobs and inflation. Under the dual mandate, jobs and inflation are the Fed's meat and potatoes. In the rest of my comments, I will focus on financial stability--a topic that has always been on the menu, but that, since the crisis, has become a more integral part of the meal. Historical Perspective on Financial StabilityThe term "financial stability" has a particular meaning in this context. A stable financial system is one that continues to function effectively even in severely adverse conditions. A stable system meets the borrowing and investment needs of households and businesses despite economic turbulence. An unstable system, in contrast, may amplify turbulence and prolong economic hardship in the face of stress by failing to provide these essential services when they are needed most. For Economic Club of New York trivia buffs, I will note that the second ever presentation to this club by a Federal Reserve official was about this very topic. The date was March 18, 1929. Weeks before, the Fed had issued a public statement of concern over stock market speculation, and had provided guidance frowning on bank funding of such speculation. William Harding, a former Fed Chair and then president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, defended the Fed's actions in his talk. He argued that, while the Fed should not act as the arbiter of correct asset prices, it did have a primary responsibility to protect the banking system's capacity to meet the credit needs of households and businesses. At the meeting, critics argued that public statements about inflated asset prices were "fraught with danger;" that the nation's banks were so well managed that they should not "face public admonition"; and, more generally, that the Fed was "out of its sphere."1Of course, Harding spoke just a few months before the 1929 stock market crash, which signaled the onset of the Great Depression.2 Fast forwarding, a host of Depression-era reforms helped avoid, for the next three-quarters of a century, a systemic financial crisis and the associated severe economic dislocation‑‑the longest such period in American history. Those decades saw many advances in monetary policy and in bank regulatory policy, but the appropriate role for government in managing threats to the broader financial system remained unresolved. Periodic bouts of financial stress during this period--such as the Latin American debt crisis, the savings and loan crisis, and the Russian debt default--were met with improvised responses. Policymakers conjured fixes from a mixture of private-sector rescues, emergency liquidity, occasional implicit or explicit bailouts, and monetary accommodation. Outside of these crisis responses, however, systemic issues were not a central focus of policy. The Global Financial Crisis demonstrated, in the clearest way, the limits of this approach. Highly inventive and courageous improvisation amid scenes of great drama helped avoid another Great Depression, but failed to prevent the most severe recession in 75 years. The crisis made clear that there can be no macroeconomic stability without financial stability, and that systemic stability risks often take root and blossom in good times.3Thus, as the emergency phase of the crisis subsided, Congress, the Fed, and the other financial regulators began developing a fundamentally different approach to financial stability. Instead of relying on improvised responses after crises strike, policymakers now constantly monitor vulnerabilities and require firms to plan in advance for financial distress, in a framework that lays out solutions in advance during good times. The New Approach to Financial StabilityThis new approach can be divided into three parts. First, build up the strength and resilience of the financial system. Second, develop and apply a broad framework for monitoring financial stability on an ongoing basis. And third, explain the new approach as transparently as possible, so that the public and its representatives in Congress can provide oversight and hold us accountable for this work. Although I'll focus mainly on the stability efforts of the Federal Reserve, a number of federal regulatory agencies have responsibilities in this area. All of these agencies are represented on the Financial Stability Oversight Council, or FSOC, which is chaired by the Treasury Secretary and which provides a forum for interagency cooperation in responding to emerging risks. Building Resilience of the Financial SystemAfter 10 years of concentrated effort in the public and private sectors, the system is now much stronger, with greater capacity to function effectively in stressful times. In the banking system, we have implemented a post-crisis regulatory framework based on robust capital and liquidity requirements, a strong stress-testing regime, and mandatory living wills for the largest firms. As a result, banks now have much more high quality capital than before (figure 1). The most recent stress tests indicate that, even after a severe global recession, capital levels at the largest banks would remain above regulatory minimums, and above the levels those banks held in good times before the crisis.4The most systemically important financial institutions also now hold roughly 20 percent of their assets in the form of high quality liquid assets--that is, safe assets that could be readily sold at short notice (figure 2). The share of these assets is about four times its pre-crisis level. Compared with other economies, lending and borrowing in the United States depend less on bank loans and more on funds flowing through a wide array of capital market channels. The crisis revealed that this capital market centric system, despite its many benefits, also provides more places where systemic risks can emerge. In response, Congress and the regulatory agencies have made many stability-enhancing changes outside of the banking system. For example, many derivatives transactions are now required to be centrally cleared, which, through netting, has reduced exposures and enabled better management of counterparty risk. Tri-party repurchase agreement (repo) reforms have substantially improved the resilience of that marketplace, in particular by limiting intraday loans. Before the crisis, prime institutional money market funds were permitted to report a constant, $1 share price so long as the value of the underlying assets remained near $1. This reporting convention, combined with the implicit support of the plans' sponsors, led investors to treat those funds like bank deposits, even though they were not likewise insured. These funds are now required to report floating net-asset values, and after this reform investors chose to migrate to government-only funds, which are safer and less susceptible to runs (figure 3).5These and other measures have reduced the risk that key non-bank parts of the system would freeze up in the face of market stress. A New Framework for Monitoring Systemic RisksInnovation and risk-taking contribute to the dynamism of our financial system and our economy. As Hyman Minsky emphasized, along with the many benefits of dynamism comes the reality that the financial system will sometimes evolve toward excess and dangerous imbalances.6This reality underscores the vital importance of the second part of post-crisis reform: monitoring for emerging vulnerabilities. As laid out in our newFinancial Stability Report, we have developed a framework to help us monitor risks to stability in our complex and rapidly evolving financial system. The framework distinguishes between shocks, that is, trigger events that can be hard to predict or influence, and vulnerabilities, defined as features of the financial system that amplify shocks. The report is organized around four broad vulnerabilities that have been prominent in financial crises through the centuries. Each of these vulnerabilities is often found to some degree even in healthy market-based systems, and there is not, at present, any generally accepted standard for assessing at what level the vulnerabilities begin to pose serious stability risks. In lieu of such a standard, we flag cases in which the vulnerabilities rise well beyond historical norms, and then form judgments about the stability risks those cases present. The first vulnerability is excessive leverage in the financial sector.7If a highly leveraged segment of the financial system is buffeted by adverse events, the affected entities may all need to deleverage at the same time by selling assets, leading to what is called a "fire sale." Both the resulting decline in asset prices and the impaired ability of the segment to play its role in the economy can amplify the effects of a downturn. We saw this chain of events play out repeatedly in various parts of the financial sector in the weeks following the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008. In our surveillance, we examine leverage across many types of financial institutions, including banks, insurance companies, hedge funds, and various funding vehicles. Currently, we do not detect a broad-based buildup of abnormal or excessive leverage. As with banks, capital levels at insurance companies and broker-dealers appear robust. In addition, securitization levels are far below their pre-crisis levels, and those structures that do exist rely on more stable funding (seefigure 4). Our view into leverage and risk-taking outside the banking sector is admittedly incomplete, however, and we are always working to get a better view of emerging leverage excesses.8 The second vulnerability is funding risk, which arises when banks or nonbank financial entities rely on funding that can be rapidly withdrawn. If depositors or market participants lose faith in the soundness of an institution or the system as a whole, unstable funding can simply vanish in what is called a "run." During the crisis, we saw widespread runs, including at broker-dealers, some segments of the repo market, and money market mutual funds. These runs did severe damage, contributing to a generalized panic at the time. Had the authorities not stepped in, the damage could have been even more severe. Today we view funding-risk vulnerabilities as low. Banks hold low levels of liabilities that are able and likely to run, and they hold high levels of liquid assets to fund any outflows that do occur. Money market mutual fund reforms have greatly reduced the run risk in that sector. More generally, it is short-term, uninsured funding that would be most likely to run in a future stress event, and the volume of such funding is now significantly below pre-crisis peaks. Taken together, the evidence on these first two vulnerabilities strongly supports the view that financial institutions and markets are substantially more resilient than they were before the crisis. Indeed, the American financial system has successfully weathered some periods of significant stress over the past several years.9 The third vulnerability is excessive debt loads at households and businesses. Credit booms have often led to credit busts and sometimes to painful economic downturns. When the bust comes, those who have overborrowed tend to sharply reduce their spending. Defaults typically rise faster than had been expected, which may put financial institutions into distress. These effects may combine to bring a serious economic downturn. This boom-bust pattern was clear in measures of household debt around the crisis period, with mortgage debt rising far above its historical trend and then contracting sharply (seefigure 5). After the contraction, household debt has grown only moderately. The net increase in mortgage debt has been among borrowers with higher credit scores. While heavily indebted households always suffer in a downturn, all of this suggests that household debt would not present a systemic stability threat if the economy sours. Nonfinancial business borrowing presents a subtler story. With corporate debt, the United States has not faced a massive credit boom like that experienced with residential mortgages before the recent crisis. Instead, after controlling for its trend, business borrowing relative GDP has risen during expansions, no doubt reflecting business optimism, and then fallen when the cycle turned, as some of that optimism proved unfounded (seefigure 6). By this measure, the ratio of corporate debt to GDP is about where one might expect after nearly a decade of economic expansion: it is well above its trend, but not yet at the peaks hit in the late 1980s or late 1990s. Further, the upward trend in recent years appears broadly consistent with the growth in business assets relative to GDP. There are reasons for concern, however. Information on individual firms reveals that, over the past year, firms with high leverage and interest burdens have been increasing their debt loads the most (seefigure 7). In addition, other measures of underwriting quality have deteriorated, and leverage multiples have moved up. Some of these highly leveraged borrowers would surely face distress if the economy turned down, leading investors to take higher-than-expected losses--developments that could exacerbate the downturn. The question for financial stability is whether elevated business bankruptcies and outsized losses would risk undermining the ability of the financial system to perform its critical functions on behalf of households and businesses. For now, my view is that such losses are unlikely to pose a threat to the safety and soundness of the institutions at the core of the system and, instead, are likely to fall on investors in vehicles like collateralized loan obligations with stable funding that present little threat of damaging fire sales.10Of course, we will continue to monitor developments in this sector carefully. The fourth and final vulnerability arises when asset values rise far above conventional, historically observed valuation benchmarks--a phenomenon popularly referred to as a "bubble." The contentious term "bubble" does not appear in our work, however.11Instead, we focus is on the extent to which an asset's price is high or low relative to conventional benchmarks based on expected payoffs and current economic conditions. Historically, when asset prices soar far above standard benchmarks, sharp declines follow with some regularity, and those declines may bring economic misery reaching far beyond investors directly involved in the speculative boom. We therefore pay close attention when valuations get to the extreme ends of what we have seen in history. Looking across the landscape of major asset classes, we see some classes for which valuations seem high relative to history. For example, even after standard adjustments for economic conditions, valuations on riskier forms of corporate debt and commercial properties are in the upper ends of their post-crisis distributions, although they are short of the levels they hit in the pre-crisis credit boom. We see no major asset class, however, where valuations appear far in excess of standard benchmarks as some did, for example, in the late 1990s dot-com boom or the pre-crisis credit boom. The asset class that gets the most attention day-to-day is, of course, the stock market. Today, equity market prices are broadly consistent with historical benchmarks such as forward price-to-earnings ratios (seefigure 8). It is important to distinguish between market volatility and events that threaten financial stability. Large, sustained declines in equity prices can put downward pressure on spending and confidence. From the financial stability perspective, however, today we do not see dangerous excesses in the stock market. Monitoring Likely Triggers for Financial DistressI mentioned the distinction between vulnerabilities and shocks, or triggers. In addition to monitoring vulnerabilities under our four-part framework, we also consult a broad range of contacts regarding sources of risk that might trigger distress at any given time. For example, discussions with contacts currently point to risks emanating from the normalization of monetary policy in the United States and elsewhere, the unsettled state of trade negotiations, Brexit negotiations, budget discussions between Italy and the European Union, and cyber-related disruptions.12 Having identified possible triggers, we can assess how a particular trigger is likely to interact with known vulnerabilities. A good current example is that of Brexit. U.S. banks and broker-dealers participate in some of the markets most likely to be affected by Brexit. The Fed and other regulators have been working with U.S. financial institutions that have operations in the European Union or the United Kingdom to prepare for the full range of possible outcomes to the negotiations. In addition, the scenarios used in the stress tests routinely feature severe global contractions and show that U.S. banks have the capital to weather even highly disruptive events. Bottom Line: Financial Stability Risks Are ModerateI have reviewed a few of the key facts that inform our thinking about financial stability, and you will find a great deal more detail in our new report. You will also find that the report does not come to a bottom line conclusion. As I noted earlier, we have limited experience with this monitoring, and there is no widely accepted basis for reaching a bottom line. Thus, the purpose of the report is to provide a common platform and set of readings from which policymakers and other interested parties can form their own views. Individual policymakers will sometimes differ in their assessments and on the relative weight they put on particular vulnerabilities. My own assessment is that, while risks are above normal in some areas and below normal in others, overall financial stability vulnerabilities are at a moderate level.13 In my view, the most important feature of the stability landscape is the strength of the financial system. The risks of destabilizing runs are far lower than in the past. The institutions at the heart of the financial system are more resilient. The stress tests routinely feature extremely severe downturns in business credit, and the largest banks have the capital and liquidity to continue to function under such circumstances. Because this core resilience is so important, we are committed to preserving and strengthening the key improvements since the crisis, particularly those in capital, liquidity, stress testing, and resolution. ConclusionI'd like to conclude by putting financial stability and our two new reports in a longer-term context. To paraphrase a famous line, "eternal vigilance is the price of financial stability." We will publish these reports regularly as part of our vigilance. Over time, some may be tempted to dismiss the reports entirely or to overdramatize any concerns they raise. Instead, these reports should be viewed as you might view the results of a regular health checkup. We all hope for a report that is not very exciting. Many baby boomers like me are, however, reaching an age where a good report is, "Well, there are a number of things we should keep an eye on, but all things considered you are in good health." That is how I view theFinancial Stability Reportout today. We hope that this report and theSupervision and Regulation Reportwill be important tools, sharing Federal Reserve views and stimulating public dialogue regarding the stability of the financial system. 1. See remarks of W.P.G. Harding at a dinner of the Economic Club of New York on March 18, 1929, as reported in "Clash on Policies of Reserve Board" by theNew York Timeson March 19, 1929, p. 52; and in "Reserve Policy Upheld and Hit" by theWall Street Journalon March 19, 1929, p. 21. Also see "Wall Street News and Comment," Special Dispatch to the[Daily Boston] Globe,on March 24, 1929, p. A60.Return to text 2. Many factors after the initial crash, including what are now seen as major policy errors, contributed to the Great Depression. See Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz (1963),A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press); and Ben S. Bernanke (1983), "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression,"American Economic Review,vol. 73 (June), pp. 257-76.Return to text 3. Hyman Minsky had long emphasized this point. For instance, see Hyman P. Minsky (1991), "Financial Crises: Systemic or Idiosyncratic (PDF)," Working Paper 51, prepared for presentation at "Crisis in Finance," a conference of the Jerome Levy Economics Institute, Bard College, April.Return to text 4. See the Federal Reserve's November 2018Supervision and Regulation Report,available on the Board'swebsite.Return to text 5. Given that government money fund asset holdings are limited to safe assets, they are allowed to maintain a $1 share price.Return to text 6. See Minsky, "Financial Crises," in note 3.Return to text 7. A more highly leveraged sector is one that relies more heavily on borrowed money.Return to text 8. Sometimes we look to bank lending for information. Data from the stress tests suggest that the nation's largest banks have committed about $1 trillion in lines of credit to nonbanks.Return to text 9. Examples include episodes of intensified concerns over euro-area fiscal challenges, the discontinuous and large appreciation of the Swiss franc in January 2015, and the market volatility associated with global growth concerns in late 2015.Return to text 10. See Jerome H. Powell (2015), "Financial Institutions, Financial Markets, and Financial Stability," speech delivered at the Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, N.Y., February 18.Return to text 11. Analysts differ over how to define the term "bubble," and debate continues about the degree to which economic fundamentals might explain even the most famous apparent bubble cases from history. On the topic of tulip mania, for example, see Peter M. Garber (1989), "Tulipmania,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 97 (June), pp. 535-60."Return to text 12. TheFinancial Stability Reportdoes not currently have a standard set of metrics for determining the resiliency of critical financial systems to cyber disruptions. Nonetheless, cyber risks are the subject of ongoing policy efforts at that Federal Reserve and other relevant agencies, and these entities are working to develop resiliency expectations and measures, which may be part of future discussions in the stability report.Return to text 13. The staff have also assessed financial stability vulnerabilities as moderate. For instance, see the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting, July 31-August 1, 2018, available on the Board'swebsite.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard At Fintech and the New Financial Landscape, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Although it is still early days, it is already evident that the application of artificial intelligence (AI) in financial services is potentially quite important and merits our attention. Through our Fintech working group, we are working across the Federal Reserve System to take a deliberate approach to understanding the potential implications of AI for financial services, particularly as they relate to our responsibilities. In light of the potential importance of AI, we are seeking to learn from industry, banks, consumer advocates, researchers, and others, including through today's conference. I am pleased to take part in this timely discussion of how technology is changing the financial landscape.1 The Growing Use of Artificial Intelligence in Financial ServicesMy focus today is the branch of artificial intelligence known as machine learning, which is the basis of many recent advances and commercial applications.2Modern machine learning applies and refines, or "trains," a series of algorithms on a large data set by optimizing iteratively as it learns in order to identify patterns and make predictions for new data.3Machine learning essentially imposes much less structure on how data is interpreted compared to conventional approaches in which programmers impose ex ante rule sets to make decisions. The three key components of AI--algorithms, processing power, and big data--are all increasingly accessible. Due to an early commitment to open-source principles, AI algorithms from some of the largest companies are available to even nascent startups.4As for processing power, continuing innovation by public cloud providers means that with only a laptop and a credit card, it is possible to tap into some of the world's most powerful computing systems by paying only for usage time, without having to build out substantial hardware infrastructure. Vendors have made it easy to use these tools for even small businesses and non-technology firms, including in the financial sector. Public cloud companies provide access to pre-trained AI models via developer-friendly application programming interfaces or even "drop and drag" tools for creating sophisticated AI models.5Most notably, the world is creating data to feed those models at an ever-increasing rate. Whereas in 2013 it was estimated that 90 percent of the world's data had been created in the prior two years, by 2016, IBM estimated that 90 percent of global data had been created in the prior year alone.6 The pace and ubiquity of AI innovation have surprised even experts. The best AI result on a popular image recognition challenge improved from a 26 percent error rate to 3.5 percent in just four years. That is lower than the human error rate of 5 percent.7In one study, a combination AI-human approach brought the error rate down even further--to 0.5 percent. So it is no surprise that many financial services firms are devoting so much money, attention, and time to developing and using AI approaches. Broadly, there is particular interest in at least five capabilities.8First, firms view AI approaches as potentially having superior ability for pattern recognition, such as identifying relationships among variables that are not intuitive or not revealed by more traditional modeling. Second, firms see potential cost efficiencies where AI approaches may be able to arrive at outcomes more cheaply with no reduction in performance. Third, AI approaches might have greater accuracy in processing because of their greater automation compared to approaches that have more human input and higher "operator error." Fourth, firms may see better predictive power with AI compared to more traditional approaches--for instance, in improving investment performance or expanding credit access. Finally, AI approaches are better than conventional approaches at accommodating very large and less-structured data sets and processing those data more efficiently and effectively. Some machine learning approaches can be "let loose" on data sets to identify patterns or develop predictions without the need to specify a functional form ex ante. What do those capabilities mean in terms of how we bank? The Financial Stability Board highlighted four areas where AI could impact banking.9First, customer-facing uses could combine expanded consumer data sets with new algorithms to assess credit quality or price insurance policies. And chatbots could provide help and even financial advice to consumers, saving them the waiting time to speak with a live operator. Second, there is the potential for strengthening back-office operations, such as advanced models for capital optimization, model risk management, stress testing, and market impact analysis. Third, AI approaches could be applied to trading and investment strategies, from identifying new signals on price movements to using past trading behavior to anticipate a client's next order. Finally, there are likely to be AI advancements in compliance and risk mitigation by banks. AI solutions are already being used by some firms in areas like fraud detection, capital optimization, and portfolio management. Current Regulatory and Supervisory ApproachesThe potential breadth and power of these new AI applications inevitably raise questions about potential risks to bank safety and soundness, consumer protection, or the financial system.10The question, then, is how should we approach regulation and supervision? It is incumbent on regulators to review the potential consequences of AI, including the possible risks, and take a balanced view about its use by supervised firms. Regulation and supervision need to be thoughtfully designed so that they ensure risks are appropriately mitigated but do not stand in the way of responsible innovations that might expand access and convenience for consumers and small businesses or bring greater efficiency, risk detection, and accuracy. Likewise, it is important not to drive responsible innovation away from supervised institutions and toward less regulated and more opaque spaces in the financial system.11 Our existing regulatory and supervisory guardrails are a good place to start as we assess the appropriate approach for AI processes. The National Science and Technology Council, in an extensive study addressing regulatory activity generally, concludes that if an AI-related risk "falls within the bounds of an existing regulatory regime, . . . the policy discussion should start by considering whether the existing regulations already adequately address the risk, or whether they need to be adapted to the addition of AI."12A recent report by the U.S. Department of the Treasury reaches a similar conclusion with regard to financial services.13 With respect to banking services, a few generally applicable laws, regulations, guidance, and supervisory approaches appear particularly relevant to the use of AI tools. First, the Federal Reserve's "Guidance on Model Risk Management" (SR Letter 11-7) highlights the importance to safety and soundness of embedding critical analysis throughout the development, implementation, and use of models, which include complex algorithms like AI.14It also underscores "effective challenge" of models by a "second set of eyes"--unbiased, qualified individuals separated from the model's development, implementation, and use. It describes supervisory expectations for sound independent review of a firm's own models to confirm they are fit for purpose and functioning as intended. If the reviewers are unable to evaluate a model in full or if they identify issues, they might recommend the model be used with greater caution or with compensating controls. Similarly, when our own examiners evaluate model risk, they generally begin with an evaluation of the processes firms have for developing and reviewing models, as well as the response to any shortcomings in a model or the ability to review it. Importantly, the guidance recognizes that not all aspects of a model may be fully transparent, as with proprietary vendor models, for instance. Banks can use such models, but the guidance highlights the importance of using other tools to cabin or otherwise mitigate the risk of an unexplained or opaque model. Risks may be offset by mitigating external controls like "circuit-breakers" or other mechanisms. And importantly, models should always be interpreted in context. Second, our guidance on vendor risk management (SR 13-19/CA 13-21), along with the prudential regulators' guidance on technology service providers, highlights considerations firms should weigh when outsourcing business functions or activities--and could be expected to apply as well to AI-based tools or services that are externally sourced.15The vast majority of the banks that we supervise will have to rely on the expertise, data, and off-the-shelf AI tools of nonbank vendors to take advantage of AI-powered processes. Whether these tools are chatbots, anti-money-laundering/know your customer compliance products, or new credit evaluation tools, it seems likely that they would be classified as services to the bank. The vendor risk-management guidance discusses best practices for supervised firms regarding due diligence, selection, and contracting processes in selecting an outside vendor. It also describes ways that firms can provide oversight and monitoring throughout the relationship with the vendor, and considerations about business continuity and contingencies for a firm to consider before the termination of any such relationship. Third, it is important to emphasize that guidance has to be read in the context of the relative risk and importance of the specific use-case in question. We have long taken a risk-focused supervisory approach--the level of scrutiny should be commensurate with the potential risk posed by the approach, tool, model, or process used.16That principle also applies generally to the attention that supervised firms devote to the different approaches they use: firms should apply more care and caution to a tool they use for major decisions or that could have a material impact on consumers, compliance, or safety and soundness. For its part, AI is likely to present some challenges in the areas of opacity and explainability. Recognizing there are likely to be circumstances when using an AI tool is beneficial, even though it may be unexplainable or opaque, the AI tool should be subject to appropriate controls, as with any other tool or process, including how the AI tool is used in practice and not just how it is built. This is especially true for any new application that has not been fully tested in a variety of conditions. Given the large data sets involved with most AI approaches, it is vital to have controls around the various aspects of data--including data quality as well as data suitability. Just as with conventional models, problems with the input data can lead to cascading problems down the line. Accordingly, we would expect firms to apply robust analysis and prudent risk management and controls to AI tools, as they do in other areas, as well as to monitor potential changes and ongoing developments. For example, let's take the areas of fraud prevention and cybersecurity, where supervised institutions may need their own AI tools to identify and combat outside AI-powered threats. The wide availability of AI's building blocks means that phishers and fraudsters have access to best-in-class technologies to build AI tools that are powerful and adaptable. Supervised institutions will likely need tools that are just as powerful and adaptable as the threats that they are designed to face, which likely entails some degree of opacity. While so far, most phishing attacks against consumers have relied on standard-form emails, likely due to the high cost of personalization, in the future, AI tools could be used to make internet fraud and phishing highly personalized.17By accessing data sets with consumers' personally identifiable information and applying open-source AI tools, a phisher may be able to churn out highly targeted emails to millions of consumers at relatively low cost, containing personalized information such as their bank account number and logo, along with past transactions.18In cases such as this, where large data sets and AI tools may be used for malevolent purposes, it may be that AI is the best tool to fight AI. Let's turn to the related issue of the proverbial "black box"--the potential lack of explainability associated with some AI approaches. In the banking sector, it is not uncommon for there to be questions as to what level of understanding a bank should have of its vendors' models, due to the balancing of risk management, on the one hand, and protection of proprietary information, on the other. To some degree, the opacity of AI products can be seen as an extension of this balancing. But AI can introduce additional complexity because many AI tools and models develop analysis, arrive at conclusions, or recommend decisions that may be hard to explain. For instance, some AI approaches are able to identify patterns that were previously unidentified and are intuitively quite hard to grasp. Depending on what algorithms are used, it is possible that no one, including the algorithm's creators, can easily explain why the model generated the results that it did. The challenge of explainability can translate into a higher level of uncertainty about the suitability of an AI approach, all else equal. So how does, or even can, a firm assess the use of an approach it might not fully understand? To a large degree, this will depend on the capacity in which AI is used and the risks presented. One area where the risks may be particularly acute is the consumer space generally, and consumer lending in particular, where transparency is integral to avoiding discrimination and other unfair outcomes, as well as meeting disclosure obligations.19Let me turn briefly to this topic. The potential for the application of AI tools to result in new benefits to consumers is garnering a lot of attention. The opportunity to access services through innovative channels or processes can be a potent way to advance financial inclusion.20Consider, for instance, consumer credit scoring. There are longstanding and well-documented concerns that many consumers are burdened by material errors on their credit reports, lack sufficient credit reporting information necessary for a score, or have credit reports that are unscorable.21As noted earlier, banks and other financial service providers are using AI to develop credit-scoring models that take into account factors beyond the usual metrics. There is substantial interest in the potential for those new models to allow more consumers on the margins of the current credit system to improve their credit standing, at potentially lower cost. As noted earlier, AI also has the potential to allow creditors to more accurately model and price risk, and to bring greater speed to decisions. AI may offer new consumer benefits, but it is not immune from fair lending and other consumer protection risks, and compliance with fair lending and other consumer protection laws is important.22Of course, it should not be assumed that AI approaches are free of bias simply because they are automated and rely less on direct human intervention. Algorithms and models reflect the goals and perspectives of those who develop them as well as the data that trains them and, as a result, AI tools can reflect or "learn" the biases of the society in which they were created. A 2016 Treasury Department report noted that while "data-driven algorithms may expedite credit assessments and reduce costs, they also carry the risk of disparate impact in credit outcomes and the potential for fair lending violations."23 A recent example illustrates the risk of unwittingly introducing bias into an AI model. It was recently reported that a large employer attempted to develop an AI hiring tool for software developers that was trained with a data set of the resumes of past successful hires, which it later abandoned. Because the pool of previously hired software developers in the training data set was overwhelmingly male, the AI developed a bias against female applicants, going so far as to exclude resumes of graduates from two women's colleges.24 Importantly, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) include requirements for creditors to provide notice of the factors involved in taking actions that are adverse or unfavorable for the consumer.25These requirements help provide transparency in the underwriting process, promote fair lending by requiring creditors to explain why they reached their decisions, and provide consumers with actionable information to improve their credit standing. Compliance with these requirements implies finding a way to explain AI decisions. However, the opacity of some AI tools may make it challenging to explain credit decisions to consumers, which would make it harder for consumers to improve their credit score by changing their behavior. Fortunately, AI itself may play a role in the solution: The AI community is responding with important advances in developing "explainable" AI tools with a focus on expanding consumer access to credit.26I am pleased that this is one of the topics on your agenda today. Looking AheadPerhaps one of the most important early lessons is that not all potential consequences are knowable now--firms should be continually vigilant for new issues in the rapidly evolving area of AI. Throughout the history of banking, new products and processes have been an area where problems can arise. Further, firms should not assume that AI approaches are less susceptible to problems because they are purported to be able to "learn" or less prone to human error. There are plenty of examples of AI approaches not functioning as expected--a reminder that things can go wrong. It is important for firms to recognize the possible pitfalls and employ sound controls now to prevent and mitigate possible future problems. For our part, we are still learning how AI tools can be used in the banking sector. We welcome discussion about what use cases banks and other financial services firms are exploring with AI approaches and other innovations, and how our existing laws, regulations, guidance, and policy interests may intersect with these new approaches.27When considering financial innovation of any type, our task is to facilitate an environment in which socially beneficial, responsible innovation can progress with appropriate mitigation of risk and consistent with applicable statutes and regulations. As with other technological advances, AI presents regulators with a responsibility to act with thoughtfulness and perspective in carrying out their mandates, learning from the experience in other areas. As we move ahead in exploring the policy and regulatory issues related to artificial intelligence, we look forward to collaborating with a broad array of stakeholders. 1. I am grateful to Kelvin Chen and Carol Evans for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Executive Office of the President, National Science and Technology Council Committee on Technology,Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence(PDF)(Washington: Executive Office of the President, October 2016); and American Bankers Association, "Understanding Artificial Intelligence" (Washington: American Bankers Association, November 2018), https://www.aba.com/Tools/Function/Technology/Documents/understanding-artificial-intelligence.pdf.Return to text 3. Executive Office of the President,Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence; and Financial Stability Board,Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Financial Services(PDF)(Basel: Financial Stability Board, November 1, 2017).Return to text 4. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack?" (speech at the FinTech Risks and Opportunities Conference, Ann Arbor, MI, November 16, 2017).Return to text 5. See, e.g., Brandon Vigliarolo, "Amazon AI: The Smart Person's Guide,"TechRepublic,August 21, 2017, https://www.techrepublic.com/article/amazon-ai-the-smart-persons-guide/; and Fei-Fei Li and Jia Li, "Cloud AutoML: Making AI Accessible to Every Business,"The Keyword(Google blog), January 17, 2018, https://www.blog.google/topics/google-cloud/cloud-automl-making-ai-accessible-every-business/.Return to text 6. SINTEF, "Big Data, for Better or Worse: 90% of World's Data Generated over Last Two Years," ScienceDaily.com, May 22, 2013, https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/05/130522085217.htm;and IBM, "10 Key Marketing Trends for 2017" (2017) (on file with author).Return to text 7. Executive Office of the President,Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence.Return to text 8. AI tools are also likely to be useful for central banks and regulators in their responsibilities for supervision, financial stability, and monetary policy, although this is not addressed here. The 2017 Financial Stability Board report highlighted the potential use of AI tools by central banks and prudential authorities for applications ranging from systemic risk identification to detecting fraud and money laundering (Financial Stability Board,Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning).Return to text 9. See Financial Stability Board,Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. See also, e.g., U.S. Department of the Treasury,A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities(PDF)(Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, June 3, 2018); Brainard, "Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack?"; and American Bankers Association, "Understanding Artificial Intelligence."Return to text 10. See, e.g., Financial Stability Board,Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learningand National Consumers Law Center (on behalf of its low-income clients), California Reinvestment Coalition Consumer Action, Consumers Union, National Association of Consumer Advocates, U.S. PIRG, Woodstock Institute, World Privacy Forum, "Comments in Response to Request for Information Regarding Use of Alternative Data and Modeling Techniques in the Credit Process," Docket No. CFPB-2017-0005 (May 19, 2017); U.S. Department of the Treasury,A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities; and Carol A. Evans, "Keeping Fintech Fair: Thinking about Fair Lending and UDAP Risks,"Consumer Compliance Outlook(Second Issue 2017), https://www.consumercomplianceoutlook.org/2017/second-issue/keeping-fintech-fair-thinking-about-fair-lending-and-udap-risks/.Return to text 11. Lael Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack?" (speech at the Northwestern Kellogg Public-Private Interface Conference, April 28, 2017).Return to text 12. Executive Office of the President,Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence.Return to text 13. U.S. Department of the Treasury,A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities.Return to text 14. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Guidance on Model Risk Management," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR Letter 11-7 (April 4, 2011). See also Andrew Burt, "Leave A.I. Alone,"New York Times,January 4, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/04/opinion/leave-artificial-intelligence.html.Return to text 15. See, e.g.,FFIEC Outsourcing Technology Services Booklet(June 2004); and Board of Governors, "Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 13-19/Consumer Affairs Letter CA 13-21 (December 5, 2013).Return to text 16. Board of Governors, "Risk-Focused Safety and Soundness Examinations and Inspections," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 96-14 (May 24, 1996).Return to text 17. See, e.g., Eric Lipton, David E. Sanger, and Scott Shane, "The Perfect Weapon: How Russian Cyberpower Invaded the U.S.,"New York Times, December 13, 2016, https://mobile.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/us/politics/russia-hack-election-dnc.html; and Cormac Herley,"Why Do Nigerian Scammers Say They Are from Nigeria?" Microsoft Research, June 1, 2012, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/WhyFromNigeria.pdf, ("A less outlandish wording that did not mention Nigeria would almost certainly gather more total responses and more viable responses, but would yield lower overall profit. Recall, that viability requires that the scammer actually extract money from the victim: those who are fooled for a while, but then figure it out, or who balk at the last hurdle are precisely the expensive false positives that the scammer must deter.")Return to text 18. Brian Krebs, "The Year Targeted Phishing Went Mainstream,"Krebs on Security,(August 18, 2018), https://krebsonsecurity.com/2018/08/the-year-targeted-phishing-went-mainstream/.Return to text 19. In a 2017 request for public comment, the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection noted that alternative modeling techniques may offer consumer benefits, such as greater credit access, enhanced creditworthiness predictions, lower costs, and better service and convenience, but also highlighted consumer risks, such as privacy concerns, data quality issues, loss of the ability to correct errors, and discrimination. See Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, "Request for Information Regarding Use of Alternative Data and Modeling Techniques in the Credit Process (PDF)," (Washington: Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, February 14, 2017),Return to text 20. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "FinTech and the Search for Full Stack Financial Inclusion," (speech at the Conference on FinTech, Financial Inclusion, and the Potential to Transform Financial Services at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 17, 2018).Return to text 21. Federal Trade Commission, "In FTC Study, Five Percent of Consumers Had Errors on Their Credit Reports That Could Result in Less Favorable Terms for Loans," news release, (February 11, 2013); Federal Trade Commission, "FTC Issues Follow-Up Study on Credit Report Accuracy," news release, (January 21, 2015);and Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection,Data Point: Credit Invisibles(PDF)(Washington: Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, May 2015).Return to text 22. The primary federal statutes governing fair lending are the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair Housing Act (FHA). See, also Lael Brainard, "Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack?" (speech at the FinTech Risks and Opportunities Conference, Ann Arbor, MI, November 16, 2017).Return to text 23. U.S. Department of the Treasury, "Opportunities and Challenges in Online Marketplace Lending (PDF)" (Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, May 2016).Return to text 24. Jeffrey Dastin, "Amazon Scraps Secret AI Recruiting Tool That Showed Bias against Women," Reuters, October 9, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-amazon-com-jobs-automation-insight/amazon-scraps-secret-ai-recruiting-tool-that-showed-bias-against-women-idUSKCN1MK08G.Return to text 25. See generally ECOA section 701, 15 USC 1691; 12 CFR § 1002.9; FCRA section 615, 15 USC 1681m; and 12 CFR §§ 1022.70-75.Return to text 26. See, e.g., Nanette Byrnes, "An AI-Fueled Credit Formula Might Help You Get a Loan,"MIT Technology Review(February 14, 2017), https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603604/an-ai-fueled-credit-formula-might-help-you-get-a-loan/.Return to text 27. See, e.g., U.S. Department of the Treasury,A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities; Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack?"; and Lael Brainard, "The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech" (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation at the Board of Governors, Washington, December 2, 2016).Return to text