Governor Lael Brainard At the Decoding Digital Currency ConferenceSponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California It is a pleasure to be here today. What better place to discuss digital currencies than in San Francisco, home to so many technology innovators working on new ways to disrupt various aspects of our daily lives?1 Because of the transformative potential of digital currency and distributed ledger technologies, the Federal Reserve is actively monitoring digital innovations in the financial system. We have been keenly evaluating developments in fintech and digital currencies through a multidisciplinary lens, combining information technology and policy analysis to study their potential implications for payments policy, supervision and regulation, financial stability, monetary policy, and the provision of financial services. This work draws from expertise throughout the Federal Reserve System and benefits from engagement with our colleagues internationally. CryptocurrenciesThe past decade has seen a wave of important new developments in digital technologies for payments, clearing, and settlement. Cryptocurrencies represent the leading edge of this digital wave. And it was the advent a decade ago of Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, that first gave shape to the vision of a decentralized digital currency. At the heart of any cryptocurrency is the creation of a new type of asset--the unit of the cryptocurrency itself--that is distinct from any traditional form of money used in routine transactions, such as U.S. currency or checking accounts in commercial banks. A typical cryptocurrency would not be a liability of any individual or institution. There is no trusted institution standing behind it. This is in stark contrast to U.S. currency and reserve balances, which are liabilities of the Federal Reserve Banks, and deposit accounts, which are liabilities of a bank or another regulated depository institution backed by federal insurance up to a specific level. And while a typical cryptocurrency may be used in payments, it is not legal tender, in contrast to U.S. currency. A typical cryptocurrency relies on the use of distributed ledger technology, which provides a new way to keep ownership records and transfer ownership from one user to another, often with little to no information about the identity of the owner. For instance, Bitcoin relies on the blockchain, which is run by anonymous computers all over the world linked together through a ledger of anonymized transactions. Digital currencies use automation via computer processing power, networking via the internet, and cryptography to transfer value from one person to another. What is innovative is that the computer code behind these transactions uses automated checks and balances to validate the sender and receiver, and whether there is enough value in the sender's account to make the payment. Traditionally, this validation would be done by banks and payment networks. Instead, with a cryptocurrency, this validation could be done by anyone with enough computing power and resources to participate. Importantly, this technology is not owned or managed by any entity--regulated or not--that would be responsible for its maintenance, security, and reliability. Rather, its maintenance, security, and reliability are handled by a decentralized developer community, which often lacks strong governance. This combination of a new asset, which is not a liability of any individual or institution, and a new recordkeeping and transfer technology, which is not maintained by any single individual or institution, illustrates the powerful capabilities of today's technologies. But there are also serious challenges. For instance, cryptocurrencies have exhibited periods of extreme volatility. If you purchased Bitcoin in December 2017 at a value of over $19,000, your electronic claims would be worth close to half that today.2Indeed, Bitcoin's value has been known to fluctuate by one-quarter in one day alone. Such extreme fluctuations limit an asset's ability to fulfill two of the classic functions of money: to act as a stable store of value that people can hold and use predictably in the future, and to serve as a meaningful unit of account that can be used to assign a comparable value of goods and services. In addition to losses, individual investors should be careful to understand the potential for other risks.3Cryptocurrencies may raise important investor and consumer protection issues. The lack of strong governance and questions about the applicable legal framework for some cryptocurrencies may make consumers vulnerable to mistakes, thefts, and security breaches without much, or any, recourse. Although the cryptographic technology may be robust to some events, such as the fraudulent double spending of the same units of the cryptocurrency for more than one transaction, the large number of breaches at some cryptocurrency exchanges and wallet providers suggest that significant vulnerabilities may remain with respect to security protections around customers' accounts.4These breaches remind us that relying solely on cryptography within the transfer technology is not enough. Ultimately, a more holistic approach to the security of the broader cryptocurrency ecosystem, along with added layers of security on top of cryptography, are likely to be necessary for cryptocurrencies to be widely adopted. Some cryptocurrencies also appear quite vulnerable to money-laundering (BSA/AML, or Bank Secrecy Act/anti-money-laundering) concerns. Since many cryptocurrencies store in their ledger little to no information about the identity of owners of the cryptocurrency, this essentially mimics a bearer instrument--that is, an instrument whereby the holder of the instrument is presumed to be its owner. Further, cryptocurrencies are easy to transfer across borders. Indeed, a cryptocurrency that mimics a bearer instrument and provides significant anonymity in transactions, including across borders, could raise significant concerns regarding the potential to facilitate illicit activities and associated money laundering. For example, electronic instruments can be easily transferred and stored in large amounts, and peer-to-peer transactions outside of the United States could be very hard to prevent and detect. Such instruments appear to have proven susceptible for use to convey payments to illicit actors--for example, to pay ransoms. Overall, however, the still relatively small scale of cryptocurrencies in relation to our broader financial system and relatively limited connections to our banking sector suggest that they do not currently pose a threat to financial stability.5Of course, if cryptocurrencies were to achieve wide-scale use, or their impact were greatly magnified through leverage, the effects could be broader. In particular, adverse developments and shifts in sentiment could cause a global rush to exit this market. As we have seen in other speculative activity in the past, rush-for-the-exits behavior can aggravate price fluctuations, create trading difficulties, and even induce market breakdowns. Thus, we will continue to monitor cryptocurrencies as they evolve, with particular vigilance for any signs of growing materiality to the broader financial system. Central Bank Digital CurrenciesGiven some of the inherent issues and challenges that cryptocurrencies pose for investor and consumer protection and the prevention of money laundering, some have advocated that central banks should create their own digital forms of currency as more stable and reliable alternatives to cryptocurrencies. After all, a central bank digital currency could overcome the volatility risks associated with an unbacked asset with no intrinsic value by substituting a digital instrument that is the direct liability of the central bank. Moreover, advocates suggest a central bank would be able to develop a transfer mechanism that has robust governance. Even though central bank digital currencies may at first glance appear to address a number of challenges associated with the current crop of cryptocurrencies, this appeal may not withstand closer scrutiny.6First, there are serious technical and operational challenges that would need to be overcome, such as the risk of creating a global target for cyberattacks or a ready means of money laundering. For starters, with regard to money laundering risks, unless there is the technological capability for effective identity authentication, a central bank digital currency would provide no improvement over physical notes and could be worse than current noncash funds transfer systems, especially for a digital currency that could circulate worldwide. In addition, putting a central bank currency in digital form could make it a very attractive target for cyberattacks by giving threat actors a prominent platform on which to focus their efforts. Any implementation would need to adequately deal with a variety of cyber threats--especially for a reserve currency like the U.S. dollar. Second, the issuance of central bank digital currency could have implications for retail banking beyond payments. If a successful central bank digital currency were to become widely used, it could become a substitute for retail banking deposits. This could restrict banks' ability to make loans for productive economic activities and have broader macroeconomic consequences. Moreover, the parallel coexistence of central bank digital currency with retail banking deposits could raise the risk of runs on the banking system in times of stress and so have adverse implications for financial stability. Finally, there is no compelling demonstrated need for a Fed-issued digital currency. Most consumers and businesses in the U.S. already make retail payments electronically using debit and credit cards, payment applications, and the automated clearinghouse network. Moreover, people are finding easy ways to make digital payments directly to other people through a variety of mobile apps. New private-sector real-time payments solutions are beginning to gain acceptance in the United States. And the Faster Payments Task Force has laid out a roadmap embraced by a variety of stakeholders for a fast, ubiquitous, and secure payments system to be in place in the United States in the next few years.7In short, a multiplicity of mechanisms are likely to be available for American consumers to make payments electronically in real time. As such, it is not obvious what additional value a Fed-issued digital currency would provide over and above these options. Wholesale Digital Settlement TokensIt is important for the Fed and other central banks to continue to research these issues as technology evolves, exploring the technical and economic possibilities and limitations of central-bank-issued digital currencies. Even though the case for a digital currency for general use may not be compelling, opportunities for more targeted and restricted use may nonetheless prove to have value. The private sector has been exploring a variety of ways of deploying the underlying technologies of digital assets that are native to a particular wholesale platform, to help to facilitate finality of settlement. Such wholesale digital settlement tokens could potentially reduce the time and costs required for wholesale financial transactions. This is being discussed, for instance, for the use cases of interbank payments, securities settlements, and cross-border transactions, where the introduction of a digital token native to a platform may facilitate certain types of settlement. Likewise, it is possible at some point in the future that a limited central bank digital instrument that serves as a settlement asset for wholesale payment and settlement activity may hold some promise. Several central banks have been studying this issue, and we have been actively watching these developments.8We are also interested in work that decouples the underlying distributed ledger technology from cryptocurrencies and attempts to build on the benefits of the technology, a topic to which I now turn. Distributed Ledger TechnologyEven if cryptocurrencies prove to have a very limited role in the future, the technology behind them is likely to live on and offer improvements in the way we transfer and record more traditional financial assets. Distributed ledger technology could also facilitate other applications that could improve the way we share information, validate possessions, and handle logistics. Recall that distributed ledger technology is the mechanism for recordkeeping and transfer of ownership that underpins cryptocurrencies. Over the past few years, the financial industry has conducted a great deal of research and development on how to adapt the more promising aspects of distributed ledger technology for use with more traditional financial assets. The industry has moved a number of these projects through a series of phases, often developing more incremental changes at first in order to gain confidence in the technology before tackling large projects with significant operational impacts. The industry is making steady progress and some projects could be live in some form this year. Many of the use cases focus on the areas of post-trade clearing and settlement of securities transactions, cross-border payments solutions, and trade finance. The common thread running through these use cases is the presence of operational "pain points" that generate inefficiencies and delays for users. For example, post-trade reconciliation of securities transactions can be a time-consuming and resource-intensive process that involves numerous parties, operational steps, and message flows across the counterparties and their various agents involved in the transactions. Distributed ledger technology has the potential to provide synchronized, real-time views for those counterparties and agents that can speed up the process and reduce errors. For cross-border transactions, the process for sending payments via the existing correspondent banking network can add time and money. Distributed ledger technology could potentially lower the costs and time it takes funds to reach the recipient through more direct connections, reducing the number of intermediaries required to effect the transaction. The financial industry has been working on versions of distributed ledger technology that help address a number of concerns, including the loose governance around the maintenance, security, and reliability of the technology for cryptocurrencies. Most projects are organized either as partnerships between technology and financial services firms or through consortia of technology firms, financial firms, and other interested parties. To some degree, these alliances may provide prototype governance arrangements for future technology deployments in financial services. In addition, there are exchanges and clearinghouses that are actively exploring the use of distributed ledger technology, which represent the more traditional model of multilateral organization in the financial markets. Although the governance arrangements may need to evolve over time, one thing that is clear is that strong governance arrangements will be required to provide the coordinated operational and financial risk management for the critical clearing and settlement operations that underpin our financial markets. In addition, the industry continues to make progress on the ability of distributed ledger technology to handle the very large volumes of transactions that take place both in financial markets and in retail payments every day. As I highlighted in 2016, this technical challenge of achieving the necessary scale and through put is an important hurdle.9Much of this challenge has been tied to the time it takes to achieve "consensus" on a distributed ledger. Consensus is the process by which new transactions are broadcast to all the participants, or nodes, in the network and each node accepts those new transactions as valid additions to the ledger. The initial consensus method used by Bitcoin, called "proof of work," is designed to deal with the lack of information and trust among the users of the network by providing tools and incentives to overcome this problem. But it is a highly resource-intensive process that limits the number of transactions that can be processed each second. The proof of work consensus model represents a tradeoff between operational efficiency and scalability, on the one hand, and the ability to operate without sufficient trust or information about the entities in the network, on the other hand. Fundamentally, however, the financial industry does not operate as a trustless network. Rather, the industry has long specialized in the collection and analysis of information about customers and counterparties as a core part of banking operations. Even allowing for the inevitable imperfect information that may result, it would seem natural for the financial industry to be able to leverage institutional information and trust in ways that allow for more efficient methods to achieve consensus than proof of work. Consequently, the industry and the academic community have focused a great deal of attention on various consensus methods that can provide greater scalability either by leveraging trust, which relaxes some operational and incentive constraints, or possibly by devising methods without trust that are much less resource intensive. Some of the technology firms working with the financial industry are taking different approaches in this fast-moving arena. Another important challenge for the industry has been leveraging distributed ledger technology while preserving the confidentiality of transactional information. At its core, distributed ledger technology is a shared ledger across multiple nodes in a network, likely representing multiple firms and legal entities. Ownership records and transactions flows from accounts on such a ledger are typically copied and stored on all the nodes in the network. The financial industry, however, must develop distributed ledgers that adhere to laws, regulations, and policies that protect important information of the parties and their customers. Clearly, a model where every entity on the network can see everyone else's account holdings and transactions history will not satisfy broad industry confidentiality requirements. In addition, stored data that may be protected cryptographically today may not be protected as the technology continues to advance, which adds even more difficulty and urgency to the work on confidentiality. The industry has been working to develop approaches to preserve confidentiality so that only the authorized parties relevant to a transaction can see the details recorded on the ledger. Some of these approaches involve encrypting data on the ledger so that the ledgers can still be copied across all the nodes in the network, but an entity cannot look at any element of that ledger except for transactions in which it has been involved. Other approaches include so-called zero-knowledge proofs or ring signatures that allow entities to validate transactions without seeing confidential information. Still others are looking at platforms that connect multiple ledgers rather than having one single ledger that is copied across all nodes in the network. While questions remain about the usefulness and viability of each of these approaches, it is important to underscore that preserving confidentiality is an important area of research. Finally, perhaps the biggest potential benefit for payments, clearing, and settlement of distributed ledger technology may be resiliency. Distributed ledger technology may enable a network to continue to operate even if some of the nodes on the network are compromised because of the ability of the other nodes in the network to pick up the slack and continue processing transactions. One challenge going forward will be to understand the implications that the confidentiality tools and different approaches to consensus under consideration may have on the resilience of the distributed ledger. Given that resiliency is a key potential benefit of distributed ledger technology over existing platforms, it is critical to understand the trade-offs between resiliency and a consensus method that focuses on operational speed, or between resilience and confidentiality. ConclusionIt is an exciting time for the financial sector as digital innovations are challenging conventional thinking about currency, money, and payments. Cryptocurrencies are strikingly innovative but also pose challenges associated with speculative dynamics, investor and consumer protections, and money-laundering risks. Although central bank digital currencies may be able to overcome some of the particular vulnerabilities that cryptocurrencies face, they too have significant challenges related to cybersecurity, money laundering, and the retail financial system. Even so, digital tokens for wholesale payments and some aspects of distributed ledger technology--the key technologies underlying cryptocurrencies--may hold promise for strengthening traditional financial instruments and markets. I have highlighted a few key areas where the technology is advancing to deal with some important policy, business, and operational challenges. The Federal Reserve is dedicated to continuing to monitor industry developments and conduct research in these vital areas. I remain optimistic that the financial sector will find valuable ways to employ distributed ledger technology in the area of payments, clearing, and settlement in coming years. 1. I am grateful to David Mills of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See, for example, https://www.coinbase.com/charts.Return to text 3. Lael Brainard, "An Update on the Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda" (speech delivered at the Center for Global Economy and Business, Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, NY, April 3, 2018).Return to text 4. For example, Coincheck, a Tokyo-based cryptocurrency exchange was hacked in 2018. See https://www.wsj.com/articles/cryptocurrency-worth-530-million-missing-from-japanese-exchange-1516988190. A similar attack occurred back in 2014 to another Tokyo-based cryptocurrency exchange, Mt. Gox. See https://www.wsj.com/articles/mt-gox-to-hold-news-conference-1393579356.Return to text 5. Seehttps://g20.org/sites/default/files/media/communique_-_fmcbg_march_2018.pdf.Return to text 6. See, for example, the recent joint Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and Markets Committee report "Central Bank Digital Currencies (PDF)," March 2018. A Fed-issued digital currency might have implications for the rates and terms of funding for U.S. financial institutions and even the U.S. government as well as the transmission of monetary policy that I will not discuss here.Return to text 7. Seehttps://fedpaymentsimprovement.org/faster-payments/path-to-faster-payments/.Return to text 8. For example, see Bank of Canada's Project Jasper,https://www.bankofcanada.ca/research/digital-currencies-and-fintech/fintech-experiments-and-projects/.Return to text 9. Lael Brainard, "The Use of Distributed Ledger Technologies in Payment, Clearing, and Settlement" (speech delivered at the Institute of International Finance Blockchain Roundtable, Washington, DC, April 14, 2016); and Lael Brainard, "Distributed Ledger Technology: Implications for Payments, Clearing, and Settlement" (speech delivered at the Institute of International Finance Annual Meeting Panel on Blockchain, Washington, DC, October 7, 2016).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) on Friday extended until June 25, 2018, the comment period for their proposed rule that would tailor leverage ratio requirements to the business activities and risk profiles of the largest domestic firms. The agencies extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to prepare their comments, which were originally due on May 21. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
On May 17, 2018, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on May 17, 2018, and will mature on May 24, 2018. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Ameris Bancorp, Moultrie, Georgia, to acquire Atlantic Coast Financial Corporation ("Atlantic") and thereby indirectly acquire Atlantic's subsidiary bank, Atlantic Coast Bank, both of Jacksonville, Florida. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Independent Bank Group, Inc., McKinney, Texas, to acquire Integrity Bancshares, Inc. ("Integrity"), and thereby indirectly acquire Integrity's subsidiary bank, Integrity Bank SSB, both of Houston, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the approval of final amendments to its Regulation A, which governs extensions of credit by Federal Reserve Banks, to make certain technical adjustments including to reflect the expiration of the Term Asset Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) program. The final amendments revise the provisions regarding the establishment of the primary credit rate at the discount window in a financial emergency, and delete obsolete provisions relating to the use of credit ratings for collateral for extensions of credit under the former TALF program. The final amendments are effective 30 days after the date of publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Regions Bank, Birmingham, AlabamaCease and Desist Order dated June 25, 2014 (PDF)Terminated May 14, 2018 Other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Barclays Bank plc, London, England and Barclays Bank plc, New York Branch, New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated August 16, 2010 (PDF)Terminated May 11, 2018 Oklahoma Capital Bank (formerly known as Freedom Bank of Oklahoma), Tulsa OklahomaWritten Agreement dated April 16, 2013 (PDF)Terminated May 10, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday asked for comment on a proposed rule to simplify and tailor compliance requirements relating to the "Volcker rule." By statute, the Volcker rule generally prohibits banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading and from owning or controlling hedge funds or private equity funds. Since regulations implementing the Volcker rule were finalized in December 2013 by five federal agencies, experience has shown that the complexity of the rule has created compliance uncertainty for firms subject to the rule. The proposed changes are intended to streamline the rule by eliminating or modifying requirements that are not necessary to effectively implement the statute, without diminishing the safety and soundness of banking entities. "The agencies responsible for implementing the rule see many opportunities to simplify it and improve it in ways that will allow firms to conduct appropriate activities without undue burden and without sacrificing safety and soundness," Chairman Jerome H. Powell said. "The proposal will address some of the uncertainty and complexity that now make it difficult for firms to know how best to comply, and for supervisors to know that they are in compliance." The proposed changes were jointly developed by all five agencies responsible for administration of the Volcker rule--the Federal Reserve Board, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Specifically, the proposed changes would: "The specific elements of this proposal are drawn from experience--the shared experience of all five responsible agencies and of policymakers at those agencies with wide and varied backgrounds during the four years that the Volcker rule regulations have been in force," said Randal K. Quarles, the Board's Vice Chairman for Supervision. "By focusing the application of the rule on those firms with the highest levels of activity covered by the statue, and by clarifying and simplifying the compliance regime, we can promote safety and soundness while reducing unnecessary burdens." The recently enacted Economic Growth, Regulatory Reform, and Consumer Protection Act made several changes to the statutory Volcker rule provisions. Among other things, the Act exempted community banks--firms with less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets and with total trading assets and liabilities that are not more than five percent of total consolidated assets--from the Volcker rule restrictions. Formal implementation of the Volcker rule-related changes contained in the Act will occur in a separate rulemaking by the agencies. Comment will be accepted for 60 days after the proposal's publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF Information Collection 1 (PDF) Information Collection 2 (PDF) Opening Statement by Chairman Jerome H. Powell Opening Statement by Vice Chairman of Supervision Randal K. Quarles Statement by Governor Lael Brainard Open Board Meeting on May 30, 2018
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it has fined The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., $54.75 million for the firm's unsafe and unsound practices in its foreign exchange (FX) trading business. The Board levied the fine for deficiencies in Goldman's internal controls and oversight of traders who buy and sell U.S. dollars and foreign currencies for the firm's own accounts and for customers. The firm failed to detect and address its traders' use of electronic chatrooms to communicate with competitors about trading positions, including around benchmark fixes, and failed to detect and address the disclosure of confidential client information. The Board's order requires Goldman to improve its controls and compliance risk management for the firm's FX trading. The Board coordinated its enforcement action with the New York State Department of Financial Services. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: The Bank of Fayette County (PDF), Piperton, TennesseeOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated April 26, 2018 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Consent prohibition of Nathaniel Frazier, former Branch Manager of Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, for engaging in improper practices regarding credit origination Consent prohibition of Jeffrey Garrison, former Financial Services Specialist of Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, for engaging in improper practices regarding credit origination The Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Hometown Bancshares, Inc., Carthage, MissouriWritten Agreement dated April 28, 2009 (PDF)Terminated May 16, 2018 Other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. The Federal Reserve Board's latestReport on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Householdsfinds that economic well-being has generally improved over the past five years. The report notes that 74 percent of adults reported they were doing at least OK financially in 2017‑‑up 10 percentage points from the first survey in 2013. Even so, notable differences remain across race, ethnicity, education groups, and locations and many individuals still struggle to repay college loans, handle small emergency expenses, and manage retirement savings. The report draws from the Board's fifth annual Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) and examines the economic well-being and financial lives of Americans and their families. In November and December 2017, more than 12,000 people participated in the survey. They described their experiences on a wide range of topics, including income, employment, unexpected expenses, banking and credit, housing, education, and retirement planning. Among the new topics covered in this year's report is the relationship between the opioid epidemic and local economic conditions. One in five adults personally knows someone who has been addicted to opioids, and those who do have somewhat less favorable assessments of economic conditions. Still, over half of adults exposed to opioid addiction say that their local economy is good or excellent, suggesting a role for factors beyond economic conditions in understanding the crisis. "This year's survey finds that rising levels of employment are translating into improved financial conditions for many but not all Americans, with one third now reporting they are living comfortably and another 40 percent reporting they are doing ok financially," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Lael Brainard. "Even with the improvement in financial outlook, however, 40 percent still say they cannot cover a $400 emergency expense, or would do so by borrowing or selling something. We learned that about one in five adults knows someone with addiction to opioids or painkillers; whites are about twice as likely to have such exposure as blacks and Hispanics; and exposure does not vary much by education level or by local economic conditions." The Board's SHED data looks at how individuals are managing their finances and making decisions vital to their financial lives and futures. Alongside the economic gains observed since the Great Recession, this report also notes challenges faced by people who are trying to piece together multiple jobs or who are struggling to establish emergency savings. The Board will continue to follow these developments. Among the report's other key findings: Other data on urban and rural geographic differences and national and local views are also in the report. Survey data files from the report are available for download. The report, downloadable data, and a video summarizing the survey's findings may be found at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households(PDF) Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday welcomed the release of a global strategy for reducing wholesale payments fraud and reaffirms its commitment to work collaboratively with domestic and international stakeholders to promote the safety and resiliency of the wholesale payments ecosystem worldwide. The strategy, published today in areportby the Bank for International Settlement's Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI), sets forth an approach to reducing the risk of wholesale payments fraud related to endpoint security with the broader objective of supporting financial stability. A safe, reliable, secure and efficient wholesale payment system, which supports banks, financial market infrastructures, and other financial institutions and service providers, is an essential component of a well-functioning financial system. The seven elements of the strategy are designed to address all areas relevant to preventing, detecting, responding to, and communicating about, payments fraud. The high-level nature of the elements provides participants in the ecosystem with the flexibility to implement the strategy in accordance with their unique architecture and processes. As noted in the report, each CPMI member central bank has committed to acting as a catalyst for carrying out the strategy in its jurisdiction and actively monitoring progress. Accordingly, Federal Reserve Board staff, in close collaboration with the Federal Reserve Banks, will continue related efforts to advance the security of the wholesale payments ecosystem. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Recent data suggest that growth of household spending moderated from its strong fourth-quarter pace, while business fixed investment continued to grow strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have moved close to 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with further gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace in the medium term and labor market conditions will remain strong. Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to run near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. Risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Thomas I. Barkin; Raphael W. Bostic; Lael Brainard; Loretta J. Mester; Randal K. Quarles; and John C. Williams. Implementation Note issued May 2, 2018
The Federal Reserve plans to continue its previously announced periodic testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) with one operation in May. These operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve plans to conduct a similar routine TDF test operation in the second half of 2018. The schedule and terms for future test operations will be announced at later dates. On May 17, 2018, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its TDF. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $250,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. EDT to 12:30 p.m. EDT, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.frbservices.org/sign-in/term-deposit-facility.html) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. EDT and 12:00 p.m. EDT. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (https://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/reserves-central/term-deposit-facility/index.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (https://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/reserves-central/term-deposit-facility/index.html). Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttps://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/reserves-central/term-deposit-facility/index.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Chairman Jerome H. Powell At "350 years of Central Banking: The Past, the Present and the Future," A Sveriges Riksbank anniversary conference sponsored by the Riksbank and the Riksdag, Stockholm, Sweden Thank you for inviting me here to celebrate this important milestone. Today is a special day for all of us, since the founding of the Riksbank 350 years ago marked the beginning of central banking.1As we meet to discuss the challenges and opportunities the future may hold, it is worth pausing to note that the three and a half centuries since the Riksbank's founding have seen economic growth and dynamism the breadth and duration of which have been unprecedented in world history. The Swedish innovation we celebrate today, I believe, is a vital part of the financial foundations that support the continuation of rising prosperity. In my comments today, I will explore the road ahead for public transparency and accountability of central banks in a time of intense scrutiny and declining trust in public institutions in many places around the world. As you know, the importance of transparency and accountability to monetary policymaking was recognized and became firmly entrenched in practice over the past few decades. The Riksbank has been a leader in this transparency revolution. Today I will focus on the less-often emphasized but critically important role transparency and accountability play in regulatory and financial stability policies. To preview my conclusions, public transparency and accountability around both financial stability and monetary policy have become all the more important in light of the extraordinary actions taken by central banks in response to the Global Financial Crisis. Financial stability policymaking has evolved from managing individual crises as they arise to establishing a policy framework that emphasizes prevention. This framework now includes measures to increase the resiliency of the financial system; enhanced monitoring of financial institutions and of building risks to the system; and measures, such as resolution planning, that require firms to take steps today to better prepare for future episodes of stress. These innovations have placed special demands on transparency and accountability, and we have worked hard to explain them to the public. The framework is still evolving, and we will need to be open to making changes and to new ways to enhance transparency and accountability. Government, Central Banking, and IndependenceThis is a challenging moment for central banking. Opinion polls show that trust in government and public institutions is at historic lows.2In this environment, central banks cannot take our measure of independence for granted. For monetary policy, the case for central bank independence rests on the demonstrated benefits of insulating monetary policy decisions from shorter-term political considerations. But for a quarter century, inflation has been low and inflation expectations anchored. We must not forget the lessons of the past, when a lack of central bank independence led to episodes of runaway inflation and subsequent economic contractions. As for financial stability, the crisis and the severe recession that followed revealed serious flaws at many private and public institutions, including shortcomings in supervision and regulation. The crisis and its aftermath led central banks to take extraordinary actions, actions that challenged the ingenuity of experts in the field and were understandably difficult to explain and justify to a skeptical public. While these actions were authorized by law and on the whole necessary to avert the complete collapse of the financial system's ability to service households and businesses, they may have also contributed to the erosion of public trust. Central banks are assigned narrow but important mandates. For monetary policy, the Fed's mandate is to keep inflation low and stable and to achieve maximum employment. For financial sector supervision and regulation, part of our mandate is to foster the safety and soundness of individual institutions. In addition, we have a responsibility, shared with other government agencies, to promote financial stability. I view this responsibility as being highly complementary to other aspects of our mission: Financial stability promotes sustainable economic growth, and a stable, well-functioning financial system is an effective transmission channel for monetary policy. Indeed, there can be no macroeconomic stability without financial stability. Within our narrow mandates, to safeguard against political interference, central banks are afforded instrument independence‑‑that is, we are given considerable freedom to choose the means to achieve legislatively-assigned goals. While the focus is often on monetary policy independence, research suggests that a degree of independence in regulatory and financial stability matters improves the stability of the banking system and leads to better outcomes.3For this reason, governments in many countries, including the United States, have granted some institutional and budgetary independence to their financial regulators. Financial Stability, Transparency and AccountabilityIn a democratic system, any degree of independence brings with it the obligation to provide appropriate transparency. In turn, transparency provides an essential basis for accountability and democratic legitimacy by enabling effective legislative oversight and keeping the public informed.4Of course, central banks also need to stick closely to our mandates; the case for independence weakens to the extent that central banks stray into issues that the legislature has not assigned to us.5 There is also an important policy effectiveness argument in favor of transparency. In the financial stability arena, there is no better example of this than the role that the first round of stress tests played during the crisis in restoring confidence in the U.S. banking system.6So in the financial stability realm, the case for enhanced transparency is not just about being accountable; it is also about providing credible information that can help restore and sustain public confidence in the financial system. The post-crisis regulatory system recognizes the importance of enhanced transparency, both about financial institutions themselves and about the processes and expectations of regulators and supervisors. Before the crisis, supervision focused on the safety and soundness of individual institutions and was insufficiently attentive to risk in the financial system as a whole. Supervisory judgments about firms were shared with the public only in rare and exceptional circumstances. Financial stability tools were deployed after the fact, to address specific events that emerged to threaten stability. It is an understatement to say that this approach proved inadequate in the crisis. The post-crisis regime has shifted to implementing preventive policies well in advance of any crisis.7Newly established ex ante policies include building the resilience of institutions by requiring more and higher-quality capital and liquidity buffers; a regime of stress tests undertaken by supervisors; and resolution planning, which requires firms to analyze their own potential for distress or failure and create a plan to be used in the event of bankruptcy. These post-crisis policies have benefitted from public solicitation of feedback and in many cases from consideration in open meetings of the Board of Governors. Transparency and incorporation of public feedback in these areas have produced more effective supervision and regulation. For example, transparent and clearly communicated policies make it easier for regulated entities to know what is expected of them and how best to comply. Of course, as with any large-scale, complex undertaking, the standards adopted over the past decade can undoubtedly be improved. At the Fed, we are committed to transparency as we assess the efficacy and efficiency of post-crisis reforms. In a sense, stress testing is itself a step forward in transparency. Pre-crisis, supervisors' views of the risks facing our most systemically important firms--and the firms' ability to understand and survive these risks--were shrouded in secrecy. Post-crisis, as part of our stress-testing regime, these supervisory views and expectations are transparent. We expect that these firms will have capital, liquidity, and risk-management capabilities that are adequate for the firms not only to survive, but to continue to perform their key functions even in the event of truly severe stress, akin to the global financial crisis. We make a great deal of information regarding the stress tests public, including the scenarios we use, portfolio-level projected losses for participating firms, and, of course, the results. We have also proposed for public comment a range of ways to further enhance the transparency of the supervisory stress tests. This detailed disclosure provides the public with a wealth of information on how these institutions would perform under severe stress. And this transparency both enhances public confidence and holds banking regulators accountable for their judgments. At the Federal Reserve we use a variety of additional means to enhance public understanding of our supervisory and financial stability efforts and judgments. The Board's Vice Chairman for Supervision testifies before the Congress twice a year. The Board staff's assessment of financial stability is discussed four times a year at Federal Open Market Committee meetings, and these discussions are summarized in the meeting's published minutes. And, since 2013, the semiannualMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress has contained a review of financial stability conditions. The Way ForwardThe post-crisis framework remains novel and unfamiliar. Some of these new policies, such as stress testing and resolution planning, are inherently complex and challenging for all involved. As a result, transparency and accountability around financial stability tools present particular challenges. We will continue to strive to find better ways to enhance transparency around our approach to preserving financial stability. Efforts to engage with the public‑‑including consumer groups, academics, and the financial sector‑‑are likely to lead to improved policies. Moreover, ongoing dialogue will work to enhance public trust, as well as our ability to adapt to new threats as they emerge. There is every reason to expect that technology and communications will continue to rapidly evolve, and to affect the financial system and financial stability in ways that we cannot fully anticipate. While future innovations may well improve the delivery of financial services and make the system stronger, they may also contain the seeds of potential future systemic vulnerabilities. We will need to keep up with the pace of innovation, which will doubtless require changes to our approach to financial stability. As we consider such changes, it will remain critically important to provide transparency and accountability. By doing so, we strengthen the foundation of democratic legitimacy that enables central banks to serve the needs of our citizens, in the long and proud tradition of the Riksbank. References Bernanke, Ben S. (2013). "Stress Testing Banks: What Have We Learned?" speech delivered at "Maintaining Financial Stability: Holding a Tiger by the Tail," a financial markets conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, held in Stone Mountain, Ga., April 8. -------- (2017). "Monetary Policy in a New Era," paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute, Washington, October 2. Bordo, Michael D. (2007). "A Brief History of Central Banks," Economic Commentary. Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, December. Goodhart, Charles, and Rosa Lastra (2018). "Populism and Central Bank Independence,"Open Economies Review,vol. 29 (February), pp. 49-68. Hogue, Henry, Marc Labonte, and Baird Webel (2017).Independence of Federal Financial Regulators: Structure, Funding, and Other Issues,Congressional Research Service Report 7-5700. Washington: CRS. Kaufmann, Christine, and Rolf Weber (forthcoming). "Transparency of Central Banks' Policies," in Peter Conti-Brown and Rosa Maria Lastra, eds.,Research Handbook on Central Banking. Northampton, Mass.: Edwin Elgar Publishing, pp. 518-34. Pew Research Center (2017). "Public Trust in Government: 1958-2017," webpage, Pew Research Center. Tucker, Paul (2017). "What Is Macroprudential Policy for? Making It Safe for Central Bankers (PDF)," speech delivered at "Financial Systems and the Real Economy," a conference sponsored by Bank Negara Malaysia and the Bank for International Settlements, held in Kuala Lumpur, March 31. 1.See Bordo (2007).Return to text 2.For example, see Pew Research Center (2017).Return to text 3.Technical implementation and oversight are two areas where instrument independence may be especially helpful. See Hogue, Labonte, and Webel (2017) and the references therein. Also, the need for some regulatory independence is not exclusive to the central bank; see Bernanke (2017) for a discussion.Return to text 4.See Kaufmann and Weber (forthcoming).Return to text 5.See Goodhart and Lastra (2017).Return to text 6.See Bernanke (2013).Return to text 7.See Tucker (2017).Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee on Friday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2019: January 29-30 (Tuesday-Wednesday) March 19-20 (Tuesday-Wednesday) April 30-May 1 (Tuesday-Wednesday) June 18-19 (Tuesday-Wednesday) July 30-31 (Tuesday-Wednesday) September 17-18 (Tuesday-Wednesday) October 29-30 (Tuesday-Wednesday) December 10-11 (Tuesday-Wednesday) January 28-29, 2020 (Tuesday-Wednesday) The Chairman's quarterly news conferences will take place following the March, June, September, and December meetings. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lael Brainard At the Association of Neighborhood and Housing Development Eighth Annual Community Development Conference Build.Community.Power, New York, New York I want to thank Ben Dulchin and the Association of Neighborhood and Housing Development (ANHD) for inviting me to be here with you today. While New York is known globally as a cultural hub that attracts the world to its doorstep, it is known locally as a city of neighborhoods. Like other cities across this country, New York's future is bound to the vitality of its neighborhoods as places to live, work, learn, play, worship, and invest.1 Neighborhoods have been the focus of ANHD's work for over 40 years. The organization's success is a function of its unwavering focus on preserving and strengthening the quality of life in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods across the five boroughs. The mission of each of the members of ANHD is to strengthen these communities. Together, your organizations are providing capacity building, advocacy, and services for the benefit of your communities and the city as a whole. Like many of the nation's metropolitan areas, New York City has rebounded since the recession and is thriving.2That, however, has not been the experience for many. Many of the city's residents have not fully recovered, and some have fallen further behind. Here, as elsewhere in the country, there remain important gaps in economic opportunity. Powerful research now demonstrates that persistent gaps in economic opportunity are connected to the health of neighborhoods. The effects of place on opportunity can stretch from one generation to the next. Raj Chetty and others have shown that upward mobility can vary immensely by neighborhood even within the same metropolitan area. The longer a child lives in a neighborhood of opportunity--a neighborhood that is racially integrated and has a strong middle class, strong family structures, more social capital, and better schools--the more likely that a child will do better than their parents economically in adulthood and navigating a path of upward mobility.3 As I have noted previously, these disparities matter for growth and prosperity. If there are large disparities in opportunity, such that enterprise, exertion, and investments reap lower returns in some communities than others, then families and small businesses in these communities will invest less in the future, and potential growth will fall short.4Although there are important implications at the national level for growth and prosperity, to the extent that the roots of the disparities in opportunity and mobility lie in local communities, an important part of the solution is likely to be investments in those communities.5 The Community Reinvestment ActThat one powerful insight--the importance of investment in communities--lies at the heart of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). The CRA is one of the principal tools the Congress has provided for improving investment and development in lower-income communities. Implementing this law effectively is one of the important responsibilities of the banking agencies in promoting strong outcomes locally that reverberate nationally. So let me turn to the role of the CRA in supporting local efforts to strengthen low- and moderate-income neighborhoods and offer my preliminary thoughts on the opportunity before us to make the regulations even more effective in this regard. The CRA was enacted in 1977 to combat the legacy of redlining--literally, the demarcation in red ink of neighborhoods deemed too risky for lending. Federal lending agencies used these redlined maps in deciding where to guarantee mortgage loans.6Not surprisingly, the resulting deprivation of credit stifled opportunity for the people living in these areas. Through the CRA, Congress requires the federal banking agencies to encourage banks and thrifts to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with safety and soundness. It requires the Federal Reserve and other agencies to evaluate how well banking institutions help meet those needs and to assign ratings to their performance.7The CRA further requires the agencies to make public both the ratings and their written evaluations of the banks' performance. This transparency provides an incentive for banks to work with their communities to meet the needs of low- and moderate-income members and provides important information to enable community members to engage meaningfully with banks. Research has demonstrated that the CRA has had a positive effect on low- and moderate- income neighborhoods.8The CRA is unique in that it puts decisionmaking about the community's needs and priorities in the hands of local stakeholders: financial institutions that lend and invest, community organizations that deliver services and develop real estate, and state and local governments that direct incentives and subsidies. The enactment of other laws around the same time supported the CRA's success, including the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, which requires lenders to report the location of their home mortgage lending and the race and income of borrowers. Much has changed in the years since the CRA was enacted, including technology-driven changes in the delivery of financial services, and it is high time to consider corresponding improvements to the regulations. Both banks and community organizations have offered a variety of suggestions for improving the CRA regulations and their implementation in the last several years. We are undertaking discussions with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, with which we have traditionally issued joint rulemakings on the CRA. The Federal Reserve has long been interested in engaging in an interagency review of the CRA regulations, so we are pleased to participate in this process. In addition, the Treasury Department recently completed an extensive outreach effort related to modernizing the CRA regulations. CRA is a vital tool to address the credit needs of low- and moderate-income communities, and I believe the time is ripe for a refresh to make it even more relevant to today's challenges. There are five principles that can help guide our efforts. The Importance of PlaceFirst, we should update the area in which the agencies assess a bank's CRA activities while retaining the core focus on place. This is the most important aspect of refreshing the CRA, and also the one that will require the most care. As our Federal Advisory Council noted, "...a bank's ability to engage in meaningful community development efforts continues to require a meaningful knowledge of and presence in local communities."9A significant strength of CRA evaluations is that a bank's performance is evaluated taking into account the demographics of its communities, the types of housing and businesses they serve, and the other financial institutions serving those communities. The current regulations use branches and deposit-taking ATMs as a proxy for the communities the bank serves because these were the primary mechanisms for delivering services when the CRA was enacted and for many years subsequently. This reflected an environment where interstate banking was not allowed, and physical branches were necessary for deposit taking and lending. Today, changes in technology and consumer preferences have made it possible for banks to serve customers far beyond their physical branches and deposit-taking ATMs--via online and mobile platforms. Even so, as much as technology has made banking transactions more convenient for customers, it has not eliminated the need for branches. For large parts of the country, branches and deposit-taking ATMs remain an important way that banks engage with a community. Branches and ATMs are still necessary for depositing and withdrawing cash. Branches also provide personal service and assistance to consumers and business customers. They provide a presence for lenders to get to know borrowers and the communities in which they live, lend, and invest. As our Community Advisory Council recently emphasized, "[f]or many rural and LMI populations, bank branches remain critical for the provision of bank loans, investments, and services."10 Recent studies measuring the impact of branch closures on credit availability in neighborhoods demonstrate that branches still matter, particularly with respect to accessing small business credit.11The Federal Reserve Bank of New York found that access to small business credit declines and the rates for small business loans increase as the distance between the bank and the borrower grows.12Similarly, the large majority of mortgage lending continues to be located in one or more of a bank's delineated assessment areas--that is, near a physical branch. This research also found that people in low-income census tracts were more than twice as likely to live in a banking desert--an area without a branch within 10 miles--than those in higher-income tracts.13When they are cut off from mainstream banking institutions, some consumers rely on more expensive alternatives that include payday loans, auto title loans, pawn shops, and check cashing services. Banks vary widely in terms of the types of services they offer and the mechanisms they use for reaching their customers. On one end of the spectrum, many community banks still rely primarily on branches and ATMs to reach their customers, with mobile functionality offered primarily to enhance the customer experience. In the middle of the spectrum, regional and national banking organizations are using online and mobile app capabilities to attract and retain customers well beyond their physical footprint. At the other end of the spectrum, online banks employ business models that reach customers across much or all of America without relying on branches. Although these online banks may provide the same retail products and services as a traditional bank with a branch network, because they have only one location, they are evaluated for CRA purposes in the area around that location, rather than in the many areas where they have customers. Still other banks offer a limited set of credit products or wholesale services. Take, for instance, the example of Industrial Loan Companies (ILCs), which have CRA obligations as state-chartered insured depository institutions. ILCs are owned by corporations rather than bank holding companies and are typically chartered to provide credit cards or other forms of financing related to their parent company's business. Many large ILCs are chartered in Utah and are evaluated on their CRA performance in Salt Lake City, even though they lend nationally. The result is a saturated market for community development lending and investment in Salt Lake City. At the same time, other areas in Utah and beyond have important community development opportunities that may go unmet. At a minimum, revised CRA regulations should allow banks with this type of business model to expand CRA activities beyond the area surrounding its branch so that the community and economic development needs of more underserved communities can be met. Branches are important vehicles for reaching small business customers and low-income consumers, but they are not the only way. In considering ways to revise the CRA regulations, the agencies should be thoughtful about how to make the areas in which we evaluate CRA performance more meaningful to both banks and low- and moderate-income communities. For community banks that rely on branches to serve their customers, the current assessment area approach may need only small adjustments. For banks that serve their customers through a variety of approaches, assessing their broader deposit-taking and loan-making footprint might make sense. For large wholesale banks, it might make sense to evaluate CRA activity in a broader area and to encourage them to spread their investments and services to underserved areas. The CRA regulations should be updated in a way that is appropriate for different business models. To the extent that banks are able to serve the needs in low- and moderate-income communities through additional channels, it is important they receive due consideration, while CRA revisions should also continue to recognize the importance of sustaining branches in communities where they are needed. Opportunities in Underserved AreasThe second, and related, principle guiding our CRA refresh is that the regulations should encourage banks to seek out opportunities in underserved areas. As I noted earlier, the CRA recognizes that banks make a unique contribution. Banks are able to make targeted and valuable investments because of their stake in the local community and their knowledge of it. As a long-term stakeholder in a community, a bank's efforts to finance housing, small businesses, and community services are not just good business short-term, but also good investments long-term as residents improve their economic standing and use more banking services. Streamlining the CRA regulations and clarifying the performance measures could create stronger incentives for banks to pursue the less obvious, but potentially more impactful, projects that low- and moderate-income neighborhoods need the most to become areas of opportunity. We will want to update the CRA in ways that reduce the distortions that lead to some areas becoming credit "hot spots" and others credit deserts. Where there is a high density of banks relative to investment opportunities, the result of too many banks competing for too few CRA-qualified investments can be declining returns. Meanwhile, other areas have a difficult time attracting capital not because the social return on investment is low, but rather because they are not in a bank's major market, if they are served by a bank at all. However we define a bank's assessment areas in the future, the regulations need to be designed and implemented in a way that encourages banks to direct their community investment activities productively. TailoringThe third guiding principle is that the CRA regulations should be tailored to banks of different sizes and business models. We should set standards that are flexible enough to evaluate the CRA performance of a $100 million bank no less effectively than a $2 trillion bank. Banks seek clearer, simpler rules that result in more CRA activity with less burden. We believe this can be done while retaining the flexibility to evaluate a bank's CRA performance in light of its size, business model, capacity, and constraints as well as its community's demographics, economic conditions, and credit needs and opportunities. Regulatory revisions that do not contemplate evaluating CRA performance in context could arguably undermine the CRA's greatest attribute--its recognition that banks are uniquely situated to be responsive to the most important community and economic development needs in their communities. The typical small community bank focuses on serving its community through deposit and credit products and may not have the capacity to finance a major community development initiative. But as banks grow in size or specialize in different types of lending, they may have greater capacity to invest through additional channels. We should be sensitive to the ways in which a bank's business model, in addition to its size, influences the types of activities it undertakes to meet its CRA obligations. We will want to maintain the flexibility to ensure that, no matter the business line, a bank can meet its CRA obligation by doing what it has the expertise to do well. And as we look to improve our CRA evaluations, the agencies will need to determine what kind of data will be necessary to evaluate a bank's CRA performance based on the activities it chooses and which banks should collect and report that data based on their scale and business model. Consistency and PredictabilityThe fourth principle is that the revised regulations should promote greater consistency and predictability in evaluations and ratings, both within and across the agencies. The members of our Federal Advisory Council have recommended that the regulations "need to be consistent across the [a]gencies and provide for all regulated financial institutions to be subject to the same CRA 'crediting', examination, and remedial standards."14Banks have expressed understandable concern regarding the variation they see in evaluations. Banks seek greater clarity in advance about what activities will qualify for CRA consideration. They want to understand how the qualitative criteria--those measuring the impact and responsiveness of loans, investments, and services--will be factored into their ratings. This concern is not limited to banks. The community organizations and local governments that are trying to attract bank financing to their projects need this clarity, too. Regulatory streamlining can help to promote consistency, as would regular examiner training. Fair Credit AccessThe fifth and final principle for CRA modernization is to ensure that revised CRA regulations support its position as one of several mutually reinforcing laws designed to promote an inclusive financial services industry. The central thrust of the CRA is to encourage banks to ensure that all creditworthy borrowers have fair access to credit. For banks to be successful in meeting the credit needs of their entire community, it follows that they must guard against discriminatory or unfair and deceptive lending practices. Ensuring fair access to credit is difficult and requires ongoing vigilance.15For this reason, taking a holistic view of closely related issues is likely to be the best way to fulfill the purpose of the CRA, as one of several important laws intended to promote fair financial access. Affordable Housing and the CRAI want to briefly connect the dots between the high priority we put on strengthening the CRA and the pressing challenge of affordable housing that is a key focus of the work that you all do. Access to affordable housing connects families concretely to place and can be a source of strength or fragility. Pew just released a study showing that 38 percent of renter households in America are spending more than 30 percent of their pretax income on rent, representing a 19 percent increase from 2001.16The percent of renter households that are spending half or more of their pretax income on housing increased by 42 percent during the same period. Households that spend a high fraction of their income on rent often may find themselves unable to pursue proven strategies to achieve financial security and invest in their family's future. They may need to turn to costly short-term sources of credit to cover emergency expenses. Some may experience eviction if there is an unexpected expense or loss of income. To manage the high cost of housing, workers may be compelled to live far from where they work, rent substandard units, or resort to overcrowding. Research shows that households that live far from work often pay a large share of their budget in commuting costs.17As a society, we need to do better in ensuring that affordable housing is available where it is needed. The supply of affordable housing is a good example of a problem of national scope whose solution must be tailored to local needs and economic conditions. This audience knows better than most about the complex dynamics that affect housing at the local level. Local decisions on land use, zoning, taxes, and leveraging of federal funding, and whether community needs are prioritized, are at the heart of whether neighborhoods thrive. I'm not going to suggest that there are any easy answers to housing affordability. Still, the CRA is one of the important policy levers that can make a difference by encouraging solutions that are tailored to local needs and circumstances. It does this by encouraging banks to provide affordable and sustainable mortgage products to qualified low- and moderate-income families. This helps those families have a chance to purchase homes sustainably and build equity. In addition, by encouraging banks to work with the community to identify tailored rental and homeownership investment opportunities, the CRA helps encourage the construction of affordable housing where it is needed most. The Path ForwardIn our effort to refresh the CRA regulations, we will continue to honor the purpose of the CRA by encouraging banks to engage in local community and economic development initiatives. I am confident that there are ways to update the areas where we evaluate a bank's CRA performance without losing the core focus on place. We should do more to encourage banks to offer deposit and credit products designed to help rent-burdened customers save for homeownership and build strong credit scores that will enable them to succeed in obtaining mortgage credit on favorable terms. We should do more to encourage banks to lend to the underserved entrepreneurs and small businesses that hold the promise of providing jobs and growing local economies. Even as the economy looks strong overall, significant challenges remain for low- and moderate-income areas, making the CRA and its focus on local credit needs more important than ever. I look forward to hearing from you over the next several months to help inform our interagency effort to refresh the CRA regulations. This conference is an opportunity for ANHD members to envision the future for New York's neighborhoods and discuss critical actions to achieve that vision. I know you have a full agenda today, replete with pressing conversations on the compelling challenges that face your neighborhoods. I want to applaud your work to ensure that all of New York's neighborhoods are communities of opportunity. Thank you. 1. I am grateful to Theresa Stark of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing these remarks. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. According to the most recent report by the New York City Comptroller, the city's GDP grew 2.7 percent in the first quarter of 2018 as compared to 2.3 percent for the nation, and the unemployment rate for the city fell to 4.3 percent, the lowest rate on record. See "NYC Economic Growth Slows Down, but Still Surpasses the Nation".Return to text 3. Seehttp://www.equality-of-opportunity.org/.Return to text 4. See, for example, Lael Brainard,Why Opportunity and Inclusion Matter to America's Economic Strength,May 22, 2017. Studies have shown inequality is associated with lower long-term growth and with lower income growth. See, for example, Heather Boushey and Carter C. Price,How Are Economic Inequality and Growth Connected: A Review of Recent Research(PDF)(Washington, DC: Washington Center for Equitable Growth, October 2014).Return to text 5. See Raj Chetty https://www.citylab.com/equity/2017/10/to-revive-the-american-dream-take-a-neighborhood-precision-approach/543630/.Return to text 6. See http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/10/housing-discrimination-redlining-maps/ for details about how maps created by the Home Owners' Loan Corporation in the 1930s were used to designate areas considered hazardous for mortgage lending and influenced whether mortgage loans qualified for government guarantees from the Federal Housing Administration. To view interactive historical maps, seehttps://dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/redlining/#loc=10/44.1788/-84.8433&opacity=0.8.Return to text 7. See 12 U.S.C. § 2901; the ratings are Outstanding, Satisfactory, Needs to Improve, and Substantial Non-compliance.Return to text 8. CRA-related mortgage loans had delinquency rates lower than the average across all 2006-vintage mortgages and sharply lower than those of subprime loans; see Neil Bhutta, and Glenn B. Canner, "Mortgage Market Conditions and Borrower Outcomes: Evidence from the 2012 HMDA Data and Matched HMDA-Credit Record Data,"Federal Reserve Bulletin99 (November 2013). In addition, a study of mortgage loans originated between 2003 and 2006 as part of a CRA targeted, low- to moderate-income homebuyer program found that they performed nearly as well as prime loans and much better than subprime mortgage loans through the financial crisis; see Lei Ding, Roberto G. Quercia, Janneke Ratcliffe, and Wei Lei, "Risky Borrowers or Risky Mortgages: Disaggregating Effects Using Propensity Score Models,"Journal of Real Estate Research33 no. 2 (2011): 245-77. Another analysis found evidence of a substantial increase in mortgage lending due to the CRA--especially among low-income borrowers--with no measurable rise in the likelihood of default; see Daniel Ringo, "Mortgage Lending, Default, and the Community Reinvestment Act," June 15, 2017.Return to text 9. Federal Reserve Board Federal Advisory Council,Record of Meeting (PDF), May 2018.Return to text 10. Federal Reserve Board Community Advisory Council,Record of Meeting (PDF), May 4, 2018.Return to text 11. See Hoai-Luu Q. Nguyen,Do Bank Branches Still Matter? The Effect of Closings on Local Economic Outcomes,October 2015. The reason is the information-intensive nature of the underwriting process. Even in areas with plenty of bank branches, declines in small businesses lending because of the loss of the relationship between a small business owner and their loan officer were significant. Once broken, the study found that those relationships take years to replace. The impact of branch closures were found to be more severe in tracts with lower median income, a higher fraction of minority households, and where firms were, on average, closer to their lending.Return to text 12. Donald Morgan, Maxim Pinkovskiy, and Bryan Yang, "Banking Deserts, Branch Closings and Soft Information,"Liberty Street Economicsblog, March 7, 2015.Return to text 13. See, again, Morgan, Pinkovskiy, and Yang, March 7, 2015; between 2009 and 2014, the fraction of low-income tracts that were also banking deserts increased 0.17 percentage points compared to a 0.06 percentage point increase in higher-income tracts.Return to text 14. Federal Reserve Board Federal Advisory Council, Record of Meeting, May 2018.Return to text 15. Richard Rothstein,The Color of Law: The Forgotten History of How Our Government Segregated America(New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2017).Return to text 16. Seehttp://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/reports/2018/04/american-families-face-a-growing-rent-burden.Return to text 17. See, for example, the Center for Neighborhood Technology's Housing and Transportation (H+T) Affordability Index athttps://htaindex.cnt.org/about/.Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "Currencies, Capital, and Central Bank Balances: A Policy Conference," a Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference, Stanford University, Stanford, California Revised Version: August 3, 2018 Thank you very much to the Hoover Institution for hosting this important conference and to John Taylor and John Cochrane for inviting me to participate.1In my capacity as both the Vice Chairman for Supervision at the Board of Governors and a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), part of my job is to consider the intersection of financial regulatory and monetary policy issues, the subject of my discussion today. This topic is both complex and dynamic, especially as both regulation and the implementation of monetary policy continue to evolve. One important issue for us at the Fed, and the one that I will spend some time reflecting on today, is how post-crisis financial regulation, through its incentives for bank behavior, may influence the size and composition of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet in the long run. Obviously, the whole excessively kaleidoscopic body of financial regulation is admittedly difficult to address in the time we have today, so I will focus on a particular component -- the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR--and its link to banks' demand for U.S. central bank reserve balances. Besides illuminating this particular issue, I hope my discussion will help illustrate the complexities associated with the interconnection of regulatory and monetary policy issues in general. Also, let me emphasize at the outset that I will be touching on some issues that the Board and the FOMC are in the process of observing and evaluating and, in some cases, on which we may be far from reaching any final decisions. As such, my thoughts on these issues are my own and are likely to evolve, benefiting from further discussion and our continued monitoring of bank behavior and financial markets over time. Monetary Policy and the Efficiency of the Financial SystemBefore I delve into the more specific complicated subject of how one type of bank regulation affects the Fed's balance sheet, let me say a few words about financial regulation more generally. As I have said previously, I view promoting the safety, soundness, andefficiencyof the financial system as one of the most important roles of the Board. Improving efficiency of the financial system is not an isolated goal. The task is to enhance efficiency while maintaining the system's resiliency. Take, for example, the Board's two most recent and material proposals, the stress capital buffer and the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio (eSLR). The proposal to modify the eSLR, in particular, initially raised questions in the minds of some as to whether it would reduce the ability of the banking system to weather shocks. A closer look at the proposal shows that the opposite is true. The proposed change simply restores the original intent of leverage requirements as a backstop measure to risk-based capital requirements. As we have seen, a leverage requirement that is too high favors high-risk activities and disincentivizes low-risk activities. We had initially calibrated the leverage ratio at a level that caused it to be the binding constraint for a number of our largest banks. As a result, those banks had an incentive to add risk rather than reduce risk in their portfolios because the capital cost of each additional asset was the same whether it was risky or safe, and the riskier assets would produce the higher return. The proposed recalibration eliminates this incentive by returning this leverage ratio to a level that is a backstop rather than the driver of decisions at the margin. Yet, because of the complex way our capital regulations work together--with risk-based constraints and stress tests regulating capital at both the operating and holding company levels--this improvement in incentives is obtained with virtually no change in the overall capital requirements of the affected firms. Federal Reserve staff estimate the proposal would potentially reduce capital requirements across the eight large banks subject to the proposal by $400 million, or 0.04 percent of the $955 billion in capital these banks held as of September 2017.2So this recalibration is a win-win: a material realignment of incentives to reduce a regulatory encouragement to take on risk at a time when we want to encourage prudent behavior without any material capital reduction or cost to the system's resiliency. Taken together, I believe these new rules will maintain the resiliency of the financial system and make our regulation simpler and more risk sensitive. Liquidity RegulationsLet me now back up to the time just before the financial crisis and briefly describe the genesis of liquidity regulations for banks. Banking organizations play a vital role in the economy in serving the financial needs of U.S. households and businesses. They perform this function in part through the mechanism of maturity transformation--that is, taking in short-term deposits, thereby making a form of short-term, liquid investments available to households and businesses, while providing longer-term credit to these same entities. This role, however, makes banking firms vulnerable to the potential for rapid, broad-based outflows of their funding (a so-called run), and these institutions must therefore balance the extent of their profitable maturity transformation against the associated liquidity risks.3Leading up to the 2007-09 financial crisis, some large firms were overly reliant on certain types of short-term funding and overly confident in their ability to replenish their funding when it came due. Thus, during the crisis, some large banks did not have sufficient liquidity, and liquidity risk management at a broader set of institutions proved inadequate at anticipating and compensating for potential outflows, especially when those outflows occurred rapidly.4 In the wake of the crisis, central banks and regulators around the world implemented a combination of regulatory reforms and stronger supervision to promote increased resilience in the financial sector. With regard to liquidity, the prudential regulations and supervisory programs of the U.S. banking agencies have resulted in significant increases in the liquidity positions and changes in the risk management of our largest institutions. And, working closely with other jurisdictions, we have also implemented global liquidity standards for the first time. These standards seek to limit the effect of short-term outflows and extended overall funding mismatches, thus improving banks' liquidity resilience. One particular liquidity requirement for large banking organizations is the Liquidity Coverage Ratio, or LCR, which the U.S. federal banking agencies adopted in 2014.5The LCR rule requires covered firms to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets (HQLA)‑‑in terms of both quantity and quality‑‑to cover potential outflows over a 30-day period of liquidity stress. The LCR rule allows firms to meet this requirement with a range of cash and securities and does not apply a haircut to reserve balances or Treasury securities based on the estimated liquidity value of those instruments in times of stress. Further, firms are required to demonstrate that they can monetize HQLA in a stress event without adversely affecting the firm's reputation or franchise. The rules have resulted in some changes in the behavior of large banks and in market dynamics. Large banks have adjusted their funding profiles by shifting to more stable funding sources. Indeed, taken together, the covered banks have reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale funding from about 50 percent of total assets in the years before the financial crisis to about 30 percent in recent years, and they have also reduced their reliance on contingent funding sources. Meanwhile, covered banks have also adjusted their asset profiles, materially increasing their holdings of cash and other highly liquid assets. In fact, these banks' holdings of HQLA have increased significantly, from fairly low levels at some firms in the lead-up to the crisis to an average of about 15 to 20 percent of total assets today.6A sizable portion of these assets currently consists of U.S. central bank reserve balances, in part because reserve balances, unlike other types of highly liquid assets, do not need to be monetized, but also, importantly, because of the conduct of the Fed's monetary policy, a topic to which I will next turn. How Does the LCR Interact with the Size of the Fed's Balance Sheet?With this backdrop, a relevant question for monetary policymakers is, what quantity of central bank reserve balances will banks likely want to hold, and, hence, how might the LCR affect banks' reserve demand and thereby the longer-run size of the Fed's balance sheet? Let me emphasize that policymakers have long been aware of the potential influence that regulations may have on reserve demand and thus the longer-run size of the Fed's balance sheet. And, of course, regulatory influences on banks' behavior, my focus today, is just one of many factors that could affect policymakers' decisions regarding the appropriate long-run size of the Fed's balance sheet.7In particular, in augmenting its Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, the FOMC stated in June 2017 that it "currently anticipates reducing the quantity of reserve balances, over time, to a level appreciably below that seen in recent years but larger than before the financial crisis" and went on to note that "the level will reflect the banking system's demand for reserve balances and the Committee's decisions about how to implement monetary policy most efficiently and effectively in the future."8 With that said, it is useful to begin by examining banks' current reserve holdings.Figure 1plots the aggregate level of reserve balances in the U.S. banking system, starting well before the financial crisis. As you can see, the current level of reserves‑‑at around $2 trillion‑‑is many orders of magnitude higher than the level that prevailed before the financial crisis, a result of the Fed's large-scale asset purchase programs or "quantitative easing." The vertical lines in the figure show key dates in the implementation of the LCR, including the initial Basel III international introduction of the regulation followed by its two-step introduction in the United States. A key takeaway from this figure is that the Fed was in the process of adding substantial quantities of reserve balances to the banking system while the LCR was being implemented‑‑and these two changes largely happened simultaneously. As a result, banks, in aggregate, are currently using reserve balances to meet a significant portion of their LCR requirements. In addition, because these changes happened together, it is reasonable to conclude that the current environment is likely not very informative about banks'underlyingdemand for reserve balances. But now the situation is changing, albeit very slowly. Last October, the Fed began to gradually and predictably reduce the size of its balance sheet.9The Fed is doing so by reinvesting the principal payments it receives on its securities holdings only to the extent that they exceed gradually increasing caps‑‑that is, the Fed is allowing securities to roll off its portfolio each month up to a specific maximum amount. This policy is also reducing reserve balances. So far, after the first seven months of the program, the Fed has shed about $120 billion of its securities holdings, which is a fairly modest amount when compared with the remaining size of its balance sheet. Consequently, the level of reserves in the banking system is still quite abundant. So, how many more reserve balances can be drained, and how small will the Fed's balance sheet get? Let me emphasize that this question is highly speculative‑‑we have not decidedex antethe desired long-run size of the Fed's balance sheet, nor, as I noted earlier, do we have a definitive handle on banks' long-run demand for reserve balances. Indeed, the FOMC has said that it "expects to learn more about the underlying demand for reserves during the process of balance sheet normalization."10Nonetheless, let me spend a little time reflecting on this challenging question. How banks respond to the Fed's reduction in reserve balances could, in theory, take a few different forms. One could envision that as the Fed reduces its securities holdings, a large share of which consists of Treasury securities, banks would easily replace any reduction in reserve balances with Treasury holdings, thereby keeping their LCRs roughly unchanged. According to this line of thought, because central bank reserve balances and Treasury securities are treated identically by the LCR, banks should be largely indifferent to holding either asset to meet the regulation. In that case, the reduction in reserves and corresponding increase in Treasury holdings might occur with relatively little adjustment in their relative rates of return. Alternatively, one could argue that banks may have particular preferences about the composition of their liquid assets. And since banks are profit-maximizing entities, they will likely compare rates of return across various HQLA-eligible assets in determining how many reserves to hold. If relative asset returns are a key driver of reserve demand, then interest rates across various types of HQLA will adjust on an ongoing basis until banks are satisfied holding the aggregate quantity of reserves that is available. Recent research by the Board staff shows that banks currently display a significant degree of heterogeneity in their approaches to meeting their LCR requirements, including in their chosen volumes of reserve balances.11Figure 2shows a subset of this research to illustrate this point. The top and bottom panels represent estimates of how two large banks have been meeting their HQLA requirements over time. In each panel, the blue portions of the bars denote the share of HQLA met by reserve balances, while the red, yellow, and brown slices of the bars represent the share met by Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities, and other HQLA-eligible assets, respectively. Despite holding roughly similarly amounts of HQLA, the two banks exhibit very different HQLA compositions, with the bank depicted in the top panel consistently holding a much larger share of HQLA in the form of reserve balances than the bank shown in the bottom panel. This finding suggests that there likely is no single "representative bank" behavioral model that can capture all we might want to know about banks' demand for central bank reserve balances. Some of the differences we see in bank behavior likely relate to banks' individual liquidity needs and preferences. Indeed, banks manage their balance sheets in part by taking into account their internal liquidity targets, which are determined by the interaction between the specific needs of their various business lines and bank management's preferences. In any case, this picture illustrates the complexities that are inherent in understanding banks' underlying demand for reserve balances, a topic for which more research would be quite valuable to policymakers. So, what does this finding say about the longer-run level of reserve balances demanded by banks? The answer is that there is a large degree of uncertainty. In fact, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York surveyed primary dealers and market participants last December to solicit their views about the level of reserves they expect to prevail in 2025.12A few features of the survey responses stand out. All respondents thought that the longer-run level of reserve balances would be substantiallylowerthan the current level of more than $2 trillion. In addition, there appeared to be a widely held view that the longer-run level of reserves will be significantlyabovethe level that prevailed before the financial crisis. But even so, the respondents did not agree about what that longer-run level will be, with about half expecting a level ranging between $400 billion and $750 billion. It is also important to point out that the Fed's balance sheet will remain larger than it was before the crisis even after abstracting from the issue of banks' longer-run demand for reserve balances. The reason is that the ultimate size of the Fed's balance sheet also depends on developments across a broader set of Fed liabilities. One such liability is the outstanding amount of Federal Reserve notes in circulation‑‑that is, paper money‑‑which has doubled over the past decade to a volume of more than $1.6 trillion, growing at a rate that generally reflects the pace of expansion of economic activity in nominal terms. When I left my position in the Bush Treasury in 2006, by contrast, the total amount of paper currency outstanding was not quite $800 billion. Other nonreserve liabilities have also grown since the crisis, including the Treasury Department's account at the Fed, known as the Treasury's General Account. Recent growth in such items means that the longer-run size of the Fed's balance sheet will be noticeably larger than before the crisis regardless of the volume of reserve balances that might ultimately prevail. Putting the various pieces together,figure 3illustrates how the overall size of the Fed's balance sheet may evolve. Given the uncertainties I have described, I have chosen to show three different scenarios, drawn from the most recent annual report released by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which was published last month.13These scenarios highlight the degree to which the longer-run size of the Fed's domestic securities portfolio‑‑also known as the System Open Market Account, or SOMA, which accounts for the vast majority of the Fed's assets‑‑will be affected by choices about the future level of reserve balances and the evolution of nonreserve liabilities. The assumptions underlying the scenarios are based on the distribution of responses from the surveys I described earlier, as those surveys also asked respondents to forecast the likely longer-run levels of several liabilities on the Fed's balance sheet other than reserves. The "median" scenario, represented by the red (middle) line in the figure, is based on the 50thpercentile of survey responses, while the "larger" and the "smaller" scenarios, denoted by the gold dashed (top) and blue dotted (bottom) lines, are based on the 75th and 25th percentiles, respectively. The figure illustrates that the Fed's securities holdings are projected to decline about $400 billion this year and another $460 billion next year as Treasury and agency securities continue to roll off gradually from the Fed's portfolio. The kink in each curve captures what the FOMC has referred to as the point of "normalization" of the size of the Fed's balance sheet‑‑that is, the point at which the balance sheet will begin to expand again to support the underlying growth in liabilities items such as Federal Reserve notes in circulation. All else being equal, greater longer-run demand for currency, reserve balances, or other liabilities implies an earlier timing of balance sheet normalization and a higher longer-run size of the balance sheet, as illustrated by the top line. And the converse--smaller demand for these liabilities and a later timing of normalization, illustrated by the bottom line--is also possible. In the three scenarios shown, the size of the Fed's securities portfolio normalizes sometime between 2020 and 2022. That is quite a range of time, so as the balance sheet normalization program continues, the Fed will be closely monitoring developments for clues about banks' underlying demand for reserves. What will the Fed be monitoring as reserves are drained and the balance sheet shrinks? I would first like to emphasize that the Fed regularly monitors financial markets for a number of reasons, so I do not mean to imply that we will be doing anything that is very much different for our normal practice. As reserves continue to be drained, we will want to gauge how banks are managing their balance sheets in continuing to meet their LCRs, watching in particular how the distribution of reserve balances across the banking system evolves as well as monitoring any large-scale changes in banks' holdings of other HQLA-eligible assets, including Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities. And on the liabilities side of banks' books, we will be keeping our eye on both the volume and the composition of deposits, as there are reasons why banks may take steps, over time, to hold onto certain types of deposits more than others. In particular, retail deposits may be especially desired by banks going forward because they receive the most favorable treatment under the LCR and also tend to be relatively low cost. Retail deposits have grown quite a bit since the crisis, especially in light of the prolonged period of broad-based low interest rates and accommodative monetary policy, limiting the need for banks to compete for this most stable form of deposits. However, the combination of rising interest rates and the Fed's shrinking balance sheet, together with banks' ongoing need to meet the LCR, may alter these competitive dynamics. Of course, importantly, deposits will not necessarily decline one-for-one with reserve balances as the Fed's balance sheet shrinks. The overall effects of the decline in the Fed's balance sheet will depend both on who ultimately ends up holding the securities in place of the Fed and on the full range of portfolio adjustments that other economic agents ultimately make as a result.14 We will also be monitoring movements in interest rates. In part, we will be tracking how the yields and spreads on the various assets that banks use to meet their LCR requirements evolve. For example, to the extent that some banks will wish to keep meeting a significant portion of their LCR requirements with reserves, the reduction in the Fed's balance sheet and the associated drop in aggregate reserves could eventually result in some upward pressure on the effective federal funds rate and on yields of Treasury securities. This situation could occur if some banks eventually find that they are holding fewer reserves than desired at a given constellation of interest rates and, in response, begin to bid for more federal funds while selling Treasury securities or other assets. Interest rates will adjust up until banks are indifferent with regard to holding the relatively smaller volume of reserves available in the banking system. Overall, we will be monitoring to make sure that the level of reserves the Fed supplies to the banking sector, which influences the composition of assets and liabilities on banks' balance sheets as well as market interest rates, provides the desired stance of monetary policy to achieve our dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. Of course, we will need to be very careful to understand the precise factors that underlie any significant movements in these areas, because factors that are unrelated to the Fed's balance sheet policies might also cause such adjustments. ConclusionTo conclude, I would like to reemphasize that I have touched on some highly uncertain issues today--issues that, I would like to stress again, have not been decided by the FOMC. One such issue that closely relates to my remarks today, and one I believe the upcoming panel will likely address, is which policy implementation framework the Fed should use in the long run. That is, broadly speaking, should the Fed continue to use an operational framework that is characterized by having relatively abundant reserves and operate in what is termed a "floor regime," or should it use one in which the supply of reserves is managed so that it is much closer to banks' underlying demand for reserves as in a "corridor regime"? Of course, a host of complex issues underlie this decision, so I would just like to emphasize two general points. First, a wide range of quantities of reserve balances--and thus overall sizes of the Fed's balance sheet--could be consistent with either type of framework. Second, while U.S. liquidity regulations likely influence banks' demand for reserves, the Fed is not constrained by such regulations in deciding its operational framework, because U.S. banks will be readily able to meet their regulatory liquidity requirements using the range of available high-quality liquid assets, of which reserve balances is one type. Importantly, additional experience with the Federal Reserve's policy of gradually reducing its balance sheet will help inform policymakers' future deliberations regarding issues related to the long-run size of the Fed's balance sheet, issues that will not need to be decided for some time. The final and most general point is simply to underscore the premise with which I began these remarks: Financial regulation and monetary policy are, in important respects, connected. Thus, it will always be important for the Federal Reserve to maintain its integral role in the regulation of the financial system not only for the visibility this provides into the economy, but precisely in order to calibrate the sorts of relationships we have been talking about today. 1.The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.Required capital at the bank subsidiaries of these firms would be reduced by larger amounts--and would only allow the firm to move that capital to different subsidiaries within the firm--but, more importantly, the overall capital regime prevents this capital from being distributed out of the banking organization as a whole except in this de minimis amount. Thus, the overall organization retains the same capital levels without the structure of capital regulation creating an incentive to add risk to the system.Return to text 3.While deposit insurance helps mitigate the incentive for many depositors to run, it cannot fully eliminate this risk. For a discussion of this vulnerability, see Douglas W. Diamond and Philip H. Dybvig (1983), "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 91 (June), pp. 401-19.Return to text 4.See Senior Supervisors Group (2009),Risk Management Lessons from the Global Banking Crisis of 2008(PDF)(New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October).Return to text 5.For a full description of the U.S. LCR, including which banks are covered, seeRegulation WW--Liquidity Risk Management Standards, 12 C.F.R. pt. 249 (2017).Return to text 6.See Jane Ihrig, Edward Kim, Ashish Kumbhat, Cindy M. Vojtech, and Gretchen C. Weinbach (2017), "How Have Banks Been Managing the Composition of High-Quality Liquid Assets? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-092 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August; revised February 2018).Return to text 7.For example, a separate factor that is relevant for policymakers in this regard is the FOMC's choice of long-run framework for monetary policy implementation. For policymakers' discussions of this factor, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 26-27, 2016," press release, August 17; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, November 1-2, 2016," press release, November 23,Return to text 8.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, June 14, paragraph 6.Return to text 9.The FOMC announced this change to its balance sheet policy in its September 2017 postmeeting statement; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 20.Return to text 10.See Board of Governors, "FOMC Issues Addendum," paragraph 6, in note 7.Return to text 11.See Ihrig and others, "Managing the Composition of High-Quality Liquid Assets," in note 5.Return to text 12.The December 2017 Survey of Primary Dealers is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/survey/2017/dec-2017-spd-results.pdf. The December 2017 Survey of Market Participants is available athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/survey/2017/dec-2017-smp-results.pdf.Return to text 13.See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2018),Open Market Operations during 2017(New York: FRBNY, April), available athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/annual_reports.html. Among other things, the report reviews the conduct of open market operations and other developments that influenced the System Open Market Account of the Federal Reserve in 2017.Return to text 14.For a discussion of the overall effects of the decline in the Fed's balance sheet, see Jane Ihrig, Lawrence Mize, and Gretchen C. Weinbach (2017), "How Does the Fed Adjust Its Securities Holdings and Who Is Affected? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-099 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from April 23 and May 2, 2018. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on May 1-2, 2018. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 1-2, 2018:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Chairman Jerome H. Powell At "Challenges for Monetary Policy and the GFSN in an Evolving Global Economy" Eighth High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System sponsored by the International Monetary Fund and Swiss National Bank, Zurich, Switzerland Thank you for inviting me to join you today as part of this distinguished panel. Our subject is the relationship between "center country" monetary policy and global financial conditions, and the policy implications of that relationship both for the center country and for other countries affected. This broad topic has been the subject of a great deal of research and discussion in recent years. Today I will focus in particular on the role of U.S. monetary policy in driving global financial conditions and capital flows. To preview my conclusions, I will argue that, while global factors play an important role in influencing domestic financial conditions, the role of U.S. monetary policy is often exaggerated. And while financial globalization does pose some challenges for monetary policy, efforts to build stronger and more transparent policy frameworks and a more resilient financial system can reduce the adverse consequences of external shocks. The well-known Mundell-Fleming "trilemma" states that it is not possible to have all three of the following things: free capital mobility, a fixed exchange rate, and the ability to pursue an independent monetary policy. The trilemma does not say that a flexible exchange rate will always fully insulate domestic economic conditions from external shocks.1And, indeed, that is not the case. We have seen that integration of global capital markets can make for difficult tradeoffs for some economies, whether they have fixed or floating exchange rate regimes. Since the Fed is the central bank of the world's largest economy and issuer of the world's most widely used reserve currency, it is to be expected that the Fed's policy actions will spill over to other economies. To illustrate this point, the scatterplot on the left side offigure 1focuses on movements in interest rates and exchange rates following Federal Reserve policy announcements. As you can see, changes in U.S. interest rates after Fed policy actions (shown on the horizontal axis) lead to corresponding changes in the value of the dollar (shown on the vertical axis). And because of the dollar's widespread use around the world, these changes in the dollar affect financial conditions abroad. Fed policy-related movements in U.S. bond yields also tend to spill over to bond yields abroad, such as the German yields shown in the scatterplot on the right. Such spillovers are to be expected in a world of highly integrated financial markets.2Asfigure 2shows, bond yields (left) and equity prices (right) around the world typically move together fairly closely. But the influence of U.S. monetary policy on global financial conditions should not be overstated. The Federal Reserve is not the only central bank whose actions affect global financial markets. In fact, the United States is the recipient as well as the originator of monetary policy spillovers. For example, as seen infigure 3, changes in German yields after European Central Bank policy decisions also pass through to U.S. yields.3More broadly, it is notable that although the Fed has raised its target interest rate six times since December 2015 and has begun to shrink its balance sheet, overall U.S. domestic financial conditions have gotten looser, in part due to improving global conditions and central bank policy abroad. Much of the discussion of the spillovers of U.S. monetary policy focuses on their effects on financial conditions in emerging market economies (EMEs). Some observers have attributed the movements in international capital flowing to EMEs since the Global Financial Crisis primarily to monetary stimulus by the Fed and other advanced-economy central banks.4The data do not seem to me to fit this narrative particularly well. As illustrated by the blue dashed line in the left panel offigure 4, capital flows to EMEs were already very strong before the Global Financial Crisis, when the federal funds rate was comparatively high. The subsequent surge in capital flows in 2009, as the crisis was abating, largely reflects a rebound from the capital flow interruption during the crisis itself, though highly accommodative monetary policies in advanced economies doubtless also played a role. Moreover, capital flows to EMEs started to ease after 2011, a period when the Federal Reserve continued to add accommodation and reduce yields through increases in its balance sheet, as shown in the right panel. And, more recently, capital flows to EMEs have picked up again despite the fact that the Fed has been removing accommodation since 2015. If U.S. monetary policy is not the major determinant, what other factors have been driving EME capital flows? One prominent factor has been growth differentials between EMEs and advanced economies. Infigure 5, the left panel shows that capital inflows to EMEs picked up post-crisis, in line with the widening of this growth differential, while the slowdown in inflows after 2011 coincides with its narrowing. Another related determinant has been commodity prices, as shown in the right panel. The pickup in both global growth and commodity prices over the past couple of years explains a good part of the recent recovery of capital flows to EMEs.5 Monetary stimulus by the Fed and other advanced-economy central banks played a relatively limited role in the surge of capital flows to EMEs in recent years. There is good reason to think that the normalization of monetary policies in advanced economies should continue to prove manageable for EMEs. Fed policy normalization has proceeded without disruption to financial markets, and market participants' expectations for policy (the red symbols infigure 6) seem reasonably well aligned with policymakers' expectations in the Summary of Economic Projections (the black dots), suggesting that markets should not be surprised by our actions if the economy evolves in line with expectations. It also bears emphasizing that the EMEs themselves have made considerable progress in reducing vulnerabilities since the crisis-prone 1980s and 1990s. Many EMEs have substantially improved their fiscal and monetary policy frameworks while adopting more flexible exchange rates, a policy that recent research shows provides better insulation from external financial shocks.6Corporate debt at risk--the debt of firms with limited debt service capacity--has been rising in EMEs, as shown infigure 7.7But this rise has been relatively limited outside of China and has begun to reverse as stronger global growth has pushed up earnings. All that said, I do not dismiss the prospective risks emanating from global policy normalization. Some investors and institutions may not be well positioned for a rise in interest rates, even one that markets broadly anticipate. And, of course, future economic conditions may surprise us, as they often do. Moreover, the linkages among monetary policy, asset prices, and the mood of global financial markets are not fully understood. Some observers have argued that U.S. monetary policy also influences capital flows through its effects on global risk sentiment, with looser policy leading to more positive sentiment in markets and tighter policy depressing sentiment.8While those channels may well operate, research at both the Fed and the IMF suggests that actions by major central banks account for only a relatively small fraction of global financial volatility and capital flow movements.9 Nevertheless, risk sentiment will bear close watching as normalization proceeds around the world. What can the Federal Reserve do to foster continued financial stability and economic growth as normalization proceeds? We will communicate our policy strategy as clearly and transparently as possible to help align expectations and avoid market disruptions. And we will continue to help build resilience in the financial system and support global efforts to do the same. ReferencesAdrian, Tobias, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt (2017). "Global Price of Risk and Stabilization Policies (PDF)," paper presented at "Eighteenth Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference: The Global Financial Cycle," sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 2-3. Washington: IMF. Ahmed, Shaghil, and Andrei Zlate (2014). "Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World?"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 48 (November), pp. 221-48. Bems, Rudolfs, Luis Catao, Zsoka Koczan, Weicheng Lian, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro (2016). "Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets," chapter 2 inWorld Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long.Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 63-99. Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Andrew Rose (2017). "How Important Is the Global Financial Cycle? Evidence from Capital Flows," IMF Working Paper 17/193. Washington: International Monetary Fund, September. Chari, Anusha, Karlye Dilts Stedman, and Christian Lundblad (2017). "Taper Tantrums: QE, Its Aftermath, and Emerging Market Capital Flows," NBER Working Paper Series 23474. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Clark, John, Nathan Converse, Brahima Coulibaly, and Steve Kamin (2016). "Emerging Market Capital Flows and U.S. Monetary Policy," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 18. Curcuru, Stephanie, Michiel De Pooter, and George Eckerd (2018). "Measuring Monetary Policy Spillovers between U.S. and German Bond Yields (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1226. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Fratzscher, Marcel (2012). "Capital Flows, Push Versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 88 (2), pp. 341-56. Ghosh, Atish R., Jun Kim, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Juan Zalduendo (2012). "Surges (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/12/22. Washington: International Monetary Fund, January. International Monetary Fund (2017). "Are Countries Losing Control of Domestic Financial Conditions?" chapter 3 inGlobal Financial Stability Report: Getting the Policy Mix Right.Washington: IMF, April, pp. 83-108. -------- (2018). "A Bumpy Road Ahead," chapter 1 inGlobal Financial Stability Report: A Bumpy Road Ahead.Washington: IMF, April, pp. 1-55. Koepke, Robin (2015). "What Drives Capital Flows to Emerging Markets? A Survey of the Empirical Literature," IIF Working Paper. Washington: Institute of International Finance, April. Klein, Michael, and Jay Shambaugh (2013). "Is There a Dilemma with the Trilemma?" Centre for Economic Policy Research,Vox,September 27. Londono, Juan M., and Beth Anne Wilson (2018). "Understanding Global Volatility," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 19. Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Helene Rey (2015). "U.S. Monetary Policy and the Global Financial Cycle," NBER Working Paper Series 21722. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November (revised February 2018). Obstfeld, Maurice (2015). "Trilemmas and Trade-offs: Living with Financial Globalisation (PDF)," BIS Working Papers 480. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, January. Obstfeld, Maurice, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mahvash S. Qureshi (2017). "A Tie That Binds: Revisiting the Trilemma in Emerging Market Economies," IMF Working Paper WP/17/130. Washington: International Monetary Fund, June. Pomerleano, Michael (1998). "Corporate Finance Lessons from the East Asian Crisis (PDF)," Viewpoint: Public Policy for the Private Sector, Note 155. Washington: World Bank Group, October. Powell, Jerome H. (2017). "Prospects for Emerging Market Economies in a Normalizing Global Economy," speech delivered at the 2017 Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute of International Finance, Washington, October 12. Rajan, Raghuram (2014). "Competitive Monetary Easing--Is It Yesterday Once More?" speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, April 10. Rey, Helene (2015). "Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence," NBER Working Paper Series 21162. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May (revised February 2018). Wheatley, Jonathan, and Peter Garnham (2010). "Brazil in 'Currency War' Alert,"Financial Times,September 27. 1.See, for example, Klein and Shambaugh (2013) and Obstfeld (2015).Return to text 2.See, for example, Adrian and others (2017) and the IMF's most recentGlobal Financial Stability Report(2018) for discussion of the transmission of global risk shocks to domestic macroeconomic conditions.Return to text 3.Curcuru, De Pooter, and Eckerd (2018) find that about half of the movement in German bund yields in a window following ECB monetary policy announcements spills over to U.S. Treasury yields, roughly the same magnitude as the spillover of movements in U.S Treasury yields to German bund yields following Federal Reserve policy announcements.Return to text 4.See, for example, Wheatley and Garnham (2010) andRajan (2014).Return to text 5.Studies looking at the determinants of EME capital flows include Chari and others (2017), Clark and others (2016), Bems and others (2016), Koepke (2015), Ahmed and Zlate (2014), Fratzscher (2012), and Ghosh and others (2012). These papers generally conclude that many factors, including both "pull" and "push," affect EME capital flows.Return to text 6.See, for example, Obstfeld, Ostry, and Qureshi (2017). The results in IMF (2017) also indicate that while global financial conditions explain a significant portion of countries' domestic financial conditions, domestic monetary policy changes also play an important role in economies with flexible exchange rates.Return to text 7.The interest coverage ratio (ICR) is the ratio of earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, and amortization to interest expense. A value of 2 or less is typically associated with an increased likelihood of distress. For example, just before the Asian financial crisis, firms in Korea, Thailand, and Indonesia had an average ICR of 2; see Pomerleano (1998).For more on evolution of EME debt at risk and vulnerabilities, see Powell (2017).Return to text 8.Rey (2015); Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015).Return to text 9.For example, Londono and Wilson (2018) find that U.S. monetary policy variables account for only roughly 10 percent of the six-month ahead forecast error variance of the VIX. In fact, in their study, non-U.S. global factors (non-U.S industrial production, a global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index, and the expected probability of recessions outside of the United States) explain nearly as much of the VIX forecast error variance as U.S. monetary policy and other U.S. variables combined. In addition, Cerutti, Claessens, and Rose (2017) find that directly observed variables in "center" countries (including VIX), as well as unobserved common dynamic factors extracted from actual capital flows, together rarely explain more than one-fourth of the variation in most types of capital flows.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard At the Forecasters Club of New York, New York, New York I appreciate the opportunity to join the Forecasters Club to discuss the path ahead for our economy and monetary policy.1In the months ahead, I expect to see tightening resource utilization in the U.S. economy as rising fiscal stimulus reinforces above-trend growth. Continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to be consistent with sustaining strong labor market conditions and inflation around target, with the balance sheet running off gradually and predictably in the background. This outlook suggests a policy path that moves gradually from modestly accommodative today to neutral--and, after some time, modestly beyond neutral--against the backdrop of a longer-run neutral rate that is likely to remain low by historical standards. Let me consider each element in turn Growing above TrendAlthough indicators of economic activity were on the soft side earlier in the year, the outlook for the remainder of 2018 remains quite positive, supported by sizable fiscal stimulus as well as still-accommodative financial conditions. In the latest report, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased 2.2 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter of 2018, a slowdown from the 3 percent pace in the final three quarters of 2017. The first-quarter slowdown was especially noticeable in consumer spending, which increased at only a 1 percent pace last quarter, compared with 2-3/4 percent in 2017. By contrast, business fixed investment increased 9 percent at an annual rate last quarter, surpassing its robust 2017 pace. I expect real GDP growth to pick up in the next few quarters. In particular, the fundamentals for consumer spending are favorable: Income gains have been strong, consumer confidence remains solid, and employment prospects remain bright. And business investment should remain solid, with drilling and mining bolstered by increased oil prices. Moreover, the sizable fiscal stimulus that is in train is likely to provide a tailwind to growth in the second half of the year and beyond.2From a position of full employment, the economy will likely receive a substantial boost from $1.5 trillion in personal and corporate tax cuts and a $300 billion increase in federal spending, with estimates suggesting a boost to the growth rate of real GDP of about 3/4 percent this year and next.3 Risks and UncertaintiesIn short, with a tightening labor market and inflation near target, fiscal stimulus in the pipeline suggests some risk to the upside. By contrast, recent developments abroad suggest some risk to the downside. Global growth has been synchronized over the past year, but recent developments pose some risk. Political developments in Italy have reintroduced some risk, and financial conditions in the euro area have worsened somewhat in response. With some uptick in political uncertainty, and inflation still below target in the euro area and Japan, monetary policies among the advanced economies look likely to be divergent for some time. In addition, some emerging markets may find conditions more challenging. An environment with a strengthening dollar, rising energy prices, and the possibility of rising rates raises the risks of capital flow reversals in some emerging markets that have seen increased borrowing from abroad. Although stresses have been contained to a few vulnerable countries so far, the risk of a broader pullback bears watching. In addition, uncertainty over trade clouds the horizon. An escalation in measures and countermeasures--although an outside risk--could prove disruptive at home and abroad. Sustaining Full EmploymentHere at home, the labor market is strong. So far this year, payroll gains have averaged 200,000 per month, sufficient to put further downward pressure on unemployment. Indeed, the unemployment rate moved down to 3.9 percent in April following six consecutive months at 4.1 percent. The unemployment rate for African Americans dropped in April to 6.6 percent, which is the lowest level recorded since this series began in 1972 but still high relative to other groups. It is difficult to know how much slack remains. April's 3.9 percent unemployment rate was the lowest reading since December 2000. If the unemployment rate falls another couple of tenths--which seems likely, based on recent trends--it will be at its lowest level since 1969. Although the late 1960s marked the beginning of what is now called the Great Inflation, it is worth keeping in mind that there have been important shifts in the labor market since that time. For example, educational attainment is much higher today than it was in the 1960s, and college degree holders tend to have much lower unemployment rates, on average, than those with a high school degree or less.4 While the unemployment rate is now lower than before the financial crisis, the employment-to-population ratio for prime-age workers remains about 1 percentage point below its pre-crisis level. It is an open question what portion of the prime-age Americans who are out of the labor force may prove responsive to tight labor market conditions. While it is difficult to know with precision how much slack still remains, I am seeing more evidence that labor markets are tightening, and wages are accelerating, although at a measured pace. The 12-month change in the employment cost index (ECI) for private industry workers in the first quarter was 2.8 percent, up from 2.3 percent in the year-earlier period. By way of comparison, in the period from 2005 to 2007, just before the financial crisis, the ECI rose a bit more than 3 percent at an annual rate, while core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation was around 2-1/4 percent. I am hearing anecdotes of labor market shortages in particular occupations and sectors, echoing a theme in our recent Beige Book. Going forward, I will be looking for confirmation in other measures of wages that labor market tightness is feeding through to wage gains. Sustainably Achieving Our Inflation ObjectiveTurning to the second leg of our dual mandate, in the most recent data, the trailing 12-month change in core PCE prices was 1.8 percent, up from a year earlier, when core PCE prices increased only 1.6 percent. Overall PCE prices, which include the volatile food and energy sectors, increased 2.0 percent, largely reflecting the recent run-up in crude oil prices. While the recent core PCE data are somewhat encouraging, we will want to see inflation coming in around target on a sustained basis after seven years of below-target readings. As I have noted before, the persistence of subdued inflation, despite an unemployment rate that has moved below most estimates of its natural rate, suggests some risk that underlying inflation--the slow-moving trend that exerts a pull on wage and price setting--may have softened.5For example, some survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations are currently lower than they were before the financial crisis, as are most estimates based on statistical filters. Inflation compensation has moved up recently but is still running somewhat below levels that prevailed before the crisis. Re-anchoring underlying inflation at the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent objective is an important goal. Recent research has highlighted the downside risks to inflation and inflation expectations that are posed by the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates, and it underscores the importance of ensuring underlying inflation does not slip below target in today's new normal.6In that regard, if we were to see a mild, temporary overshoot of the inflation target, this could well be consistent with the symmetry of the FOMC's target and may help nudge underlying inflation back to target.7 In short, it is reassuring to see core PCE inflation moving up, along with market-based measures of inflation compensation retracing earlier declines. After seven years of below-target inflation, it will be important to see inflation coming in around target on a sustained basis to be confident that underlying trend inflation is running at 2 percent. The Yield CurveEven though longer-term Treasury yields have moved up, on net, since the beginning of the year, there has been growing attention of late to the possibility of an inversion of the yield curve--that is, circumstances in which short-term interest rates exceed long-term interest rates on Treasury securities. Historically, yield curve inversions have had a reliable track record of predicting recessions in the United States.8Since 1960, there has only been one case where the 3-month Treasury yield has moved above the 10-year Treasury yield and a recession has not followed--in 1966.9 This correlation between yield curve inversions and recessions might arise for a variety of reasons. First, let us take a case where short-term rates rise relative to long-term rates. When the FOMC is undertaking a deliberate tightening in policy, short-term interest rates typically rise, as do expectations of short-term interest rates in the medium term, while interest rates in the distant future may be less affected. For example, if short-term interest rates were raised to stabilize temporary swings in the economy, the logic of the expectations hypothesis would suggest that long rates would not rise as much. And if tighter monetary policy were to weaken the economy with a lag, this would lead to long rates not rising by as much or at all. Second, let us take a case where long-term rates decline relative to short-term rates, perhaps reflecting a flight to safety. If market participants become concerned about a future macroeconomic risk that could lead to a weaker economy, this concern would tend to lower expected longer-term interest rates, both because monetary policy would be expected to become more accommodative in the future and because market participants may increase their relative holdings of safe assets, such as Treasury securities. In this case, longer-dated Treasury yields may fall, and if short-term interest rates do not adjust commensurately, the yield curve will invert ahead of a weaker economy. Turning to current conditions, the spread between the 10-year and 3-month Treasury yields has declined from 375 basis points in early 2010 to about 125 basis points in the first quarter of this year. While that represents a considerable flattening, the current spread between the 10-year and 3-month yields is only about 20 basis points narrower than the average over the 45 years before the financial crisis. As we try to assess the implications of this flattening of the yield curve, it is important to take into account the very low level of the current 10-year yield by historical standards. For the 20 years before the crisis, the 10-year Treasury yield averaged about 6‑1/4 percent, compared with recent readings around 3 percent. One reason the 10-year Treasury yield may be unusually low is that market expectations of interest rates in the longer run may be unusually low. A second reason may be that the term premium--the extra compensation an investor would demand for investing in a 10-year bond rather than rolling over a shorter-dated instrument repeatedly over a 10-year period--has fallen to levels that are very low by historical standards. According to one estimate from Federal Reserve Board staff, the term premium has tended to be slightly negative in recent years. By contrast, when the spread between the 10-year and 3-month Treasury yields was at its peak in early 2010, this measure of the term premium was close to 100 basis points.10 Other things being equal, a smaller term premium will make the yield curve flatter by lowering the long end of the curve. With the term premium today very low by historical standards, this may temper somewhat the conclusions that we can draw from a pattern that we have seen historically in periods with a higher term premium. With a very low term premium, any given amount of monetary policy tightening will lead to an inversion sooner so that even a modest tightening that might not have led to an inversion in the past could do so today. There are a number of possible explanations of the low level of the term premium. The asset purchases of the Federal Reserve and other central banks may be contributing factors. The goal of these policies was to lower longer-term interest rates--and in many cases, expressly by lowering term premiums. A number of studies suggest that these polices have indeed been successful in lowering term premiums.11 A second reason the term premium may be lower than in the past is the changing correlation between stock and bond returns, likely caused by changes in expected inflation outcomes.12While in the 1970s and 1980s stock and bond returns tended to be positively correlated, more recently the correlation has tended to be negative. With an inverse correlation, bonds recently have been a good hedge for stocks, and that correlation may have contributed to lower bond term premiums by increasing the demand for bonds as an instrument for hedging portfolio risks. This changed correlation between stock and bond returns in turn may be related to better anchored inflation expectations following a long period of low and stable inflation. Looking ahead, it seems likely the term premium will increase somewhat, although perhaps not to the levels seen historically. On the one hand, a continued gradual runoff of the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve and reduced bond buying by other central banks will tend to put upward pressure on the term premium. On the other hand, the FOMC's demonstrated commitment to maintaining low and stable inflation makes it unlikely that expectations of high inflation will reemerge. Thus, on balance, while term premiums may recover somewhat from their recent depressed values, it is unlikely they will return to the high levels of earlier decades. The Path of PolicyIn the median outlook in the FOMC's Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the federal funds rate is projected to reach its longer-run value by 2019 and exceed it in 2020. If the 10-year term premium were to stay very low, that path would likely imply a yield curve inversion. But for the reasons I just noted, if the term premium remains low by historical standards, there would probably be less adverse signal from any given yield curve spread. It is important to emphasize that the flattening yield curve suggested by the SEP median is associated with a policy path calibrated to sustain full employment and inflation around target. So while I will keep a close watch on the yield curve as an important signal on how tight financial conditions are becoming, I consider it as just one among several important indicators. Yield curve movements will need to be interpreted within the broader context of financial conditions and the outlook and will be one of many considerations informing my assessment of appropriate policy. As suggested by the SEP median path, I believe that the forward-guidance language in the Committee statement that was introduced a few years ago that "the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run" is growing stale and may no longer serve its original purpose. For purposes of comparison, in March 2016, the median of SEP projections for the federal funds rate path had the funds rate rising to 3.0 percent and remaining below the longer run value that was projected to be 3.3 percent. A year later, the median projection of the longer-run federal funds rate fell. In the March 2018 SEP, the median projection of the federal funds rate peaks at 3.4 percent in 2020--1/2 percentage point above the median projection of its longer-run value of 2.9 percent. It is worth noting that this progression reflects a decrease in the long-run federal funds rate as much as an increase in the medium-run federal funds rate. ConclusionIn an environment of tightening resource utilization and above-trend growth, with sizable fiscal stimulus likely to provide a boost to demand in the near-to-medium term that should fade somewhat further out, it seems likely that the neutral rate could rise in the medium term above its longer-run value. I expect current tailwinds to boost the neutral rate gradually over the medium term but leave little imprint on the long-run neutral rate. The short-run level of the neutral rate should rise gradually because the forces that are moving the economy from headwinds to tailwinds are likely to play out gradually. Although the tax cuts are already in place, their effects may not be fully felt for a few years, and the spend-out from the recent budget agreement may occur with some delay. A gradual pace is also warranted in light of the long period of undershooting the inflation target. I would not underestimate the challenge of calibrating monetary policy to sustain full employment and re-anchor trend inflation around 2 percent, while adjusting to sizable stimulus at a time when resource constraints are tightening and the economy is growing above trend. I continue to view gradual increases in the federal funds rate as the appropriate path, although I will remain vigilant for the emergence of risks and prepared to adjust if conditions change. ReferencesBauer, Michael D., and Thomas M. Mertens (2018). "Economic Forecasts with the Yield Curve," FRBSF Economic Letter 2018-07. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018). "Federal Open Market Committee Reaffirms Its 'Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,' " press release, January 31. Brainard, Lael (2015). "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. -------- (2016). "The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12. -------- (2017). "Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5. -------- (2018). "Navigating Monetary Policy as Headwinds Shift to Tailwinds," speech delivered to the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, March 6. Chen, Andrew, Eric Engstrom, and Olesya Grishchenko (2016). "Has the Inflation Risk Premium Fallen? Is It Now Negative?" FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 4. Congressional Budget Office (2018).The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2018 to 2028 (PDF).Washington: CBO, April 9. Estrella, Arturo, and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997). "The Predictive Power of the Term Structure of Interest Rates in Europe and the United States: Implications for the European Central Bank,"European Economic Review,vol. 41 (July), pp. 1375‑401. Favara, Giovanni, Simon Gilchrist, Kurt F. Lewis, and Egon Zakrajsek (2016). "Recession Risk and the Excess Bond Premium," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 8. International Monetary Fund (2018).World Economic Outlook Update: Brighter Prospects, Optimistic Markets, Challenges Ahead.Washington: IMF, January. Johansson, Peter, and Andrew Meldrum (2018). "Predicting Recession Probabilities Using the Slope of the Yield Curve," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 1. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317-96. Kim, Don H., and Jonathan H. Wright (2005). "An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-33. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September (revised December 2011). Li, Canlin, and Min Wei (2013). "Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 9 (March), pp. 3-39. Nakata, Taisuke, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016). "The Risk-Adjusted Monetary Policy Rule," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-061. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. 1.I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.See Brainard (2018).Return to text 3.For example, the International Monetary Fund (2018) estimates that the tax cut legislation will raise the level of U.S. GDP 1-1/4 percent by 2020, and the Congressional Budget Office (2018, p. 13) estimates that increased spending caps will boost the level of real GDP by 0.6 percent in 2019.Return to text 4.The share of the labor force aged 25 or older with a college degree or more is around 40 percent today, compared with 15 percent in the late 1960s, and the share with less than a high school degree has fallen from around 40 percent to around 7 percent today. The unemployment rates of college-educated adults are typically much lower--around 2 percent today--compared with high school noncompleters--currently around 6 percent.Return to text 5.See Brainard (2017, 2018).Return to text 6.See, for example, Kiley and Roberts (2017), Nakata and Schmidt (2016), and Brainard (2015, 2016).Return to text 7.See Board of Governors (2018) and Brainard (2018).Return to text 8.An earlier paper discussing the predictive power of the yield curve is Estrella and Mishkin (1997). In more recent work, Bauer and Mertens (2018) emphasize that the predictive content of the yield curve is still largely intact. Johansson and Meldrum (2018) and Favara and others (2016), however, argue that adding information about bond risk premiums reduces somewhat the predictive power of the yield spread.Return to text 9.An earlier version of this speech stated that the 3-month Treasury yield did not move above the 10-year Treasury yield prior to the 1990 recession. While that statement is true looking at monthly average interest rates, there were several days in mid-1989 when the 3-month Treasury yield was higher than the 10-year yield.Return to text 10.See Kim and Wright (2005) for technical details; the latest estimates are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2005/200533/200533abs.html.Return to text 11.See, for example, Li and Wei (2013).Return to text 12.See Chen, Engstrom, and Grishchenko (2016).Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "Ring-Fencing the Global Banking System: The Shift towards Financial Regulatory Protectionism" Symposium sponsored by Harvard Law School Program on International Financial Systems, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts Thank you to Professor Scott for inviting me to join this discussion on cross-border resolution and risks of fragmentation. Like many of my international counterparts in the audience, I maintain a deep commitment to cross-border banking and efficient movement of capital and liquidity, which are important contributors to long-term economic growth. And it is with that commitment in mind that I have considered the topic of today's conference: "ring-fencing," beginning with some reflections on what the term means. Many here use the term to describe local capital and liquidity requirements, which are imposed ex ante on local subsidiaries and designed to protect those entities and their creditors from losses. The term is also used to refer to disruptive actions taken by host regulators to seize assets in the moment of crisis.1This type of ring-fencing occurs suddenly and unilaterally. Both uses of the term are associated with the risk arising from the stress or failure of a global financial institution; however, whether ring-fencing as I first defined it--prepositioning--is helpful or harmful in minimizing this risk depends on one's perspective. The views of different stakeholders tend to vary depending on whether one is seeking to maximize efficient allocation of resources in good times or minimize losses in stress and, importantly, whether one is a home or host regulator. Before the financial crisis, much of our collective orientation was on maximizing the efficient flow of capital across the globe. This should remain a paramount goal. Yet in the wake of the financial crisis, global regulators have understandably also focused on minimizing the cost of the failure of a global financial institution by mitigating the impediments to cross-border resolution. The single-point-of-entry (SPOE) and bail-in concepts hold particular promise for most large global firms. However, a successful SPOE resolution of a large global firm has not yet been attempted and will require close cooperation among a large number of stakeholders, including both home and host country regulators. This cooperation will be based on an understanding of separate and mutual interests, not on trust alone. So while SPOE creates a potentially workable framework for resolution, setting the conditions for cooperation is critical. I grew up among the ranches of the American West, where we lived by the motto taught to me as a young child: trust everyone, but brand your cattle. This is a theme that will run throughout my remarks today. In addition to setting the stage for effective cooperation, I will focus specifically on the type of ring-fencing that will almost certainly undermine the successful execution of an SPOE resolution--namely the disruptive seizure of assets by host regulators in the moment of stress. As with other elements of our regime, I have been considering whether our current prepositioning requirements for domestic and foreign firms operating in the United States are both minimizing this risk and functioning in an efficient and transparent manner, and I will share some thoughts in that regard. Our vantage point in the United States as a large home and host regulator would counsel that it is sensible to find a middle ground and fine tune our approach as we learn more and global conditions evolve. Resolution Considerations of a Home and Host RegulatorTo enable cooperation and avoid a destabilizing seizure of assets by host regulators, I would submit that all jurisdictions must find a balance offlexibilityfor the parent bank andcertaintyfor local stakeholders. Flexibility, or the ability to allocate capital and liquidity to different parts of the group on an as-needed basis, helps to meet unexpected demands on resources and reduces the risk of misallocation and inefficient use of resources. Certainty, or the local prepositioning of capital and liquidity to ensure a firm can satisfy local claimants under stressful conditions, helps to promote cooperation in the context of a cross-border resolution and avoid incentives for more drastic action by host authorities. One's assessment of the optimal balance, as I alluded to earlier, can depend significantly on where one sits in the regulatory constellation. The home regulator, by nature, will logically prefer flexibility in a resolution; consolidated capital and liquidity requirements are most effective if resources can be freely allocated around the consolidated firm where and when they are needed. Flexibility also helps offset the uncertainty in forecasting the location within the consolidated firm where stress may arise. Yet I would also argue that home regulators should recognize host jurisdictions may take action to restrict the flow of resources, or worse yet, demand resources in the moment of crisis, even if the stress does not originally emanate from their location. Such actions tend to both limit the flexibility of the home regulator and undermine cooperation in times of stress. The host regulator, by nature, will prefer the certainty that resources will be available to satisfy local customers and counterparties under stressful conditions. This is particularly the case if the risk of default or the potential local loss given default of a foreign firm is high, and the tolerance for a government-assisted intervention for foreign banks is low. However, the host regulator should also recognize that it is ultimately in its interest for the SPOE resolution of the foreign bank to be successful and, given the uncertainty of the circumstances or location of losses that emerge in an actual stress, adequate flexibility for the parent to deploy resources where needed is likewise in the host regulator's interest. A global bank has other stakeholders who have preferences regarding flexibility or certainty and can take actions that can potentially destabilize the firm. For instance, parent company debt and equity holders may prefer less prepositioning, while local creditors and financial market utilities may prefer more. These other stakeholders can act in ways that can be destabilizing. Building a system that is transparent and is perceived by stakeholders as allocating losses fairly is key in this regard. Finally, I would like to note that the considerations of policymakers in determining the right balance of flexibility and certainty may differ depending on whether the resource at issue is capital or liquidity. In resolution, the most important difference between capital and liquidity is the speed with which financial stress can appear. Liquidity needs are sudden and tend to manifest in all areas of the organization, and the consequences of not meeting liquidity demand--an immediate default on an obligation--can be grave. Capital needs, however, may be more localized and slower to evolve but are foundational to the execution of an SPOE resolution. It is unlikely that host regulators would be comfortable cooperating in an SPOE resolution strategy without some confidence in the viability of the entities in their jurisdictions. U.S. ApproachHistorically, the United States and the United Kingdom have been in a unique position of having large interests as both home country and host country regulators of internationally active banks. Soon, the European Union is likely to assume this privilege as well. We understand that any requirements we impose on foreign banks operating in the United States may well be imposed on U.S. firms operating abroad. In addition, we are operating under a veil of ignorance, as we don't know whether the next firm in distress will be a U.S. firm operating globally or a foreign firm with U.S. operations. This provides us with strong incentives to view the risks from both sides. As the home regulator to U.S. global systemically important banking organizations (G-SIBs), we and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) have used the living wills process to set the expectation that a firm appropriately balance prepositioned and centrally managed resources.2This expectation is based on the premise that the optimal balance will depend on factors such as the firm's structure and the host jurisdictions in which the firm operates. As such, the Board and the FDIC have asked U.S. G-SIBs to analyze and anticipate capital and liquidity resources needed to ensure the continued operation of material entities in resolution. Regarding capital, the positioning of a U.S. G-SIB's internal total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) should reflect a balance of certainty--prepositioning internal TLAC directly at material entities--and flexibility--holding recapitalization resources at the parent, known as contributable resources--to meet unanticipated losses at material entities.3 Regarding liquidity, the Board and FDIC expect a U.S. G-SIB to appropriately estimate and maintain sufficient liquidity for material entities, an expectation known as Resolution Liquidity Adequacy and Positioning, or RLAP.4RLAP expectations are intended to be designed so that liquidity is not "double counted" among home and host jurisdictions, to provide transparency into the location of liquidity across the firm's material entities, and to ensure that liquidity can flow where needed with minimal potential disruption. The RLAP approach is aimed at ensuring that surpluses in one host jurisdiction generally are not relied upon to meet deficits in another host jurisdiction, given the confusion and vulnerabilities such reliance can cause in an actual stress. Specifically, a firm should be able to measure the stand-alone liquidity position of each material entity and ensure that liquidity is readily available either at the parent or at that entity to meet any deficits.5As with capital, firms are expected to have a balance of prepositioned and centrally managed liquidity--specifically, by balancing the certainty associated with holding liquidity directly at material entities against the flexibility provided by holding high-quality liquid assets at the parent available to meet unanticipated outflows at material entities. As a host regulator, our approach to local capital and liquidity regulations of foreign banks with large U.S. operations is motivated by the lessons of the recent financial crisis, where many foreign banks operating in the United States suffered severe stress and survived only with extraordinary support from the United States and their home country governments. In addition to increasing the resiliency of the U.S. operations of foreign banks, our approach also reflects both resolution and competitive equity considerations. From a resolution perspective, our rules seek to ensure that there are sufficient resources in the United States today to ensure that we, as a host regulator, are well positioned to cooperate with a home country authority in the event a firm experiences material stress or failure. Our rules also ensure that we do not have a strong incentive to limit flows or seek additional resources in the moment of crisis, which could be highly destabilizing in a stress event. From a competitive equity standpoint, we believe that U.S. subsidiaries of foreign banks should operate on a level playing field with their domestic counterparts. This is generally consistent with the long-standing treatment of large and complex bank and nonbank subsidiaries around the world. As such, our rules subject a large foreign bank to the same capital and liquidity requirements as domestic bank holding companies by requiring the foreign bank to hold its U.S. subsidiaries through a U.S. intermediate holding company (IHC) and imposing capital and liquidity requirements to the IHC. At the same time, we have adjusted our approach for the U.S. branches of a foreign bank with a large U.S. presence in recognition that branches are subject to a narrower set of permissible activities and operate as a direct extension of the parent bank. For these U.S. branches, we have imposed local liquidity requirements in light of the liquidity vulnerabilities that many U.S. branches of foreign banks experienced in the crisis, but no separate capital requirements. For IHCs that are subsidiaries of foreign-owned G-SIBs, the Federal Reserve requires such a firm to issue a minimum amount of loss-absorbing instruments to its foreign parent, known as internal TLAC, including a minimum amount of unsecured long-term debt.6In the event that an IHC was experiencing significant financial distress, the internal TLAC could be used to replenish the IHC's equity and maintain its solvency. The U.S. implementation of internal TLAC is modeled on the internal TLAC framework developed by the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which includes a calibration of the amount of loss-absorbing resources that should be prepositioned in a given jurisdiction.7Specifically, the FSB contemplates that internal TLAC requirements of a subsidiary of a foreign bank expected to be resolved through SPOE would be calibrated at 75 to 90 percent of the external TLAC requirement that would apply to the subsidiary if it were to be separately resolved. In implementing the TLAC standards in the United States, the Board calibrated the internal TLAC requirement for IHCs of foreign-owned G-SIBs at the high end of the FSB range, at around 90 percent. Adjustments to the Current RegimeThere are two principal points I have been making today. The first is that some amount of local capital and liquidity prepositioning can reduce the incentives for damaging and unpredictable seizures of resources by local regulators during times of stress--thus actually reducing the likelihood that improvised, beggar-thy-neighbor ring-fencing would frustrate completion of a successful SPOE resolution in the future. As we learned long ago out West, the branding of cattle creates the possibility of trust. The second point, however, is equally important: the best prepositioning structure is not an eternal verity mathematically deducible from first principles, but it is instead a practical balance designed to promote cooperation among humans, and any such balance is likely to be improvable with experience, reflection, and debate. We are interested in views from the firms and the public on how the regimes can be improved, and we expect to invite public comment on our living will guidance for U.S. and foreign firms in the near future. In addition, we are currently weighing the costs and benefits of our current approach of directing firms to determine the appropriate amount of prepositioned capital and liquidity. We are also considering whether formalizing resolution capital and liquidity requirements through a rulemaking process would improve the predictability and transparency of our approach. We continue to believe that the IHC and attendant requirements are appropriate for foreign banks with large U.S. operations. However, in light of our experience with these structures, I believe we should consider whether the internal TLAC calibration for IHCs could be adjusted to reflect the practice of other regulators without adversely affecting resolvability and U.S. financial stability. The current calibration is at the top end of the scale set forth by the FSB, and willingness by the United States to reconsider its calibration may prompt other jurisdictions to do the same, which could better the prospects of successful resolution for both foreign G-SIBs operating in the United States, and for U.S. G-SIBs operating abroad. Alternatively, it may be possible to streamline the elements of our resolution loss absorbency regime, which include both TLAC and long-term debt requirements. I will be recommending to my colleagues that we look closely at these possibilities in the coming weeks and seek comment on ways to further improve this framework. ConclusionWe are committed to working with other jurisdictions to continue to build the foundation of the SPOE resolution framework. In addition to finding the appropriate balance of flexibility and certainty that I have discussed, we continue to advocate for increasing the standardization in the global implementation of the regulatory capital rules, improving host supervisors' transparency into the global liquidity and capital positions of a G-SIB on a consolidated and deconsolidated basis, and addressing impediments to a successful SPOE resolution. As with all regulations, we will be open to considering adjustments that would improve transparency and efficiency and will continue to reassess our regime as we make advancements in developing the cross-border resolution framework. 1. "Home regulator" refers to the prudential regulatory agency of the parent bank, and "host regulator" refers to the prudential regulatory agency of a foreign branch or subsidiary of the parent bank.Return to text 2. Section 165(d) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires a large firm to submit an annual resolution plan, or living will, that describes the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. If the Federal Reserve and the FDIC determine that a firm's resolution plan is not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, the agencies, acting jointly, may impose more stringent prudential requirements on the firm until it remediates identified deficiencies.Return to text 3. Guidance for 2017 section 165(d) Annual Resolution Plan Submissions by Domestic Covered Companies that Submitted Resolution Plans in July 2015, available atwww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/bcreg20160413a1.pdf.Return to text 4. Id.Return to text 5. The liquidity position of an entity reflects high-quality liquid assets at the material entity less stressed net outflows to third parties and affiliates.Return to text 6. 12 CFR part 252, subpart G.Return to text 7. Financial Stability Board, "Principles on Loss-Absorbing and Recapitalisation of G-SIBs in Resolution" and "Total Loss-absorbing Capacity (TLAC) Term Sheet" (November 9, 2015), available atwww.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/TLAC-Principles-and-Term-Sheet-for-publication-final.pdf.Return to text