The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Monday communicated their expectations to 19 foreign-based banking organizations for the firms' next resolution plans. Resolution plans, required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. For foreign banking organizations, resolution plans are focused on their U.S. operations. The 19 foreign banking organizations, which submitted plans in December 2015, are: Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, S.A.; Banco Santander, S.A.; Bank of China Limited; Bank of Montreal; BNP Paribas; BPCE; Coöperatieve Rabobank U.A.; Crédit Agricole S.A.; HSBC Holdings plc; Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Ltd.; Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, Inc.; Mizuho Financial Group, Inc.; Royal Bank of Canada; Société Générale; Standard Chartered PLC; Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group, Inc.; The Bank of Nova Scotia; The Norinchukin Bank; and The Toronto-Dominion Bank. The next resolution plans from these companies are due no later than December 31, 2018. To reflect the limited complexity of most of these firms' U.S. operations, the agencies are further tailoring their expectations for these firms' 2018 resolution plans. The Federal Reserve Board is also releasing feedback letters issued to the firms.
The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced they will give favorable consideration under Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations to institutions that are located outside of the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, which were designated as major disaster areas in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria, for bank activities that help to revitalize or stabilize these areas. The CRA encourages financial institutions to help meet local credit and community development needs. The agencies give CRA consideration for bank activities such as loans, investments, or services with a primary purpose of community development. Widespread devastation from Hurricane Maria occurred in areas that are not connected to the U.S. mainland, and the resulting economic impact and other effects may extend to other parts of the United States. The agencies therefore have determined that it is appropriate to give favorable consideration to community development activities that help to revitalize or stabilize these disaster areas by financial institutions located anywhere in the United States, provided that they have been responsive to the community development needs and opportunities of their own CRA assessment areas. Such activities may include assistance to people displaced by the hurricane, including evacuees relocated to other states. Consideration for activities that assist the disaster areas or affected individuals will be given regardless of the median income of the census tract or the personal income of the individual. However, the agencies may give greater weight to activities that are most responsive to community needs, including the needs of low- and-moderate-income areas and individuals. The interagency statement is attached.
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. It is a pleasure to be here with you at the American Bar Association banking law committee annual meeting.1Thank you to Meg Tahyar, my longtime friend and colleague, for inviting me to speak today. These are still the early days of my tenure at the Federal Reserve--last weekend marked my first three months as the first Vice Chairman for Supervision. In those three months, people have had a lot of questions for me, but the most frequently asked question has been: What's next? Today I hope to give you some insights into how I am approaching the work of evaluating and improving the post-crisis regulatory regime and to outline some specific areas that are emerging as areas of focus early in my tenure. Some of those areas are closer to being ready for action, while others are topics that I believe are important and would benefit from more attention and discussion. My hope is that you will come away from our time together with a better sense of my preliminary thinking for charting a course forward on financial regulation. Efficiency, Transparency, and Simplicity of RegulationBefore I delve into specifics, let me say a few words about the principles that are guiding my approach to evaluating changes to the current regime. The body of post-crisis financial regulation is broad in scope, complicated in detail, and extraordinarily ambitious in its objectives. Core aspects of that project have resulted in critical gains to our financial system: higher and better quality capital, an innovative stress testing regime, new liquidity regulation, and improvements in the resolvability of large firms. We undoubtedly have a stronger and more resilient financial system due in significant part to the gains from those core reforms. These achievements are consistent with the responsibility of the Federal Reserve to be a steward of a safe financial system, and with the goal of maintaining the ability of banks to lend through the business cycle. That said, the Federal Reserve and our colleagues at other agencies have now spent the better part of the past decade building out and standing up the post-crisis regulatory regime. At this point, we have completed the bulk of the work of post-crisis regulation, with an important exception being the U.S. implementation of the recently concluded Basel III "end game" agreement on bank capital standards at the Basel Committee. As such, now is an eminently natural and expected time to step back and assess those efforts. It is our responsibility to ensure that they are working as intended and--given the breadth and complexity of this new body of regulation--it is inevitable that we will be able to improve them, especially with the benefit of experience and hindsight. In undertaking this review and assessment, in addition to ensuring that we are satisfied with the effectiveness of these regulations, I believe that we have an opportunity to improve the efficiency, transparency, and simplicity of regulation. By efficiency I mean the degree to which the net cost of regulation--whether in reduced economic growth or in increased frictions in the financial system--is outweighed by the benefits of the regulation. In other words, if we have a choice between two methods of equal effectiveness in achieving a goal, we should strive to choose the one that is less burdensome for both the system and regulators. Efficiency of regulation can be improved through a variety of means. For example, it can mean achieving a given regulation's objective using fewer tools. It can mean addressing unintended adverse consequences to the industry and the broader public from a regulation or eliminating perverse incentives created by a regulation. It can mean calibrating a given regulation more precisely to the risks in need of mitigation. It can also mean simpler examination procedures for bank supervisors, or less intrusive examinations for well managed firms. In our approach to assessing post-crisis regulation, we should consider all of these ways of improving efficiency. Transparency is an objective that ought to particularly resonate with this audience. As lawyers, we were all trained to view transparency as a necessary precondition to the core democratic ideal of government accountability--the governed have a right to know the rules imposed on them by the government. In addition, as any good lawyer also recognizes, there are valuable, practical benefits to transparency around rulemaking; even good ideas can improve as a result of exposure to a variety of perspectives. Finally, simplicity of regulation is a principle that promotes public understanding of regulation, promotes meaningful compliance by the industry with regulation, and reduces unexpected negative synergies among regulations. Confusion that results from overly complex regulation does not advance the goal of a safe system. Common Ground Areas of ImprovementWhen I arrived at the Federal Reserve, the early stages of reflection on how to improve the cost-benefit balance of post-crisis regulation had already begun, mainly in a few narrow areas of focus. These were areas of low-hanging fruit in which relatively broad consensus was reached that efficiency enhancements were available with no material cost to the resiliency or resolvability of the banking system. My colleague and Chairman-nominee Jay Powell spoke about five of these areas last summer when he served as the Board's oversight governor for supervision and regulation: small bank capital simplification, burden reduction in resolution planning, enhancements to stress testing, leverage ratio recalibration, and Volcker rule simplification.2I wholeheartedly support these initiatives, and I am pleased that some of them have progressed even in the months since the summer. The banking agencies recently proposed changes to the capital rules for smaller firms, consistent with last year's Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act report, which is a positive step toward meaningful burden relief for smaller banks.3The Federal Reserve, along with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, extended the upcoming resolution planning cycles for the eight most systemic domestic banking firms and for foreign banks with limited U.S. operations in order to allow for more time between submissions.4I believe we should continue to improve the resolution planning process in light of the substantial progress made by firms over the past few years, including a permanent extension of submission cycles from annual to once every two years and reduced burden for banking firms with less significant systemic footprints. And, most recently, the Federal Reserve released a package of proposed enhancements to the transparency of our stress testing program, which is currently out for comment.5The progress you have seen in those areas represents constructive early steps. Leverage ratio recalibration also is among the Federal Reserve's highest-priority, near-term initiatives. We have made considerable progress on that front in the past few months, and I expect that you will see a proposal on this topic relatively soon. Finally, the relevant agencies have begun work on a proposal to streamline the Volcker rule. This project is a quite comprehensive and substantial undertaking as well as a five-agency endeavor. As such, it will naturally take a bit of work for the agencies to congeal around a thoughtful Volcker rule 2.0 proposal for public review. Volcker rule reform remains a priority in the Federal Reserve's regulatory efforts. Emerging Areas for ReviewWith that update on the familiar, I will turn to my own impressions of what is next for post-crisis regulation. In my early days as the Vice Chairman for Supervision, I asked our staff to conduct a comprehensive review of the regulations in the core areas of reform that I outlined earlier--capital, stress testing, liquidity, and resolution. The objective is to consider the effect of those regulatory frameworks on resiliency and resolvability of the financial system, on credit availability and economic growth, and more broadly to evaluate their costs and benefits. This is a comprehensive and serious process, and work is still underway. I should note, however, that I have already formed views on a few areas that warrant more focus, and that I will be working with my colleagues on the Board to constructively consider. I will start with the issue of tailoring supervision and regulation to the size, systemic footprint, risk profile, and business model of banking firms. The Federal Reserve has devoted considerable energy in its post-crisis regulatory work to incorporate the tailoring concept in its regulation and supervision across the spectrum of small, medium, and large firms. A recent example of this approach is our late 2017 proposal to simplify capital requirements for small- and medium-sized banking firms. In my view, there is further work for the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies to do on the tailoring front. I would emphasize that tailoring is not an objective limited in scope to a subset of the smallest firms. As my colleagues and I have said before, the character of our regulation should match the character of the risk at the institution. Accordingly, we should also be looking at additional opportunities for more tailoring for larger, non-Global Systemically Important Banks, or non-G-SIBs. In this regard, I support congressional efforts regarding tailoring, whether by raising the current $50 billion statutory threshold for application of enhanced prudential standards or by articulating a so-called factors-based threshold. Irrespective of where the legislative efforts land, I believe we at the Federal Reserve have the responsibility to ensure that we do further tailoring for the institutions that remain subject to our rules to ensure that regulation matches the risk of the firm. Take for example large non-G-SIBs whose failure would not individually pose a risk to U.S. financial stability. Even without financial stability implications, the distress or failure of these firms still could harm the U.S. economy by, for example, significantly disrupting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In my view, this tranche of the U.S. banking system ought to be subject to regulations that are generally stricter than those that apply to small banking firms, but that are also meaningfully less strict than those that apply to the G-SIBs. The Board has effected this sort of G-SIB versus non-G-SIB tailoring among large banks in many areas of the regulatory framework. Most notably, each of the risk-based capital requirements, leverage requirements, stress testing requirements, and total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) requirements is calibrated substantially more strictly for G-SIBs than for large non-G-SIBs. However, in some key regulations, there is no distinction between the requirements for large non-G-SIBs and G-SIBs. Liquidity regulation, for example, does not have a G-SIB versus non-G-SIB gradation. In particular, the full liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) requirement and internal stress testing requirements of enhanced prudential standards apply to large, non-G-SIB banks in the same way that they apply to G-SIB banks. I believe it is time to take concrete steps toward calibrating liquidity requirements differently for large, non-G-SIBs than for G-SIBs. And I see prospects for further liquidity tailoring in that the content and frequency of LCR reporting are the same for the range of firms currently subject to the modified LCR as they are for the large non-G-SIBs that are subject to the full LCR. We should also explore opportunities to apply additional tailoring for these firms in other areas, such as single counterparty credit limits and resolution planning requirements. Another area that I think we should revisit are the "advanced approaches" thresholds that identify internationally active banks. These thresholds are significant not only for identifying which banking firms are subject to the advanced approaches risk-based capital requirements, but also for identifying which firms are subject to various other Basel Committee standards, such as the supplementary leverage ratio, the countercyclical capital buffer, and the LCR. The metrics used to identify internationally active firms--$250 billion in total assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign exposures--were formulated well over a decade ago, were the result of a defensible but not ineluctable analysis, and have not been refined since then. We should explore ways to bring these criteria into better alignment with our objectives. A third area in which I will be working with my Board colleagues is a meaningful simplification of our framework of loss absorbency requirements. There are different ways to count the number of loss absorbency constraints that our large banking firms face--which is perhaps in itself an indication of a surfeit of complexity if we can't be perfectly sure of how to count them--but the number I come up with is 24 total requirements in the framework. While I do not know precisely the socially optimal number of loss absorbency requirements for large banking firms, I am reasonably certain that 24 is too many. Candidates for simplification include: elimination of the advanced approaches risk-based capital requirements; one or more ratios in stress testing; and some simplification of our TLAC rule. I am not the first Federal Reserve governor to mention some of these possibilities, and we should put them back on the table in the context of a more holistic discussion of streamlining these requirements. Let me be clear, however, that while I am advocating a simplification of large bank loss absorbency requirements, I am not advocating an enervation of the regulatory capital regime applicable to large banking firms. Although not a post-crisis regulation, the Board's complex and occasionally opaque framework for making determinations of control under the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act) is another area that is ripe for re-examination through the lenses of efficiency, transparency, and simplicity. As you know, a determination of control under the BHC Act is significant because even remote entities in a controlled group can be subject to the BHC Act's restrictions on activities and a host of other regulatory requirements. Under the Board's control framework--built up piecemeal over many decades--the practical determinants of when one company is deemed to control another are now quite a bit more ornate than the basic standards set forth in the statute and in some cases cannot be discovered except through supplication to someone who has spent a long apprenticeship in the art of Fed interpretation. The process can be burdensome and time-consuming both for the requester and Federal Reserve staff. We are taking a serious look at rationalizing and recalibrating this framework. Finally, as I mentioned earlier, an enhanced stress testing transparency package was released for public comment last month. I personally believe that our stress testing disclosures can go further. I appreciate the risks to the financial system of the industry converging on the Federal Reserve's stress testing model too completely, so I am hesitant to support complete disclosure of our models for that reason. However, I believe that the disclosure we have provided does not go far enough to provide visibility into the supervisory models that often deliver a firm's binding capital constraint. It is important in any proposal to receive comments, and I can say that I and my colleagues on the Board will be paying particularly close attention to your comments on how we might improve this current proposal. Concluding RemarksTo conclude, I hope that these remarks give you a sense of our approach to analyzing and improving post-crisis regulation. As I mentioned earlier, the areas of core reform--capital, liquidity, stress testing, and resolution--have produced a stronger and more resilient system and should be preserved. We have made great progress, but there is further work to do. Some clear improvements are in the offing in the relatively near future. Other areas will benefit from longer term discussion. I look forward to engaging with you and the public more broadly as I help to chart a course for the important work ahead. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. Jerome H. Powell, "Relationship Between Regulation and Economic Growth," (testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, June 22, 2017).Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies propose simplifying regulatory capital rules," news release, September 27, 2017.Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies extend next resolution plan filing deadline for certain domestic and foreign banks," news release, September 28, 2017.Return to text 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board requests comment on package of proposals that would increase the transparency of its stress testing program," news release, December 7, 2017.Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee, at its annual organizational meeting this week, unanimously reaffirmed its "Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy" with an updated reference to the median of participants' estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (December 2017). The Committee first adopted the statement at its January 2012 meeting and has reaffirmed it, with appropriate revisions, at its annual organizational meetings each January. Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF)Amended January 30, 2018 Previous version:Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF)Amended January 31, 2017 For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Open Market Committee, at its annual organizational meeting this week, unanimously selected Jerome H. Powell to serve as its Chairman, effective February 3, 2018. He is scheduled to be sworn in as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the next business day at approximately 9 a.m. EST February 5. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday added three new tools to its web site to provide interactive access to data from the Board'sFinancial Accounts of the United States(Z.1) release, which tracks the aggregate wealth of U.S. households and other economic sectors. The data visualization tools show, at a glance, the evolution of key financial statistics, changes in household debt in recent years for each county and metro area in the United States, and developments in state and local pension funding for each state. The Board plans to add additional visualization tools using data sets from theFinancial Accounts of the United Statesas well as the Board's Enhanced Financial Accounts project, which augments theFinancial Accounts of the United Statesby providing information on additional types of financial intermediation, in finer detail, and at higher frequency. The data visualization tools are available atwww.federalreserve.gov/data/dataviz.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced a $29 million penalty against the U.S. operations of Mega International Commercial Bank Co., Ltd., of Taipei, Taiwan, for anti-money laundering violations and required the firm to improve its anti-money laundering oversight and controls. As detailed in the consent cease and desist order, the Board took action because the firm's U.S. banking operations did not maintain an effective program to comply with the Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering laws. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the designation of the chairs and deputy chairs of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks for 2018. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as chair and a second as deputy chair. Following are the names of the chairs and deputy chairs designated by the Board for 2018: Boston – Gary L. Gottlieb, M.D., chief executive officer, Partners In Health, Boston, Massachusetts, renamed Chair. Phillip L. Clay, professor – Department of Urban Studies and Planning, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, renamed Deputy Chair. New York – Sara Horowitz, founder and executive director, Freelancers Union, Brooklyn, New York, renamed Chair. Denise Scott, executive vice president, Local Initiatives Support Corporation, New York, New York, renamed Deputy Chair. Philadelphia – Brian McNeill, president and chief executive officer, TouchPoint, Inc., Concordville, Pennsylvania, named Chair. Phoebe Haddon, chancellor, Rutgers University-Camden, Camden, New Jersey, named Deputy Chair. Cleveland – Dawne S. Hickton, president and founding partner, Cumberland Highstreet Partners, Sewickley, Pennsylvania, named Chair. Dwight E. Smith, president and chief executive officer, Sophisticated Systems, Inc., Columbus, Ohio, named Deputy Chair. Richmond – Margaret G. Lewis, president (retired), HCA Capital Division, Richmond, Virginia, renamed Chair. Kathy J. Warden, president and chief operating officer, Northrop Grumman Corporation, Falls Church, Virginia, renamed Deputy Chair. Atlanta – Michael J. Jackson, chairman, chief executive officer, and president, AutoNation, Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, named Chair. Myron A. Gray, president, U.S. Operations, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chair. Chicago – Anne R. Pramaggiore, president and chief executive officer, ComEd, Chicago, Illinois, renamed Chair. E. Scott Santi, chairman and chief executive officer, Illinois Tool Works Inc., Glenview, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chair. St. Louis – Kathleen M. Mazzarella, chairman, president and chief executive officer, Graybar Electric Company, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, renamed Chair. Suzanne Sitherwood, president and chief executive officer, Spire Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, renamed Deputy Chair. Minneapolis – Kendall J. Powell, chairman (retired), General Mills, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, named Chair. Harry D. Melander, president, Minnesota Building and Construction Trades Council, St. Paul, Minnesota, named Deputy Chair. Kansas City – Rose M. Washington, executive director, Tulsa Economic Development Corporation, Tulsa, Oklahoma, renamed Chair. Steve Maestas, chief executive officer, Maestas Development Group, Albuquerque, New Mexico, renamed Deputy Chair. Dallas – Matthew K. Rose, executive chairman, BNSF Railway Company, Fort Worth, Texas, renamed Chair. Greg L. Armstrong, chairman and chief executive officer, Plains All American Pipeline L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chair. San Francisco – Alexander R. Mehran, chairman and chief executive officer, Sunset Development Company, San Ramon, California, renamed Chair. Barry M. Meyer, chairman and chief executive officer (retired), Warner Bros. Entertainment and chairman and founder, North Ten Mile Associates, Los Angeles, California, renamed Deputy Chair.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Associated Banc-Corp, Green Bay, Wisconsin, to acquire Bank Mutual Corporation ("BMC"), Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and thereby indirectly acquire BMC's subsidiary savings association, Bank Mutual, Brown Deer, Wisconsin. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application by Deutsche Pfandbriefbank AG, Unterschleissheim, Germany, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act by Huron Community Bank, East Tawas, Michigan, to acquire certain assets and assume certain liabilities of a branch of First Federal of Northern Michigan, Alpena, Michigan. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Goldman Sachs Bank USA (PDF), New York, New YorkOrder of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty, dated January 12, 2018 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that it has finalized a rule adjusting the Board's maximum civil money penalties, as required by law. In November 2015, a law was passed that requires all federal agencies to adjust their maximum civil money penalty limits annually for inflation, rather than every four years as previously required. The maximum civil money penalty limits depend on several factors, including the severity and type of violation. Additionally, the law dictates the annual adjustment formula for federal agencies. A civil money penalty is a fine imposed by a federal agency as a result of misconduct. The final rule increases the maximum civil money penalty limits for 2018. The new penalty amounts have been published in the Federal Register and apply as of January 10th, 2018. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced preliminary results indicating that the Reserve Banks provided for payments of approximately $80.2 billion of their estimated 2017 net income to the U.S. Treasury. The 2017 audited Reserve Bank financial statements are expected to be published in March and may include adjustments to these preliminary unaudited results. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2017 estimated net income of $80.7 billion represents a decrease of $11.7 billion from 2016, primarily attributable to an increase of $13.8 billion in interest expense associated with reserve balances held by depository institutions that was partially offset by an increase of $2.5 billion in interest income on securities acquired through open market operations. Net income for 2017 was derived primarily from $113.6 billion in interest income on securities acquired through open market operations (U.S. Treasury securities, federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and GSE debt securities) and foreign currency gains of $1.9 billion that result from the daily revaluation of foreign currency denominated investments at current exchange rates. The Federal Reserve Banks had interest expense of $25.9 billion primarily associated with reserve balances held by depository institutions, and incurred interest expense of $3.4 billion on securities sold under agreement to repurchase. Operating expenses of the Reserve Banks, net of amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Treasury and other entities for services the Reserve Banks provided as fiscal agents, totaled $4.1 billion in 2017. In addition, the Reserve Banks were assessed $724 million for the costs related to producing, issuing, and retiring currency, $740 million for Board expenditures, and $573 million to fund the operations of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Additional earnings were derived from income from services of $442 million. Statutory dividends totaled $784 million in 2017. The attached chart illustrates the amount the Reserve Banks distributed to the U.S. Treasury from 2008 through 2017 (estimated). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: AmBank Holdings, Inc., Davenport, IowaWritten Agreement dated February 2, 2012Terminated December 27, 2017 The enforcement action from February 2012 can be foundhereand other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Bank of Gueydan, Gueydan, LouisianaWritten Agreement issued August 12, 2014Terminated January 25, 2018 The enforcement action from August 2014 can be foundhere, and other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Heartland Bank, Little Rock, Arkansas,PCA Directive dated August 15, 2017Terminated January 18, 2018 The enforcement action from August 2017 can be foundhereand other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. The Board on Tuesday also announced that it had denied a motion to void the $1.2 million fine and permanent ban on employment in the banking industry against Christopher Ashton, the former Global Head of Foreign Exchange (FX) Spot Trading at Barclays Bank PLC, in connection with the manipulation of FX pricing benchmarks. In May 2017, the Boardbanned and finedAshton. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the termination of enforcement actions related to residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing issued in 2011 and 2012 against 10 banking organizations. The Board also announced civil money penalties totaling $35.1 million against five of these 10 organizations that had not yet been fined for their mortgage servicing deficiencies related to those enforcement actions. When it issued the mortgage servicing enforcement actions, the Board announced that it believed monetary penalties were appropriate for all firms subject to the actions for their mortgage servicing deficiencies. The Board previously assessed penalties against the other firms under mortgage servicing enforcement actions. With the penalties announced today, the Board has now assessed penalties totaling approximately $1.1 billion against all Federal Reserve supervised firms under mortgage servicing enforcement actions. The 10 banking organizations are: Ally Financial Inc.; Bank of America Corporation; CIT Group, Inc. (as successor to IMB HoldCo LLC); The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; HSBC North America Holdings, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; Morgan Stanley; The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.; SunTrust Banks, Inc.; and U.S. Bancorp. The actions required all of the firms to improve oversight of residential mortgage loan servicing and required the firms with mortgage servicing subsidiaries supervised by the Federal Reserve to correct deficiencies in residential mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure processing. The termination of the actions was based on evidence of sustainable improvements in the firms' oversight and mortgage servicing practices. In addition, the Board announced the termination of a supplemental agreement with Ally, issued in 2012 after Ally's mortgage servicing subsidiaries sought bankruptcy protection, which addressed the parent company's contingent obligations under the 2011 enforcement action against Ally. This agreement is no longer necessary after the termination of the 2011 action announced on Friday. The civil money penalties announced today are: $14 million against Goldman Sachs; $8 million against Morgan Stanley; $5.2 million against CIT (as successor to IMB); $4.4 million against U.S. Bancorp; and $3.5 million against PNC. Also on Friday, the Board announced the termination by the Board and other federal financial regulatory agencies of joint enforcement actions issued in 2011 against Lender Processing Services, Inc. (LPS), which was succeeded by ServiceLink Holdings, LLC, and against MERSCORP Holdings, Inc., formerly known as MERSCORP, Inc. (MERS). These enforcement actions addressed deficiencies in the foreclosure-related services LPS and MERS each provided to entities regulated by the agencies. The Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation are parties to the action against LPS. Each of these agencies as well as the Federal Housing Finance Agency are parties to the action against MERS. The termination of the actions was based on evidence of sustainable improvements in the foreclosure-related practices of LPS and MERS. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Independent Foreclosure Review Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: American Express Company, New York, New York andAmerican Express Travel Related Services Company, Inc., New York, New YorkConsent Order dated October 1, 2012Terminated January 8, 2018 Liberty Bank, South San Francisco, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated August 5, 2016Terminated January 8, 2018 The enforcement action from October 2012 can be foundhereand the enforcement action from August 2016 can be foundhere.Other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Jeffrey R. DavisFormer Vice President of Loans; Putnam County Bank, Hurricane, West VirginiaConsent cease and desist order and $25,000 civil money penaltyDated January 24, 2018 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested comment on proposed guidance that would clarify the Board's supervisory expectations related to risk management for large financial institutions. The guidance is part of a broader initiative to develop a new rating system for large financial institutions that will align with the post-crisis supervisory program. In August 2017, the Board invited comment on the proposed rating system, which would reflect assessments of a firm's capital, liquidity, and governance and controls. Also in August 2017, the Board issued a proposal identifying attributes of effective boards of directors. The supervisory expectations described in today's proposed guidance, as well as those for boards of directors, would help inform the Federal Reserve's overall supervisory evaluation of a firm's governance and controls. The proposed guidance released today identifies core principles for effective senior management, who are directly accountable to the firm's board of directors for the day-to-day management of the firm. The core principles include ensuring that the firm manages its risk in a way that is prudent and consistent with its business strategy and risk management capabilities. The proposed guidance also identifies core principles for a firm's business line management and independent risk management. Business line management is responsible for the day-to-day management of specific business lines, such as residential mortgage operations. Independent risk management is responsible for conducting ongoing objective and critical assessments of a firm's risks using personnel independent of the firm's business line managers. The proposed guidance would apply to large financial institutions, including: domestic bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets; foreign banks operating in the United States with $50 billion or more in combined U.S. assets; and nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council for supervision by the Board. Comments on this proposal will be accepted until March 15, 2018. The Board previously extended the comment periods for the rating system and board effectiveness guidance until February 15, 2018, so that the public could comment on and understand these components together. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a solid rate. Gains in employment, household spending, and business fixed investment have been solid, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have continued to run below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have increased in recent months but remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with further gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions will remain strong. Inflation on a 12‑month basis is expected to move up this year and to stabilize around the Committee's 2 percent objective over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but the Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1-1/4 to 1‑1/2 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were Janet L. Yellen, Chair; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Thomas I. Barkin; Raphael W. Bostic; Lael Brainard; Loretta J. Mester; Jerome H. Powell; Randal K. Quarles; and John C. Williams. Implementation Note issued January 31, 2018
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from December 4 and December 13, 2017. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 12-13, 2017. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 12-13, 2017:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955