Three federal banking agencies on Tuesday invited public comment on a proposal to update their standards for how firms measure counterparty credit risk posed by derivative contracts under the agencies' regulatory capital rules. The proposed changes are designed to better reflect the current derivatives market and incorporate risks observed during the 2007-2008 financial crisis. The proposal, jointly issued by the Federal Reserve Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, would provide the "standardized approach for measuring counterparty credit risk," also known as "SA-CCR" as an alternative approach to the agencies' current exposure methodology, or CEM, for calculating derivative exposure under the agencies' regulatory capital rules. SA-CCR better reflects the current derivatives market and would provide important improvements to risk sensitivity, resulting in more appropriate capital requirements for derivative contracts exposure. The "advanced approaches" banking organizations--firms that have $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets or $10 billion or more in on-balance sheet foreign exposure--would be required to use SA-CCR for purposes of calculating both standardized total risk-weighted assets and the supplementary leverage ratio. Non-advanced approaches banking organizations would be allowed to use either CEM or SA-CCR to determine the exposure amount for derivative contracts. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication in the Federal Register. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Jerome H. Powell will host a town hall meeting with educators from across the country on February 6, 2019. The educators will join the Chairman at 7 p.m. EST in the Board Room of the Board's main building in Washington, D.C., and participate via webcast from Federal Reserve Bank offices throughout the country. The Chairman will respond to questions from both the in-person audience and participants at the Reserve Bank offices. The event will be live streamed to the public atwww.federalreserve.govandYouTube. Social media users can follow the Federal Reserve Board's Twitter feed at@FederalReserveand Facebook page athttps://www.facebook.com/federalreserve, and they may join the discussion about the event by using the hashtag: #FedTownHall. After the event, the Board will post a transcript and video recording on its website. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lael Brainard At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Denver Branch, Denver, Colorado Good afternoon. I am delighted to be here in Denver for a few days to visit with community leaders working to support affordable housing, workforce development, and small businesses across the Mile High City. So far, I have had a chance to hear firsthand about the housing affordability challenges facing many Denver families, which are requiring some families to make difficult choices between paying rent and paying for other necessities, and the associated challenges of homelessness. I have also had the opportunity to see the incredible work underway in Denver to ensure that individuals and families in need have access to safe, affordable shelter and the healthcare and case management services they need to get back on their feet. Not only is Denver's approach to service delivery a national model, but your use of Social Impact Bonds to fund those programs is also at the forefront of innovation in the community development sector. I can see there is a lot of pride in what you are accomplishing locally, and I look forward to seeing more groundbreaking work during the remainder of my time here. Every few months, I try to make a visit such as this one to better understand how different communities across the country are experiencing the economy. Promoting community development is one of the key purposes and functions of the Federal Reserve, and it requires that we have a strong understanding of the impacts of financial policies and practices in communities in all of our Districts.1 I have heard about the important role the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) has played in strengthening community investment, so I am happy to have this opportunity to learn about your perspectives, as bankers here in Denver, on opportunities for further improvement. This roundtable is the first of several that the Federal Reserve System will host in the next several months to hear directly from bankers, community members, practitioners, researchers, and others about improving the CRA's effectiveness in making credit available to lower-income areas. We are inviting representatives of other banking regulatory agencies to join us so that we can all benefit from learning from different local experiences with the CRA. Our hosts at the Reserve Banks will be taking notes, and a summary of the findings from this outreach initiative will be made public. Before we get started, I want to say a few words about the interagency process for revising CRA regulations and the Federal Reserve's priorities. As you know, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency recently published an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) to solicit public comment on a variety of questions related to revising CRA regulations. Comments are due by November 19. Last week, the Board heard from members of the Fed's Community Advisory Council that there may be some confusion about commenting on the ANPR because it was not published on an interagency basis. Even though the Federal Reserve did not join in the publication of the ANPR, we will be reading the comment letters in anticipation of working with the Comptroller and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on a joint proposal. We understand the importance of having the agencies work toward one set of CRA regulations that are clear and consistently applied and will do everything we can to make that possible. CRA regulations are complicated, and the regulators will benefit from perspectives from a variety of channels, so I encourage you all to submit comments. The CRA is too important to the financial well-being of communities across this country for banks and community members to disengage in any part of this process. The CRA has not only made more credit available in lower-income areas, but it has also helped to create a valuable community and economic development infrastructure. Revising the regulations will require careful consideration in order to strengthen that infrastructure. All of the agencies share the stated purpose of revising the regulations, which is to promote more, not less, CRA activity in underserved areas, as the Comptroller stated in recent testimony.2Properly balancing the goals of simplifying and clarifying the regulations, with the goal of promoting more CRA activity through stronger local community engagement, will require careful consideration. I want to emphasize the Board's commitment to regulatory revisions that strengthen the CRA's purpose, which is to encourage banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. In that regard, there are a few principles that will guide our work. First, we should update the area in which the agencies assess a bank's CRA activities while retaining the core focus on place. I look forward to hearing your suggestions about how we can broaden our evaluation of banks' CRA performances to take into account the technological advances that have made it possible for banks to serve customers remotely, while retaining the focus on local credit needs that vary from place to place. The Federal Reserve's research, surveys, and outreach point to an economy that is very strong on an aggregate level but significantly more varied at the community level, with many neighborhoods still struggling. Second, the CRA regulations should be tailored to banks of different sizes and business models. Currently, the evaluation methods are tailored to banks of different sizes and business models. We should consider whether assessment areas also should be tailored to the business models employed by banks. Third, any redesign of CRA regulations should be done with the goal of encouraging banks to seek out opportunities in underserved areas. This is not simply a question of expanding a bank's assessment area, but of providing more incentives for banks to more effectively address the needs in neighborhoods that they may already be serving with branches. For example, there are concerns that distortions may lead some areas to become credit hot spots, while others become credit deserts. Investments, such as Low-Income Housing Tax Credits, are in such high demand in some areas that there is little return on investment, while it is difficult to find investors in other areas. We believe that it is important for revisions to CRA regulations to address this type of market distortion to promote more lending and investment in smaller markets within a bank's footprint. Fourth, the Federal Reserve is interested in promoting greater consistency and predictability in CRA evaluations and ratings. We see the value of clearer definitions and metrics that use publicly available information to identify local credit needs and opportunities. Finally, it is important to recognize that the CRA is one of several mutually reinforcing laws. The central thrust of the CRA is to encourage banks to ensure that all creditworthy borrowers have fair access to credit. For banks to be successful in meeting the credit needs of their entire community, it has long been recognized that they must guard against discriminatory or unfair and deceptive lending practices. With these principles in mind, I look forward to hearing your ideas on how we can make the CRA a more effective tool for bringing credit and capital to underserved communities. 1.SeeThe Federal Reserve System Purposes & Functionsatwww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/pf.htm.Return to text 2.U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Economic Club of New York Luncheon, New York, New York Thank you for having me.1I very much appreciate the opportunity to speak to this distinguished group and look forward to my discussion with Greg Ip. Now almost exactly a year into my appointment as Vice Chairman for Supervision, I have, as might be expected, spoken publicly most often about banking and the financial system more generally. However, supervision and regulation are not all that I do at the Federal Reserve, and I welcome this opportunity to speak to another part of my day job, as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Today I would like to offer my take on the economic outlook, which is optimistic, and explain how I view my optimism as consistent with the continued gradual pace of policy tightening that many Committee participants have projected. In particular, I will explain how my views on potential growth help shape my outlook, both for the economy and for the appropriate path of monetary policy. Relatedly, I will discuss the uncertainties that arise when a central element of the outlook--in this case, the potential capacity of the economy--is unknown and largely unobservable. Such uncertainty can complicate policymaking in even what appears to be a very healthy economy, providing a further argument for gradualism. Where We Are NowIn previous remarks on the economic outlook, delivered at a National Association for Business Economics conference in February, I characterized the U.S. economy as being in a "good spot" and asked if the economy had reached a positive turning point following an extended period of post-crisis slow growth. I argued that while it might be too soon to call a turning point, there was a definite possibility of an upside surprise.2 So now that we are fairly deep into 2018, where do we stand overall? My view has not changed all that much from February. While many other forecasters had to revise up their forecasts over the course of the year, my own outlook is basically unchanged, because the economy is evolving essentially as I expected at the outset of the year. The economy remains in a good spot. Gross domestic product increased a robust 3‑1/4 percent in the first half of the year, and indicators suggest continued strong growth through the summer. Economic conditions are as close to meeting the Federal Reserve's dual mandate for monetary policy--maximum sustainable employment and price stability‑‑as they have been in a long time. Inflation is in line with the Committee's 2 percent objective, and the unemployment rate is at nearly a 50-year low. How long can this strong growth be sustained? The answer depends largely on what form growth takes. Growth that is supported by increases in the productive capacity of the economy should be durable. However, if growth primarily reflects strong demand that stretches production beyond its sustainable capacity, the economy will run into constraints that will result in slower growth, higher prices, or a potentially destabilizing buildup of financial imbalances. So, which is it? Unfortunately, it is very difficult to tell. I will return to that question shortly. That said, I see many reasons to be optimistic about the growth of the potential capacity of the economy over the next few years. In part, my optimism is rooted in the view that many of the factors that have been weighing on potential growth since the financial crisis could be lifting. So, have we reached the turning point? While I believe the issue remains unresolved, the recent evidence is encouraging. Have We Reached a Turning Point?Why am I optimistic about the economy's supply potential? The growth of potential can, at the most basic level, be broken down into two factors: the supply of labor and the productivity of that labor. Productivity, in turn, is importantly affected by changes in the stock of capital--that is, machines and factories--as well as technological advances and improved production methods. I see reasons to be hopeful about both factors. Let us start with labor. For some time, the contribution of the labor force to potential growth has been held down by the predictable drag of baby boomers moving into retirement. However, the decline in labor force participation following the financial crisis exceeded even what might be expected given this long-standing downward trend-- in particular, as the participation of prime-age workers (those between the ages of 25 and 54) fell and teenagers exited the workforce in droves. The reasons behind the fall in participation among non-retirement-age workers have been the subject of much debate. However, I see little reason to assume that it will be permanent, and we have already seen some signs of a turnaround. Thus, I think there is some potential for labor force participation to move up, perhaps as workers respond to the incentives of plentiful job opportunities and higher wages, thereby adding to the productive capacity of the economy and pushing back the constraints on growth. Some recent labor force trends have been promising. For example, the two-decade-long trend increase in the population not in the labor force on account of disability peaked in 2014 and has started to move down quite rapidly--again, for reasons that defy easy explanation but may reflect the general improvement in labor market opportunities.3 I will now turn to productivity. Labor productivity has averaged an annual growth rate of only 3/4 percent since 2011, far below the 2-1/4 percent pace that prevailed in the two decades before the financial crisis. Although there are competing theories, the productivity decline is not well understood, and a consensus explanation has yet to emerge. As such, the slowdown could reverse unpredictably as well. The most recent data have been moving in the right direction, but only haltingly, with labor productivity increasing about 1-1/4 percent over the past year. There are reasons that productivity growth could shake off some of its recent torpidity. I would like to start with the capital stock. After a few years of abysmal business-sector investment spending, it appears as though the drought has broken. After picking up in 2017, business fixed investment climbed a robust 10 percent at an annual rate in the first half of this year, likely supported by lower corporate tax rates and other incentives in last year's tax bill. Also, indicators for investment, including orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods, point toward continued strength, and survey evidence points to high business optimism and solid capital expenditure plans. More capital should allow labor to be more productive. I am also a bit of a techno-enthusiast. We are in the early stages of a more widespread application of a wave of new technologies, such as 5G communications, AI (artificial intelligence) and machine learning, and 3-D printing. It might be that the productivity gains associated with these and other new technologies are embodied in new capital equipment and will only now start to become apparent as the investment drought of recent years comes to an end. A tighter economy could also create incentives for firms to revamp their production methods to save on scarce labor resources. To summarize, the economy has been doing very well. Whether this performance is sustained will be importantly determined by whether growth is supported by increases in the economy's potential. I am hopeful that potential growth, and particularly productivity, could accelerate from its relatively anemic pace of late, sustaining growth without overheating the economy. The more the economy's potential growth increases, the more gradual we can be in our removal of monetary policy accommodation. Thus, an assessment of the pace of potential growth will be an important input into what I view as the appropriate path of policy to achieve our objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. The Difficulty in Identifying PotentialThe tricky thing, as I pointed out earlier, is that potential output is unobserved and can only be inferred from the behavior of other measured economic indicators. Traditionally, as taught in Econ 101, inflation provides a signal on whether the economy is operating above or below its potential level. If inflation moves up in a sustained manner, not just because of temporary shocks, then the economy is likely operating above its productive capacity, as firms have the leeway to raise prices given the strength of demand. Likewise, if inflation moves down persistently, then the economy is likely operating with some slack, as firms restrain prices to sell their products in the face of weak demand. If inflation is the primary indicator of the economy's position relative to potential, how confident can we be in the quality of the signal? It has been noted--quite frequently, I might add--that the relationship between inflation and the tightness of the economy has gotten weaker, which is to say that inflation appears to be less affected by movements in economic slack or tightness, traditionally measured by the unemployment rate, than in the past. As the role of slack in explaining inflation has diminished, inflation expectations have assumed greater importance. However, it is reasonable to ask, if inflation is, in fact, now largely a reflection of inflation expectations, is inflation still a good indicator of the cyclical state of the economy? Or, more directly, can we count on inflation to warn us in time if the economy is overheating? To be a little controversial, perhaps what we are witnessing with inflation is an application of what has been called Goodhart's law, named after Charles Goodhart, the distinguished scholar of central banking at the London School of Economics.4The law can be summarized as the idea that if an indicator becomes a target of policy, that indicator loses its value as a gauge of the state of the economy. Rather, the indicator becomes a signal of the public's belief in the competence and commitment of the government agency that is targeting the indicator. Something along these lines could be happening to inflation, especially given the important role of expected inflation in the behavior of actual inflation. Perhaps inflation is just sending a signal of people's trust in the Fed's ability to meet its inflation objective. If so, no complaints here. That is a good thing. However, a problem does arise if the Fed remains reliant on inflation as our only gauge of the economy's position relative to its potential. There are risks in pushing the economy into a place it does not want to go if we limit ourselves to navigating by what might be a faulty indicator. Anchored inflation expectations might mask the inflation signal coming from an overheated economy for a period, but I have no doubt that prices would eventually move up in response to resource constraints. The ultimate price, from the perspective of the dual mandate, would be an unanchoring of inflation expectations. Of course, I view this more as a risk than my baseline expectation. As I have said, I am optimistic about potential growth, and I expect that even relatively strong growth can be met without running into economic constraints. However, I also think that we should pay attention to other indicators of tightness and overheating in addition to inflation. There are other signs of potential besides inflation, including, but not limited to, direct measures of labor utilization or indications of shortages and bottlenecks in production. Policy ConsiderationsHow should these thoughts affect monetary policy? I began my remarks by noting that there may be reason to think that the productive capacity of our economy could be accelerating, which would allow a more gradual withdrawal of accommodation without overheating. But I have noted as well that there may be reason to think that resource constraints could be more binding than current inflation measures would traditionally indicate, which would call for a more athletic response. Moreover, there is today a higher degree of uncertainty about many of these factors--measures of labor slack, the relation between labor slack and inflation, the sensitivity of current inflation measures to actual resource constraints, and the future growth of productivity, to name a few--than there has been for many years. In such an environment, some have argued that this greater uncertainty leaves policymakers without a clear guide and market participants without a firm anchor, meaning policy itself could drift--perhaps dangerously. I do not think that is the case at all. Instead, I think this situation reinforces and supports the importance of a clear, steady strategy and a gradual, predictable approach to the removal of accommodation as we continue to monitor the data. The analogy I frequently use is the old pilot's adage of "Don't chase the needles." The control panel of any airplane has an instrument to guide your course: a circular gauge with a vertical bar, or "needle," running through the center of it. If the bar moves sideways to the left, you are drifting off course and should change course to the left until the bar comes back into the center of the circle; if it moves to the right, you change course to the right. Today these instruments get their inputs from the plane's GPS (Global Positioning System) and are fairly sensitive and accurate, but decades ago, when I was a young man first learning to fly in the clouds, they got their information from radio beacons stationed on the ground and were quite squirrelly. The bar could wander from side to side for a while for any of a number of reasons--distance from the beacon, the angle you were approaching it from, interference from other instruments on the panel, sunspots, or rain--and because of this uncertainty, the first rule taught to us as young pilots was, "Don't chase the needles." Precisely because of the uncertainty around the course inputs, the right strategy was to set a course based on your knowledge of the destination, winds, and performance of your plane; communicate that course clearly to air traffic control so everyone knew what you were doing; and then stick to that course steadily even as the course needle might waver from side to side across your instrument. If the needle moved to one side substantially and stayed there pretty consistently, then you would make a small, firm correction--but even then, only gradually and with clear communication about what you were doing. In a world where you had great confidence in the sensitivity of your instrument, such as in today's GPS-based avionics, you could respond immediately to moment-to-moment changes in your course readings, but in the world of radio beacons and sunspots, "chasing the needles" would at best lead to inefficient fishtailing across the sky, and at worst to a substantial deviation from your destination. Today uncertainty around many of the macroeconomic inputs to monetary policy decisions argues for just the same approach to navigation. Rather than meaning that policy will drift because of this uncertainty, it means that policymakers should chart a course that is stable, gradual, and predictable; communicate it clearly; and then follow that course through the temporarily shifting and sometimes conflicting signs from the economy unless some strong and steady signal requires a firm but moderate correction. Given that the economy has performed fundamentally as I expected at the outset of this year, the right strategy is to maintain the gradual course that I have thought appropriate for some time now. Put another way, while I think that there is enough reason to think that the productive capacity of our economy might be increasing so that we should not feel compelled to accelerate our pace, I also think there is enough doubt about current inflation as an infallibly reliable measure of current resource constraints that the continued gradual removal of accommodation is appropriate. Like pilots back in the days of radio beacons, don't chase the needles. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. See Randal K. Quarles (2018), "An Assessment of the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "Promoting Sustained Growth: Policy Tensions and Risks," 34th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference, Washington, February 26.Return to text 3. See Ernie Tedeschi (2018), "Will Employment Keep Growing? Disabled Workers Offer a Clue,"New York Times,March 15.Return to text 4. For the original formulation of the law, see C.A.E. Goodhart (1975), "Problems of Monetary Management: The U.K. Experience," inPapers in Monetary Economics, vol. I (Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia).Return to text
WASHINGTON--The federal depository institutions regulators and the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) today issued a statement to address instances in which certain banks and credit unions may decide to enter into collaborative arrangements to share resources to manage their Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) and anti-money laundering (AML) obligations more efficiently and effectively. Collaborative arrangements as described in the statement generally are most suitable for financial institutions with a community focus, less complex operations, and lower-risk profiles for money laundering or terrorist financing. The statement, which was issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FinCEN, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, explains how these institutions can share BSA/AML resources in order to better protect against illicit finance risks, which can in turn also reduce costs. Today's joint statement is a result of a working group recently formed by these agencies and Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence aimed at improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the BSA/AML regime. "This joint statement is part of a broader effort to work closely with our regulatory partners to strengthen the anti-money laundering defenses across the U.S. financial system," said Sigal Mandelker, Treasury Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence. "The joint statement allows community-focused banks and credit unions to share certain anti-money laundering resources in order to better protect against illicit actors seeking to abuse those types of institutions. Such resource sharing must be approached with careful due diligence and thorough consideration of the risks and benefits." Among other things, today's joint statement aims to: The joint statement acknowledges that banks and credit unions may benefit from using shared resources to manage certain BSA/AML obligations more efficiently and effectively. However, it notes that financial institutions should approach the establishment of collaborative arrangements like other business decisions, with due diligence and thorough consideration of the risks and benefits. Banks and credit unions are encouraged to contact their primary federal regulator with questions regarding sharing BSA resources, and should refer to other relevant guidance.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the state regulators recognize the serious impact of Hurricane Michael on the customers, members, and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found atwww.fema.gov. Lending:Financial institutions should work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by Hurricane Michael. Prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas should not be subject to examiner criticism. Modifications of existing loans should be evaluated individually to determine whether they represent troubled debt restructurings. This evaluation should be based on the facts and circumstances of each borrower and loan, which requires judgment, as not all modifications will result in a troubled debt restructuring. In supervising institutions affected by Hurricane Michael, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances these institutions face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound practices as well as in the public interest. Temporary Facilities:The agencies understand that many financial institutions may face staffing, power, telecommunications, and other challenges in re-opening facilities after Hurricane Michael. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the primary federal and/or state regulator will expedite, as appropriate, any request to operate temporary facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by Hurricane Michael. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal and/or state regulator will suffice initially to start the approval process, with necessary written notification being submitted shortly thereafter. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by Hurricane Michael may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations, as applicable. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by Hurricane Michael that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of the effects of Hurricane Michael. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions, as applicable, may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, institutions should review the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected by Hurricane Michael. Institutions should monitor municipal securities and loans affected by Hurricane Michael. Appropriate monitoring and prudent efforts to stabilize such investments are encouraged. For more information, refer to theInteragency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster, which is available as follows: CSBS:https://www.csbs.org/interagency-supervisory-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster FDIC:https://www.fdic.gov/news/news/financial/2017/fil17062.htmlFRB:https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1714a1.pdfOCC:https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2017/bulletin-2017-61.htmlNCUA:https://www.ncua.gov/Resources/Documents/SL-17-02-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster-enclosure.pdf
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the annual indexing of two amounts used in determining reserve requirements of depository institutions. These amounts are the reserve requirement exemption amount and the low reserve tranche. All depository institutions must hold a percentage of certain types of deposits as reserves in the form of vault cash, as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or as a deposit in a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). Depository institutions must also regularly submit reports of their deposits and other reservable liabilities. For net transaction accounts in 2019, the first $16.3 million, up from $16.0 million in 2018, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $16.3 million up to and including $124.2 million, up from $122.3 million in 2018. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts in excess of $124.2 million. These annual adjustments, known as the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment and the low reserve tranche adjustment, are based on growth in total reservable liabilities and net transaction accounts, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 2017 and June 30, 2018. The new low reserve tranche and reserve requirement exemption amount will apply to the 14-day reserve maintenance period that begins January 17, 2019. For depository institutions that report deposit data weekly, this maintenance period corresponds to the 14-day computation period that begins Tuesday, December 18, 2018. For depository institutions that report deposit data quarterly, this maintenance period corresponds to the seven-day computation period that begins Tuesday, December 18, 2018. The Board also announced changes in two other amounts, the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit, that are used to determine the frequency with which depository institutions must submit deposit reports. The attachedFederal Registernotice contains a description of the new boundaries for deposit reporting that will be effective in 2019. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by Abanca Corporación Bancaria, S.A., Betanzos, La Coruña, Spain, to establish a state-licensed branch in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by Joint Stock Commercial Bank for Foreign Trade of Vietnam, Hanoi, Vietnam, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Old National Bancorp, Evansville, Indiana, to acquire Klein Financial, Inc. ("Klein"), and thereby indirectly acquire Klein's subsidiary bank, KleinBank, both of Chaska, Minnesota. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the applications, under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act, by Security Trust & Savings Bank, Storm Lake, Iowa, to acquire substantially all of the assets and assume substantially all of the liabilities of First National Bank of Rembrandt, Rembrandt, Iowa, and establish and operate a branch at the location of the main office of First National Bank of Rembrandt. Attached is the Board’s order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced six new members of its Community Advisory Council (CAC). The new members will serve three-year terms beginning in 2019. The CAC is composed of a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer, workforce, and community development organizations and interests, including from such fields as affordable housing, economic development, labor, small business, and asset and wealth building. CAC members provide information, advice, and recommendations to the Board on relevant policy matters and emerging issues of interest. The new members of the CAC were selected from a pool of respondents to the Board's public call for applications. These members will replace: Roberto Barragan, former chair; Angela Glover Blackwell; Patrick Dujakovich; Ben Mangan; Rodrick Miller; and Sue Taoka, whose terms expire at the end of 2018. The new members of the CAC are: Rev. Dr. Adrian M. BrooksCEOMemorial Community Development CorporationEvansville, Ind. Joshua DowneyPresidentDenver Area Labor Federation, AFL-CIODenver, Colo. Andreanecia MorrisExecutive DirectorHousingNOLANew Orleans, La. Marc NormanAssociate Professor of PracticeUniversity of Michigan, Taubman College of Architecture and Urban PlanningAnn Arbor, Mich. Bill SchlesingerCo-DirectorProject VidaEl Paso, Texas Jesse Van TolCEONational Community Reinvestment CoalitionWashington, D.C. These individuals will join nine existing members and will be led by incoming Chair Andrea Levere and incoming Vice Chair Donald Hinkle-Brown. The CAC is scheduled to meet May 24 and November 1, 2019. Records of previous meetings may be found atwww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cac.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: The Royal Bank of Scotland Group, PLC, Edinburgh, Scotland and The Royal Bank of Scotland PLC, Edinburgh, ScotlandCease and Desist Order dated December 11, 2013 (PDF)Terminated October 10, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday invited public comment on a framework that would more closely match the regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles. The changes would reduce compliance requirements for firms with less risk while maintaining more stringent requirements for firms with more risk. The framework establishes four categories of standards for large banking organizations--those with more than $100 billion in total consolidated assets. The proposals build on the Board's existing tailoring of its rules and would be consistent with changes from the Economic Growth, Regulatory Reform, and Consumer Protection Act. "The proposals would prescribe materially less stringent requirements on firms with less risk, while maintaining the most stringent requirements for firms that pose the greatest risks to the financial system and our economy," Chairman Jerome H. Powell said. The changes would significantly reduce regulatory compliance requirements for firms in the lowest risk category, modestly reduce requirements for firms in the next lowest risk category, and largely keep existing requirements in place for the largest and most complex firms in the highest risk categories. "With these proposals, banking organizations will see reduced regulatory complexity and easier compliance with no material decline in the strength of the U.S. banking system," Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles said. Firms would be sorted into categories based on several factors, including asset size, cross-jurisdictional activity, reliance on short-term wholesale funding, nonbank assets, and off-balance sheet exposure. Each factor reflects greater complexity and risk to a banking organization, resulting in greater risk to the financial system and broader economy. Firms in the lowest risk category--generally most domestic firms with $100 billion to $250 billion in total consolidated assets--would no longer be subject to standardized liquidity requirements. They would remain subject to firm-developed liquidity stress tests and regulatory liquidity risk management standards. Additionally, these firms would no longer be required to conduct company-run stress tests, and their supervisory stress tests would be moved to a two-year cycle, rather than annual. These reduced requirements would reflect the lower risk profile of these firms. Firms in the next lowest risk category--generally those with $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets, or material levels of the other risk factors, that are not global systemically important banking organizations (GSIBs)--would have their standardized liquidity requirements reduced to reflect their more stable funding profile but remain subject to a range of enhanced liquidity standards. In addition, the firms would be required to conduct company-run stress tests on a two-year cycle, rather than semi-annually. The firms would remain subject to annual supervisory stress tests. Firms in the highest risk categories--including the GSIBs--would not see any changes to their capital or liquidity requirements. Taken together, the Board estimates that the changes would result in a 0.6 percent decrease in required capital and a reduction of 2.5 percent of liquid assets for all U.S. banking firms with assets of $100 billion or more. The regulatory capital and liquidity aspects of the proposals were jointly developed with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. A separate tailoring proposal affecting foreign banks will be released in the future. The attached chart shows the proposed requirements for each category, as well as a list of firms projected to be included in each category. Comments will be accepted through January 22, 2019. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF Proposed Requirements Chart (PDF) Opening Statement by Chairman Jerome H. Powell Opening Statement by Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Statement by Governor Lael Brainard Open Board Meeting on October 31, 2018
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: AllNations Bank, Calumet, OklahomaWritten Agreement dated October 22, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition of Joel Shumate, former Senior Vice President of First Iowa State Bank, Keosauqua, Iowa, for engaging in improper practices regarding credit origination. Other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday invited public comment on actions the Federal Reserve could take to support faster payments in the United States. The potential actions, which would facilitate real-time interbank settlement of faster payments, build on collaborative work with the payment industry through the Federal Reserve System'sStrategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System (SIPS)initiative. Faster payment services are valued for the conveniences they provide, such as the ability to pay another individual on-the-spot using a mobile phone application. They also provide consumers, households, and businesses more flexibility in managing their money because faster payments can be sent and received at any time, on any day. Views are being sought on two potential actions that may support the further development of faster payments in the United States while increasing the resiliency and security of services offered to the public: 1) the development of a service for real-time interbank settlement of faster payments 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year (24x7x365); and 2) the creation of a liquidity management tool that would enable transfers between Federal Reserve accounts on a 24x7x365 basis to support services for real-time interbank settlement of faster payments, regardless of whether those services are provided by the private sector or the Federal Reserve Banks. The Board is not committing to any specific action and is seeking input on which, if any, actions the Federal Reserve should take. "Consumers and businesses increasingly expect to be able to send and immediately receive payments at any time of the day, any day of the year," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Lael Brainard. "A 24/7 economy with 24/7 real-time payments needs 24/7 real-time settlement. That is where we believe that the Federal Reserve and the private sector together need to make investments for the future." Real-time settlement avoids interbank credit risk by aligning the speed of interbank settlement with the speed of underlying payments. As a result, broad use of real-time settlement for faster payments could enhance the overall safety of the faster payments market in the United States. Development of a nationwide real-time interbank settlement infrastructure by the Federal Reserve could encourage more banks to develop faster payment services, creating more choice for consumers, households, and businesses. A liquidity management tool could improve the level of participation by banks in a real-time settlement infrastructure for faster payments, and hence public access to faster payment services, by mitigating risk that can arise for banks outside of standard business hours. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. Comments are due by December 14, 2018. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF Board Votes
The value of fraudulent noncash payments in the United States rose significantly between 2012 and 2015--outpacing growth in noncash payments overall, according to a new report based on Federal Reserve Payments Study data. The study's survey of depository institutions found that the value of noncash payments fraud rose 37 percent from $6.1 billion in 2012 to $8.3 billion in 2015. Over the same period, the total value of noncash payments rose 12 percent from $161.2 trillion to $180.3 trillion. The report provides estimates of payments fraud totals and rates for payments processed over general-purpose credit and debit card networks, including non-prepaid and prepaid debit card networks, the automated clearinghouse (ACH) transfer system, and the check clearing system. These payment systems form the core of the noncash payment and settlement systems used to clear and settle everyday payments made by consumers and businesses in the United States. The fraud data were collected as part of Federal Reserve surveys of depository institutions in 2012 and 2015 and payment card networks in 2015 and 2016. The types of fraudulent payments covered in the study are those made by an unauthorized third party. Data from the depository institutions survey show that the overall rate of payments fraud, by value, increased from 2012 to 2015 in the United States, driven primarily by card fraud. According to the payment card networks, the rate of card fraud, by value, was nearly flat from 2015 to 2016, with the rate of in-person card fraud decreasing notably and the rate of remote card fraud increasing significantly. Even so, both surveys found that card payments fraud, at less than one-tenth of a percent of all card payments, is rare, and also represents a small fraction of the value of card payments. Among the key findings of the depository institution survey: Data from the card network survey, which covered general-purpose credit and debit (non-prepaid and prepaid) card payments, but did not include ATM withdrawals, show that while the value of total card fraud increased, the fraud rate stabilized, recording a negligible decline from 2015 to 2016. In particular, card payments fraud increased from $7.1 billion in 2015 to $7.5 billion in 2016. The value of credit card fraud in both years was more than double that of debit card fraud, and the fraud rate for credit cards in both years was substantially higher than for debit cards. Among the key findings of the card network survey: The report is a collaborative project of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. It is intended to foster a better understanding of developments in the payments system, and to inform efforts to improve the U.S. payments infrastructure. The Federal Reserve will continue to collect fraud data to determine whether changes foreshadow any persistent trends. Changes in U.S. Payments Fraud from 2012 to 2016: Evidence from the Federal Reserve Payments Study (PDF)
Governor Lael Brainard At the FinTech, Financial Inclusion -- and the Potential to Transform Financial Services Hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and the Aspen Institute Financial Security Program, Boston, Massachusetts Thank you for inviting me to join today's discussion. Like many of you, I have long been interested in the potential for innovation to improve financial access for families and small businesses who are underserved. The combination of smartphone apps, big data, artificial intelligence, and cloud technology holds out intriguing possibilities in financial services. But no single app is likely to be a silver bullet for the complex challenges faced by underserved households and small businesses. Achieving inclusion will require a holistic understanding of the challenges faced by underserved groups in order to develop full stack solutions to address them.1 Fortunately, an emerging generation of metrics may offer a more complete picture of consumers' financial needs. In addition, technological infrastructure is developing, such as faster payment systems, along with the potential for more transparent and simpler product offerings enabled by richer data and lower-cost processing. These new building blocks may make a difference on their own--and, more importantly, may be combined in powerful ways to bring end-to-end solutions to financial inclusion. I will briefly discuss each of these developments in turn. Lessons from the First WaveLet's start with the basic question of how to measure financial inclusion in order to evaluate the impact of financial innovations and inclusion policies. The World Bank's Global Findex Database starts with a seemingly reasonable proxy for financial inclusion: access to financial accounts. Having access to basic transaction and savings accounts has been shown to be an important step to financial inclusion, particularly in developing countries. For instance, a 2013 experiment provided savings accounts to a random sample of market vendors in Kenya, most of whom were women. The vendors with accounts saved at a higher rate and invested 60 percent more in their businesses relative to those who did not have accounts.2Similarly, women-headed households in Nepal ultimately spent more on nutritious foods and education when they received free savings accounts relative to those who did not.3 Using account access as a proxy for financial inclusion suggests substantial progress has been made. According to the Findex Database, over two-thirds of adults around the globe now have some form of financial account, up from roughly half just seven years ago.4This represents an increase of 800 million people. Here in the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's (FDIC's) most recent survey of unbanked and underbanked households found that 7 percent of U.S. households in 2015 were "unbanked."5The unbanked rate was nearly a percentage point lower than the prior survey in 2013 and is lower than in earlier years. Even with this modest improvement, however, lower-income and minority households have substantially higher rates of being unbanked. The widespread adoption of mobile phones and the data they generate are expected to extend these gains even further. The World Bank noted, for instance, that about 1.1 billion unbanked people, about two-thirds of the unbanked population, has a mobile phone.6Here in the United States, the Federal Reserve Board's 2015 Survey of Consumers' Use of Mobile Financial Services found that nearly 60 percent of the U.S. adult population had a smart (internet-enabled) phone.7It also found that the rates of mobile banking usage are higher among minorities. And even amongst the unbanked population, 40 percent of adults had access to a smartphone in their households; the same was true for 70 percent of underbanked adults. Another proxy used to gauge financial inclusion is access to credit. When I worked on microcredit 3 decades ago, it was very difficult to scale up the provision of loans to small businesses.8Reaching small enterprises and evaluating their creditworthiness was very expensive, especially in small cities and rural areas, and it was difficult to secure loans with collateral. The high transaction costs were reflected in interest rates many times greater than those available for established businesses in urban areas. Today, new technologies are lowering transaction costs by automating the customer interface and underwriting processes. A recent analysis by staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta notes that automated fintech platforms have lower operating costs relative to storefront payday lenders.9A recent study by staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York finds that fintech lenders process mortgages on average 20 percent faster than traditional lenders. Of course, these differences focus on costs and do not address loan pricing.10 But alongside these promising developments, we have also learned some cautionary tales from the early wave of fintech. In particular, while access to accounts and to credit may be beneficial, they are by no means sufficient to ensure financial resilience on their own. Not surprisingly, access to an account is only a small part of achieving financial health. The Findex database itself notes that a quarter of all accounts worldwide are "inactive," meaning that there were no deposits or withdrawals made over the prior 12 months. In some cases, customers that are provided financial accounts quickly return to the cash economy. For example, in 2014, India launched an ambitious financial inclusion program with the goal of connecting every citizen to a basic bank account that facilitated the opening of 240 million accounts. Before too long, however, it became evident that over a quarter of the new accounts held balances of one rupee or less.11 As for credit, fintech lending has moved beyond niche to the mainstream. In 2010, fintech lenders made only 1 percent of personal loan originations in the United States. By mid-2017, fintech lenders--often in conjunction with bank partners--were responsible for nearly a third of the personal loan market.12It is not clear how much of this fintech lending is making a significant dent in financial inclusion, as opposed to serving prime and near-prime consumers in the United States.13A 2017 study by TransUnion found that fintech lenders focused 59 percent of their originations in the near prime and prime risk tiers by the end of 2016--up marginally over the previous two years.14Researchers at the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Chicago found that at least some fintech lenders were able to slot "some borrowers who would be classified as subprime by traditional criteria" into better loan grades.15But the differences from existing channels may not be large: TransUnion found that around 10 percent of loans originated by fintech lenders were to subprime consumers, as compared to 14 percent for the overall market for personal loans. What We Are Learning About Financial InclusionAccount access and credit may be helpful and possibly even necessary components of a solution. But they are unlikely to provide a complete solution on their own. Continued progress on financial inclusion is likely to require solutions that are designed with an understanding of the issues that underserved communities face. In particular, it appears that many unbanked or underbanked people in the United States are intentionally choosing not to maintain a bank account, which may hold clues to what underserved families and small businesses actually need. The data show that nearly half of the unbanked households actually had bank accounts in the past, based on a 2015 FDIC survey.16A third of these previously banked households explained that they currently did not have bank accounts because of high or unpredictable fees, as did roughly a fifth of unbanked households that previously did not have accounts. The single most cited reason for not having accounts was not having "enough money." More than 10 percent of the unbanked explained that they simply "don't trust banks." Those findings were echoed at an international level by the Findex database, where roughly a fifth of adults without a financial account cited a lack of trust in the financial system.17 To explore why consumers would choose to use alternative financial services over traditional bank accounts, Lisa Servon of the University of Pennsylvania worked for both a check-cashing firm and a payday lender.18Servon observed that check-cashing firms used simple fee structures that were transparent and prominently displayed, similar to an overhead priced menu at a fast-food restaurant. As a result, individuals could understand clearly what fees they will have to pay up front. In contrast, checking accounts can be more unpredictable. The funds from a deposited check may not be immediately available. By the same token, it may not be clear exactly when the funds associated with a payment by check are likely to be deducted from the account. That lack of predictability can be extremely important to a family that is living paycheck to paycheck. Bouncing a rent check, phone payment, or utility payment can have a destabilizing impact on day-to-day life with further knock-on effects and costs. When a check for a utility payment is rejected due to insufficient funds, for instance, the account holder may have to make time-consuming calls to get the lights turned back on, while also struggling to pay the associated overdraft fee. That may, in turn, lead to a vexing chain of additional late payments and fees. A 2013 study by the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection found that more than a quarter of checking accounts in the study experienced at least one overdraft fee in 2011.19The average fee total for overdrawn accounts was $225, but varied as much as $200 between banks. Among bank customers who bounced checks, a relatively small minority bore the brunt of the fees: A quarter of accounts with overdrafts incurred in 2011 had more than 10 overdraft fees during that year.20 It is increasingly clear that financial inclusion is less about account access and more about families' financial resilience in the face of volatile income and expenses. It is common to assess households' earnings and living expenses in terms of annual totals. But what keeps many people up at night is their ability to paythis week'sbills, especially when their paycheck is not coming until next week. The U.S. Financial Diaries Project finds that the low- and moderate-income families studied experienced fluctuations in income either 25 percent above or below average for five months over the course of a year. Nearly a third of households whose annual incomes were twice the supplemental poverty measure dipped below the poverty line for at least one month during the year.21The Federal Reserve Board's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) similarly finds that 10 percent of all adults self-reported that they struggled to pay their bills at least once in the past year due to volatile income.22Jonathan Morduch and Rachel Schneider, the principal investigators of the Financial Diaries, argue that access to steady, predictable cash flows is an important source of financial inequality.23 Expenses can be just as unpredictable as income, and financial fragility results from the mismatch between the two. The Pew Charitable Trusts showed that 60 percent of households self-reported that over the prior 12 months, they had experienced at least one financial shock, like a job change, divorce, major illness, or breakdown of a car or major household appliance.24The median household spent half-a-month's income on the most expensive shock (the median expense being $2,000). Further complicating things, expense shocks rarely occur on their own, but instead can cascade into additional expenses and stress for families on the margins. Pew showed that a third of households they studied self-reported two or more different financial shocks over the course of a year.25Morduch and Schneider found that 65 percent of spending spikes involved increases in two categories of expenses, such as transportation and health care. In more than half of the spending spikes they studied, spending was well above average in three categories.26Moreover, the spikes in expenses tended not to coincide with corresponding spikes in income. Financially vulnerable families typically do not have sufficient savings to smooth through the income and expense volatility mismatches they experience. Households in the Financial Diaries expected to spend more than 80 percent of their savings within the year.27Nearly half of households studied by the Pew Charitable Trust had not recovered from financial shocks at least six months afterward.28And the Federal Reserve SHED finds that 40 percent of adults report they would have difficulty covering an unexpected expense of $400.29 This inability to plan for the future dramatically affects individuals' ability to engage in the investments, such as cutting back on work hours to pursue education and training, and the risk-taking that is necessary to improve their financial lives.30 Access to credit can be an important part of weathering these shocks. The Federal Reserve SHED finds that families with less access to credit are more likely to self-report financial hardship due to income volatility.31But credit is only useful if consumers have the means to repay the debt in a timely manner and stabilize their financial lives. Research increasingly shows that borrowers often choose lenders based on their perceived chance of being approved for funding rather than on the cost or their ability to repay the debt. The Federal Reserve System's 2017 Small Business Credit Survey finds that this is one of the most appealing features of online lenders for small business borrowers.32With regard to consumers, a 2014 report by the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection found that 80 percent of payday loans are rolled over or followed by another loan within 14 days.33The Bureau found that many loan sequences end quickly, but 15 percent of new loans are followed by others--and half of all loans were part of a sequence of at least 10 loans. Full Stack Financial Inclusion for Financial HealthA sustainable solution is likely to require a comprehensive understanding of the needs of financially underserved families and small businesses. Accordingly, policymakers and financial services providers are beginning to assess financial inclusion in more nuanced ways. And, in parallel, new technological building blocks increasingly can be used to build more full-stack approaches to financial inclusion. When considering how to think about progress, we are seeing a move away from basic financial inclusion to a more holistic understanding of financial health. Financial health is more difficult to measure than bank accounts, and policymakers and researchers are learning how to better work with that complexity. For instance, when the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection released the findings of its research on financial well-being, it included a 10-item Financial Well-Being Scale Questionnaire, a self-evaluation tool designed to help an individual think comprehensively about his or her financial life.34The questionnaire asks consumers to rate statements such as "I can enjoy life because of the way I'm managing my money" and "I am securing my financial future." Similarly, this April, the Center for Financial Services Innovation announced the launch of a new data set that uses subjective consumer responses to survey questions and pairs that information with actual data on their financial transactions.35The regularly refreshed data is designed to give industry, researchers, and policymakers better insight into consumers' financial lives by providing more accurate metrics for assessing changes over time. The new initiative, which they call "Financial Health Pulse," aims to bring the siloes of a consumer's financial life into one comprehensive picture, encompassing "income, spending, savings, debt, retirement, and credit scores." Just as we are learning how to assess financial health more effectively, we are also seeing progress on tools that are specifically designed to address the challenges underlying financial inclusion. Moreover, these tools can be built upon a new generation of platforms and other basic building blocks, which can be used in combination to develop more effective full-stack solutions. Within the Federal Reserve System, we recognize that we have a role and, potentially, a responsibility to help create an infrastructure that facilitates safe, innovative, and ubiquitous faster payment services. Earlier this month, we announced that we are seeking public comment on whether the Reserve Banks should take a more active role in modernizing our infrastructure to support interbank settlement of faster payments in real time.36 For households living paycheck to paycheck, the difference between waiting for a payment to clear and receiving a payment in real time is not merely an inconvenience; it could tip the balance toward overdraft fees, bounced checks, or collection fees. Of course, faster payments would not address the root causes of financial fragility, but they could help reduce the strain on some.37 In addition, many small businesses cite immediate access to working capital to finance inventories or pay employees as their number one constraint on growth. If a small business could count on its customers' payments being immediately accessible in its bank account, it could reduce the need for short-term financing to cover the costs of ordering materials and goods well in advance. This could also make a difference for the many hourly wage employees that receive their pay in the form of paper checks. Electronic payments currently can take multiple days to process, so if an employer seeks to ensure that an employee receives their pay on the last day of a pay period, the employer usually has to release the funds a few days in advance. With hourly employees, it can be hard to know how much pay is owed until the hours are actually worked. So employers may wait until the last day of the pay period and then release a paper check at the end of the day, potentially leading to delays for the employee in receiving the funds or a fee to obtain immediate availability.38 Faster payment systems can change that. Employers would be able to push funds to employees shortly after their shifts have ended. Indeed, some "gig economy" employers have begun to offer "instant pay" options that allow contractors to cash out their earnings as frequently as five times a day.39But when these options recently stopped working for about a week, news reports cited comments from drivers that were hindered in their ability to refuel, pay rent, or buy groceries because they were temporarily unable to access their pay as they earned it.40 We are similarly seeing infrastructure-level innovations in the basic accounts offered to consumers. Many of the recent mobile apps provided by bank and fintech providers, separately or in partnership, enable consumers to check balances, pay bills, and deposit checks around the clock and every day of the week via their phones. Some banks have introduced innovative online-only accounts that are fee-free and require no minimum deposits, while offering phone-based deposits, account interfaces, and bill payment.41 Some banks offer no-fee, phone-based accounts that incorporate savings and budgeting tools that look and feel like nonbank fintech apps. Consumers can set goals and ask that the account begin "automatically" saving toward those objectives.42For example, consumers might be able to swipe to see how much they can safely spend on a purchase without falling behind on their financial goals or missing scheduled payments. With other tools, using just their phone, a customer can set rules for their bank account, ranging from declining transactions that would overdraw the account, to automatically transferring funds from a related account, to opening an overdraft line of credit, or being charged a fixed-dollar overdraft fee, with a one-day grace period to avoid the fee. New platforms like faster payment systems have the potential to combine with other technological improvements, like cheap access to cloud computing and an open-source approach to artificial intelligence, to create more full-stack approaches to financial inclusion. A new generation of offerings experiments with using machine-learning tools and data aggregation to study consumers' expense and income flows in order to offer credit to consumers with little to no traditional credit histories.43As mentioned earlier, other apps are using faster payments and cheap accounts to offer consumers tools to smooth volatility in their incomes.44Still other products are using behavioral economics-based "nudges" to help consumers grow their savings.45 It is still very early, and many of these products have difficult issues to work through with respect to consumer data security and privacy, which may have important implications for pricing of services. Again and again, we are reminded that when products are free, the consumers themselves may be the product. For instance, many financial apps that provide "free" services earn revenue by being paid for lead generation. Other apps may sell consumer data in ways that consumers may not be aware of.46For some workers, their employers may be able to be part of the solution, by subsidizing some or all of the costs of using these new tools. For example, some employers are partnering with fintechs to offer their employees better savings tools and the ability to draw emergency funds as an advance on their paycheck. While financial innovation may hold great promise, a lot of work is needed to ensure it will be able to reach communities that lack infrastructure for digital service delivery. In the colonias area on the Texas-Mexico border, I met with families that are unbanked, students that could not complete their homework, and businesses that could not serve customers outside their local area because they lacked the internet connectivity that many of us take for granted.47The Federal Reserve, and other federal banking agencies, view access to technology as increasingly essential to households and small businesses in underserved low- and moderate-income communities. That is why we have clarified that efforts to provide communications infrastructure, such as broadband internet service, may be viewed favorably under the Community Reinvestment Act or CRA.48 Expanding access to financial services is most effective when consumers and small businesses are equipped with the ability and information to determine which financial products are suitable for their needs. Financial literacy and consumer protections are critically important regardless of whether financial services are delivered through traditional means or smartphone apps. Here too, digital delivery can expand the reach of traditional financial education systems by providing consumers with online and mobile education, just-in-time information, and interactive financial tools to evaluate their options. Financial services providers have an affirmative obligation to deliver clear and transparent products and services and to protect the personal information and financial assets of the customers they serve. Our challenge as regulators is to ensure trust in financial products and services by maintaining the focus on consumer protection, while supporting responsible innovation that provides social benefits.49 It is too early to tell if many of these innovations will ultimately make good on their promise to help underserved consumers navigate their complex financial lives. And, of course, no app can solve a persistent gap between living expenses and real wages in some occupations, sectors, or counties. Still, I am cautiously optimistic. Together, we are developing a more holistic understanding of the financial needs of underserved households and small businesses. We are seeing the development of powerful new technologies. There is reason to hope these new technologies will be combined in ways that move the needle on financial inclusion. 1.I am grateful to Kelvin Chen of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.Pascaline Dupas and Jonathan Robinson, "Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya (PDF),"American Economic Journal: Applied Economics(2013): 163–192, cited in World Bank Group, The Global Findex Database 2017 (2017).Return to text 3.Silvia Prina, "Banking the poor via savings accounts: Evidence from a field experiment,"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 115, (July 2015): 16–31, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304387815000061Return to text 4.World Bank Group,The Global Findex Database 2017, (2017): xi. The Findex Database is widely considered the authoritative database for measuring progress and need for financial inclusion from an international perspective.Return to text 5.Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,2015 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households(PDF)(October 20, 2016).Return to text 6.The Global Findex Database 2017, 11.Return to text 7.Federal Reserve Board,Consumers and Mobile Financial Services, 12, see table 4.Return to text 8.See, e.g., Brainard, "Senegal Community and Enterprise Development Project" in C. Mann, M. Grindle, and P. Shipton, eds.,Seeking Solutions: Framework and Cases for Small Enterprise Development Programs,1989. For a more recent perspective, see "Mobile financial services are cornering the market,"The Economist, May 3, 2018, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2018/05/03/mobile-financial-services-are-cornering-the-market.Return to text 9.Larry D. Wall, "Fintech and Financial Inclusion,"Notes from the Vault(Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, August 2017) (quoting J. Michael Evans, President of Alibaba). The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta compared the high operating costs of storefront payday lenders with the automation of the Chinese fintech Alibaba's savings tools.Return to text 10.Andreas Fuster, Matthew Plosser, Philipp Schnabl, and James Vickery, "The Role of Technology in Mortgage Lending," Working Paper 24500 (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April 2018).Return to text 11.See, e.g., "Financial inclusion is making great strides,"The Economist, May 3, 2018, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2018/05/03/financial-inclusion-is-making-great-strides.Return to text 12.John Wirth, "Fact or Fiction: Are FinTechs Different than Other Lenders,"TransUnion(blog), November 17, 2017, https://www.transunion.com/blog/fact-or-fiction-are-fintechs-different-than-other-lenders.Return to text 13.See, e.g., Press Release, TransUnion, FinTechs Taking Larger Share of Personal Loan Market While Increasing Portfolio Risk-Return Performance (Nov. 2, 2017), https://newsroom.transunion.com/fintechs-taking-larger-share-of-personal-loan-market-while-increasing-portfolio-risk-return-performanceReturn to text 14.Wirth, "Fact or Fiction," https://www.transunion.com/blog/fact-or-fiction-are-fintechs-different-than-other-lenders and TransUnion, "FinTechs Taking Larger Share of Personal Loan Market While Increasing Portfolio Risk-Return Performance," press release, November 2, 2017, https://newsroom.transunion.com/fintechs-taking-larger-share-of-personal-loan-market-while-increasing-portfolio-risk-return-performance/.Return to text 15.Julapa Jagtiani and Catharine Lemieux, "Do Fintech Lenders Penetrate Areas That Are Underserved by Traditional Banks? (PDF)" Working Paper 18-13, (Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, March 2018).Return to text 16.FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households(PDF).Return to text 17.The Global Findex Database 2017, 5.Return to text 18.See, e.g., "What Is Driving the 'Unbanking of America'?" National Public Radio, Fresh Air, January 10, 2017, https://www.npr.org/2017/01/10/509126878/what-is-driving-the-unbanking-of-america, cited in Wall, "Fintech and Financial Inclusion."Return to text 19.Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, "CFPB Study of Overdraft Programs (PDF)," white paper (June 2013). The findings here refer to banks in the study "that tracked all incidences for all accounts opened at any time during 2011."Return to text 20.The findings here refer to banks in the study "that tracked all incidences for all accounts opened at any time during 2011."Return to text 21.See Jonathan Morduch and Rachel Schneider,The Financial Diaries: How American Families Cope in a World of Uncertainty(Princeton University Pres, 2017). See also Jeanne C. Marra, "The Financial Diaries Authors Discuss Income Volatility,"Bridges, (Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Fall 2017).Return to text 22.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2017(PDF)(May 2018), 12.Return to text 23.Jonathan Morduch and Rachel Schneider, "Mismatch: How Income and Expense Volatility Are Undermining Households,"Stanford Social Innovation Review, January 12, 2016, https://ssir.org/articles/entry/mismatch_how_income_and_expense_volatility_are_undermining_householdsReturn to text 24.The Pew Charitable Trusts,The Role of Emergency Savings in Family Financial Security: How Do Families Cope With Financial Shocks?(PDF)(October 2015).Return to text 25.The Pew Charitable Trusts,The Role of Emergency Savings(PDF).Return to text 26.Morduch and Schneider, "Mismatch: How Income and Expense Volatility Are Undermining Households," https://ssir.org/articles/entry/mismatch_how_income_and_expense_volatility_are_undermining_householdsReturn to text 27.Morduch and Schneider, "Mismatch: How Income and Expense Volatility Are Undermining Households," https://ssir.org/articles/entry/mismatch_how_income_and_expense_volatility_are_undermining_householdsReturn to text 28.The Pew Charitable Trusts,The Role of Emergency Savings(PDF).Return to text 29.Federal Reserve Board,Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households(PDF), 21, ("Over the past five years, as the economy has recovered, the fraction of families able to easily cover this emergency expense has increased by about 9 percentage points.").Return to text 30.See Marra, "The Financial Diaries Authors Discuss Income Volatility."Return to text 31.Federal Reserve Board,Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households(PDF). For example, one-fourth of adults who are not confident in their ability to be approved for a credit card self-reported that they had experienced hardship from income volatility over the past year, as compared to only 6 percent of those who were confident in their credit availability.Return to text 32.Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, Kansas City, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, St. Louis, and San Francisco,2017 Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms(PDF).Return to text 33.Kathleen Burke, Jonathan Lanning, Jesse Leary, and Jialan Wang, Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection,CFPB Data Point: Payday Lending(PDF), (March 2014).Return to text 34."Measuring financial well-being: A guide to using the CFPB Financial Well-Being Scale," Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.Return to text 35.Center for Financial Services Innovation, "Center for Financial Services Innovation Launches 'U.S. Financial Health Pulse,'" press release, April 3, 2018, https://s3.amazonaws.com/cfsi-innovation-files-2018/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/27001554/U.S.-Financial-Health-Pulse-2018-Press-Release-FINAL-FOR-WEB.pdf.Return to text 36.Lael Brainard, "Supporting Fast Payments for All," (speech at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, IL, October 3, 2018).Return to text 37.See, e.g., Aaron Klein,How the Fed can help families living paycheck to paycheck(PDF), Brookings (November 22, 2017).Return to text 38.See, e.g., Faster Payments Task Force,The U.S. Path to Faster Payments(PDF)(January 2017); Center for Financial Services Innovation,Beyond Check-cashing: An examination of consumer demand and business innovation for immediate access to check funds(June 2014), http://cfsinnovation.s3.amazonaws.com/RESEARCH_FIS_CFSI_BeyondCheckCashing_6.3.2014_FINAL.pdf.Return to text 39.See, e.g., "Get Paid Quickly with Lyft and Express Pays,"Lyft Blog, December 21, 2016, https://blog.lyft.com/posts/get-paid-quickly-express-pay; "Instant Pay: Your money, when you want it,"Uber Newsroom, August 16, 2016, https://newsroom.uber.com/instant-pay/.Return to text 40.See, e.g., Levi Sumagysay, Uber says Instant Pay is fixed, but issue still affecting some drivers, The Mercury News (Sept. 17, 2018), https://www.mercurynews.com/2018/09/17/uber-says-instant-pay-is-fixed-but-issue-still-affecting-some-drivers/. https://www.usnews.com/news/business/articles/2018-09-15/uber-glitch-leaves-drivers-unpaid-and-frustratedReturn to text 41.See, e.g., "What's a 360 Checking account?" Capital One, https://www.capitalone.com/bank/checking-accounts/online-checking-account/.Return to text 42.See, e.g., Simple, https://www.simple.com/; Frank Chaparro, "JPMorgan Chase launched an online bank for millennials called Finn, and I prefer it to the real thing,"Business Insider, July 8, 2018, https://www.businessinsider.com/jpmorgan-chase-online-bank-finn-for-millennials-2018-7.Return to text 43.See, e.g., Petal, https://www.petalcard.com/; Lend Academy, Podcast Transcription Session No. 101 – Raul Vazquez, Oportun (May 2017), https://www.lendacademy.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Podcast-101-Raul-Vazquez.pdf.Return to text 44.Earnup, "Money. The Way It Should Be," http://www.earnup.com/.Return to text 45.See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack? (PDF)" (speech at the "FinTech Risks and Opportunities" conference, Ann Arbor, MI, November 16, 2017). See Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein,Nudge, (Penguin Random House, 2009).Return to text 46.See, e.g., Brainard, "Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack? (PDF)".Return to text 47.See Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,Closing the Digital Divide: A Framework for Meeting CRA Obligations, (revised December 2016). and "There is a major digital divide on the Texas-Mexico border, one of least connected parts of the country," National Public Radio, Marketplace, May 2018, https://www.marketplace.org/2018/05/03/tech/there-major-digital-divide-texas-mexico-border-one-least-connected-parts-country.Return to text 48.On July 15, 2016, the federal bank regulatory agencies issued new CRA guidance that includes references to broadband access, (https://www.ffiec.gov/cra/pdf/2016_QA_Federal_Register_Notice.pdf).Return to text 49.Lael Brainard, "The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech," (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation, Washington, DC, December 2, 2016)Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and members of the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's implementation of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA or the Act). The Act calls on the federal banking agencies to aid in promoting economic growth by further tailoring regulation to better reflect the character of the different banking firms that we supervise. While recognizing that the core objectives of the post-crisis regime--higher and better quality capital, stronger liquidity, and increased resolvability--have contributed to reducing the likelihood of another severe financial crisis, the Act also acknowledges that we should be seeking to improve the efficiency with which we achieve these objectives, and gives the federal banking agencies the task of executing the thoughtful detail work necessary to enhance that efficiency. Of course, detail work can be challenging to get right. The Federal Reserve Board (Board) strongly supports the principle underlying the Act of tailoring regulation to risk, and we have embedded this principle in several aspects of our regulatory and supervisory framework. It is, however, fair to say that until recently our tailoring of regulations has been principally calibrated according to the asset size of an institution. Yet, while a useful indicator, asset size should be only one among several relevant factors in a tailoring approach. We continue to evaluate additional criteria allowing for greater regulatory and supervisory differentiation across banks of varying sizes, and the Act reflects similar goals. The legislation recognizes that banks have a variety of risk profiles and business models, and I believe that our regulation and supervisory programs can be flexible enough to accommodate this variety. The Federal Reserve's implementation of the Act's directives is underway. In my testimony today, I will describe progress we have made to date on tasks set out for the Federal Reserve in the Act. I will also highlight the work that will be our top priorities in the next few months: tailoring for firms with assets over $100 billion that are not global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) and developing a community bank leverage ratio. Tailoring in Post-Crisis Supervision and RegulationIn building the post-crisis framework, the Board designed its supervision and regulation to take on increased stringency the larger a firm's size and systemic footprint. This can be seen in larger or more complex banks facing stricter requirements in various elements of the regulatory capital framework, including the application of the supplementary leverage ratio, as well as certain buffers and surcharges, among others. And it can be seen in the specific set of more stringent prudential and resolution-related requirements that the Board has imposed on G-SIBs. By implication, these and other enhanced standards and supervisory tools have not been applied to smaller and community banks, resulting in a tailored and more appropriate regulatory framework for these institutions. We now have many years of experience with the body of post-crisis regulation, however, and it is clear that there is more that can and should be done to align the nature of our regulations with the nature of the firms being regulated. The Act provides for further tailoring of our banking rules while maintaining the Board's authority to promote financial stability and ensure the safety and soundness of supervised institutions. Regulatory Relief for Community Banking OrganizationsAmong the Act's key provisions are targeted tailoring measures to reduce the regulatory burden on community banks. The Federal Reserve is making substantial progress to implement these provisions. To provide clarity to the public, the Board and the federal banking agencies in July issued public statements on the regulations and associated reporting requirements that the Act immediately affected, indicating that we would give immediate effect to those provisions even before the formal regulatory changes were fully implemented.1And in August, the Board began implementing the Act with several interim final rules, which I will describe in more detail.2 Small Bank Holding Company Policy StatementThe Act requires the Board to revise a part of its rules commonly known as the small bank holding company (BHC) policy statement.3The small BHC policy statement permits certain small BHCs to incur debt levels higher than would be permitted for larger holding companies and exempts those small BHCs from the Board's minimum capital requirements.4This element of the Board's rules aims to facilitate the transfer of ownership in small banks, which can require the use of acquisition debt, while maintaining bank safety and soundness. The Act directs the Board to raise the asset threshold from $1 billion to $3 billion for BHCs to qualify for the policy statement, thereby expanding the reach of this regulatory relief. The Board completed this task on August 28, through an interim final rule. The rule renders most BHCs and savings and loan holding companies with less than $3 billion in assets exempt from the Board's regulatory capital rules, and provides corresponding relief from comprehensive consolidated financial regulatory reports.5 Expanded Eligibility for the Extended Exam CycleThe Act expands the eligibility for small firms to undergo 18-month examination cycles, rather than annual cycles. Previously, firms with less than $1 billion in total consolidated assets were eligible, but now firms with up to $3 billion in total consolidated assets are eligible. On August 23, the federal banking agencies adopted an interim final rule to implement these provisions and make parallel changes for U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks.6 Community Bank Leverage RatioThe Act gives the federal banking agencies the task of developing a community bank leverage ratio applicable to certain depository institutions and depository institution holding companies with total consolidated assets of less than $10 billion. Implementation of this provision is a high priority for the Board and our fellow regulators, and we have developed a work program to issue a regulatory proposal on this matter in the very near future. Regulatory Relief for Banks with Less Than $100 Billion in Assets Relief from Enhanced Prudential StandardsThe Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank) originally mandated certain enhanced prudential standards for BHCs with greater than $50 billion in total consolidated assets as well as company-run stress tests for firms with greater than $10 billion in assets. The Act exempted BHCs under $100 billion in assets from these requirements immediately upon enactment. To put these provisions into immediate effect, the Board has already stated that it will not take action to require BHCs with less than $100 billion in assets to comply with requirements related to resolution planning, liquidity risk management, internal liquidity stress testing, the liquidity coverage ratio, debt-to-equity limits, and capital planning, even before formal revisions to the regulations that implement these requirements.7The Board has also stated that it will not collect supervisory assessments for calendar years after 2017 for holding companies with assets under $100 billion.8 Relief from Stress Testing RequirementsThe Act exempted BHCs under $100 billion in total assets from Dodd-Frank requirements for supervisory stress tests and company-run stress tests immediately upon enactment. As a result, the Board did not include the three affected BHCs with less than $100 billion in assets in the results of this year's Dodd-Frank supervisory stress tests and the related Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review.9The Board has effectively eliminated application of Dodd-Frank company-run stress test requirements for BHCs and other financial companies regulated by the Board with less than $100 billion in total assets.10 Tailoring Regulations for Larger Banking OrganizationsThe Act directs the Board to further tailor its supervision and regulation of large BHCs with more than $100 billion in assets that do not qualify as G-SIBs. For firms with total assets in the range of $100 billion to $250 billion, the legislation gives us more flexibility to tailor or eliminate certain requirements that, under Dodd-Frank, were mandatory. The legislation directs us to consider factors other than size for differentiating our supervision and regulation. Moreover, for firms with more than $250 billion in total assets that are not G-SIBs, we are independently considering how these firms could be more efficiently regulated by applying more tailored standards. BHCs with Assets between $100 Billion and $250 BillionThe Board has placed our highest priority on issuing a proposed rule on tailoring enhanced prudential standards for banking firms with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion. Our task is not merely to reform the current regulation of the particular institutions that are affected by the Act at this moment, but to develp a framework that will describe in a principled way when future institutions may expect enhanced regulation and why, using objective measures that account for the relative complexity and interconnectedness among large banks. Considering the greater economic impact of the failure of larger banks versus smaller banks, it seems appropriate that tailoring supervision and regulation of large banks should not ignore size, but consider it as one factor among others. Additional factors that capture, for instance, larger banks' complexity and interconnectedness may--together with size--better serve as a basis for tailoring supervision and regulation rather than size alone. While the statute sets an 18-month deadline for this regulatory process, we expect to move much more quickly than this. Topics covered by such a proposal could include, among other things, capital and liquidity rules, and resolution planning requirements for the less complex and interconnected of these firms. The statute requires "periodic" supervisory stress testing by the Federal Reserve, which I believe recognizes the value of stress testing but requires a more tailored frequency and requires us to think more carefully about the burden of these tasks. This is consistent with the Federal Reserve's long standing expectations that all banking organizations, regardless of size, should employ internal risk-management practices that appropriately assess their capital needs and vulnerabilities under a range of reasonably anticipated stress scenarios. BHCs with Assets of $250 Billion or MoreBeyond thinking about how we will further tailor our regulation and supervisory programs for firms with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion, the Board is similarly reviewing our requirements for firms with more than $250 billion in total assets but below the G-SIB threshold. Through this review, the Board aims to ensure that our regulations continue to appropriately increase in stringency with the risk profiles of firms, consistent with the Act and the Board's extant focus on tailoring. Currently, some aspects of our regulatory regime--liquidity regulation, for example--treat banks with more than $250 billion in assets with the same stringency as G-SIBs. I can see reason to apply a clear differentiation. Foreign Banking OrganizationsUnder the Dodd-Frank Act, the application of enhanced prudential standards to foreign banks is determined based on total global consolidated assets. The Act raises the threshold for automatic application of enhanced prudential standards under section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act from $50 billion in total global consolidated assets to $250 billion, but the Federal Reserve may continue to apply enhanced prudential standards to foreign banking organizations (FBOs) with total global consolidated assets between $100 billion and $250 billion. The Act does not require the Board to change the U.S. asset threshold for establishment of an intermediate holding company, which is currently at $50 billion in U.S. non-branch assets. FBOs with significant U.S. operations have total global consolidated assets well in excess of the new statutory thresholds. We are not including any changes to the FBO regulatory scheme for FBOs with more than $250 billion in global assets as part of our implementation of tailoring mandated by the Act. We continue, as we always have, to review our regulatory framework to improve the manner in which we deal with the particular risks of FBOs in light of the distinct characteristics of such institutions. Additional Measures in EGRRCPAThe provisions I have highlighted focus on the Federal Reserve's tasks that the Board has completed or made a priority for the near term. Two additional measures for which the banking agencies have already issued rulemakings are the treatment of municipal securities in liquidity rules, and the capital treatment of high volatility commercial real estate exposures. Regarding the former, the federal banking agencies completed this task on August 22 through an interim final rule that modified the agencies' liquidity coverage ratio rule to treat certain municipal obligations as high-quality liquid assets as required by the Act.11And on the latter, the federal banking agencies released an interagency statement allowing depository institutions and their holding companies to report only commercial real estate loans that would remain subject to the higher capital requirements after implementation of the Act. The Board and the other federal banking agencies then followed up this announcement with a notice of proposed rulemaking on September 18, that seeks comment on changes to our regulation that would implement this statutory amendment.12 Under the Act, there is additional important work to be done on various other regulatory relief and refinements, including the provision in the Act regarding a custodial bank including central bank deposits in the denominator of its supplementary leverage ratio. We remain focused on completing these tasks in a timely fashion, while maintaining our commitment to engaging with stakeholders and other interested parties. In the appendix to this testimony, I have set out these tasks and the Board's latest thinking and actions on these topics. ConclusionAt this point in the aftermath of the financial crisis, we face an important opportunity to further tailor our supervision and regulation framework in a way that lets us be more risk-sensitive without sacrificing the increased post-crisis resiliency of the financial system. In implementing the Act, we should tailor regulation more broadly to take into account the business mix, complexity and interconnectedness, and risk profile of banking institutions. Implementing the Act is an important milestone in the Federal Reserve's continuing tailoring mandate. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you this morning, and I look forward to answering your questions. Appendix tothe Statement by Randal K. QuarlesIn my testimony, I focused on progress we have made to date on tasks set out for the Federal Reserve in the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (the Act) as well as certain near-term priorities. In this appendix, I set out additional provisions in the Act and some of the Board's key considerations as to implementation. Short Form Call ReportsThe Act prescribes a reduced reporting requirement for certain small depository institutions, specifically, a reduced reporting requirement every first and third quarter for qualifying depository institutions with total assets of less than $5 billion. The Board, in conjunction with the other federal banking agencies, intends to provide relief in the short-term, with additional simplifying changes to follow at a later stage. Volcker Rule ReliefThe Act exempts from the Volcker rule certain banks based on enumerated criteria. The Act also revises the statutory provisions concerning the naming of covered funds. Both changes took effect when the Act was signed into law. In light of these provisions, the relevant agencies immediately announced that they would limit enforcement of the final regulation implementing the Volcker rule consistently with the amendments made by the Act.13The Board and the other agencies responsible for implementing the Volcker rule also intend to conform the implementing rule to these statutory amendments through a separate rulemaking process. Other Measures Related to Capital and LiquidityOther provisions in the Act concerning capital and liquidity rules include requirements to eliminate the "adverse" scenario in stress testing for BHCs with total assets of $250 billion or more and allow a custodial bank to exclude central bank deposits from the denominator of its supplementary leverage ratio. The Board continues to develop these refinements. Additional MeasuresThe Act contains a number of other provisions that may require agency implementation either through a rulemaking or other action. The Board is required to tailor supervisory assessments for BHCs with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion. The Board is required to modify its engagement in international insurance standard setting, including through the establishment of an Insurance Policy Advisory Committee and through certain reports and testimony to Congress. In addition, the Board intends to assist the Treasury Department in analyzing how federal banking agencies are addressing material risks of cyber threats to U.S. financial institutions and capital markets. The Board continues to develop policies, rulemakings, and other relevant steps to address these provisions, in conjunction with the other federal banking agencies and Treasury as appropriate. Moreover, we intend to be highly engaged in the public feedback process in implementing all of the improvements to regulation and policymaking arising from the Act. 1.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Statement regarding the impact of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) (PDF)," July 6, 2018; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Interagency statement regarding the impact of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) (PDF)," July 6, 2018.Return to text 2.The Board found good cause for adopting the rules on an interim final basis, thereby implementing Congress's directives and reducing regulatory burden as soon as possible, providing further clarity to the public, and allowing affected financial institutions and agencies appropriate time to prepare for the changes. The Board invites comment on all aspects of the interim final rules.Return to text 3.The small BHC policy statement also covers savings and loan holding companies. 12 CFR part 225, appendix C.Return to text 4.Of course, the subsidiaries of these firms remain subject to minimum capital requirements.Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board issues interim final rule expanding the applicability of the Board's small bank holding company policy statement," August 28, 2018Return to text 6.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies issue interim final rules expanding examination cycles for qualifying small banks and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks," joint news release, August 23, 2018.Return to text 7."Statement regarding the impact of EGRRCPA (PDF)".Return to text 8."Statement regarding the impact of EGRRCPA (PDF)".Return to text 9.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board releases results of supervisory bank stress tests," news release, June 21, 2018.Return to text 10.The Board announced that it will take no action to require BHCs with less than $100 billion in assets to comply with company-run stress test requirements. The Board effectively exempted other financial companies regulated by the Board by extending their deadline for compliance with company-run stress test requirements until these firms would benefit from the statutory exemption under the Act, which took effect later than the exemption for BHCs with assets less than $100 billion. See the "Statement regarding the impact of EGRRCPA (PDF)".Return to text 11.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies issue interim final rule regarding the treatment of certain municipal securities as high-quality liquid assets," joint news release, August 22, 2018.Return to text 12.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies propose rule regarding the treatement of high volatility commercial real estate," Joint Press Release, September 18, 2018.Return to text 13.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Interagency statement regarding the impact of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) (PDF)," July 6, 2018.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from August 27 through September 26, 2018. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 25-26, 2018. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 25-26, 2018:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Chairman Jerome H. Powell At the "Revolution or Evolution? Reexamining Economic Paradigms" 60th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Boston, Massachusetts It is a pleasure and an honor to speak here today at the 60th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics (NABE). Since 1959, NABE has promoted the use of economics in the workplace and advanced the worthy purpose of ensuring that leading American businesses benefit from the insights of economists. Today I will focus on the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts to promote maximum employment and stable prices. I am pleased to say that, by these measures, the economy looks very good. The unemployment rate stands at 3.9 percent, near a 20-year low. Inflation is currently running near the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) objective of 2 percent. While these two top-line statistics do not always present an accurate picture of overall economic conditions, a wide range of data on jobs and prices supports a positive view. In addition, many forecasters are predicting that these favorable conditions are likely to continue. For example, the medians of the most recent projections from FOMC participants and the Survey of Professional Forecasters, as well as the most recent Congressional Budget Office (CBO) forecast, all have the unemployment rate remaining below 4 percent through the end of 2020, with inflation staying very near 2 percent over the same period.1 From the standpoint of our dual mandate, this is a remarkably positive outlook. Indeed, I was asked at last week's press conference whether these forecasts are too good to be true--a reasonable question! Since 1950, the U.S. economy has experienced periods of low, stable inflation and periods of very low unemployment, but never both for such an extended time as is seen in these forecasts.2Standard economic thinking has long offered an explanation for this: If unemployment were to remain this low for this long, employers would be pushing up wages as they compete for scarce workers, and rising labor costs would feed into more‑rapid price inflation faced by consumers. This dynamic between unemployment and inflation is known as a Phillips curve relationship, and at times it can pose a fundamental tension between the two sides of the Fed's mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Recent low inflation and unemployment have some analysts asking, "Is the Phillips curve dead?"3Others argue that the Phillips curve still lurks in the background and could reemerge at any time to exact revenge for low unemployment in the form of high inflation. My comments today have two main objectives. The first is to explain how changes in the Phillips curve help account for the somewhat surprising but broadly shared current forecasts of continued very low unemployment with inflation near 2 percent. At the risk of spoiling the surprise, I do not see it as likely that the Phillips curve is dead, or that it will soon exact revenge. What is more likely, in my view, is that many factors, including better conduct of monetary policy over the past few decades, have greatly reduced, but not eliminated, the effects that tight labor markets have on inflation. However, no one fully understands the nature of these changes or the role they play in the current context. Common sense suggests we should beware when forecasts predict events seldom before observed in the economy.4 Thus, my second objective today is to explain, given this uncertainty about the unemployment-inflation relationship, the important role that risk management plays in setting monetary policy. I will explore the FOMC's monitoring and balancing of risks as well as our contingency planning for cases when risk becomes reality. Historical Perspective on Jobs and InflationLet us start with a look at the modern history of jobs and inflation in the United States.Figure 1shows headline inflation and unemployment from 1960 to today and extended through 2020 using the average of median projections from both FOMC participants and the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the CBO projections. As the figure makes clear, a multiyear period with unemployment below 4 percent and stable inflation would, if realized, be unique in modern U.S. data.5 To understand the basis for these forecasts, it is useful to contrast two very different periods included in figure 1: From 1960 to 1985, and the period from 1995 to today. The first period includes the Great Inflation, and the latter includes both the Great Moderation and the distinctly immoderate period of the Global Financial Crisis and its aftermath. Figure 2shows unemployment and core, rather than headline, inflation in these two periods. While our inflation objective concerns headline inflation, switching to core inflation makes some relationships clearer by removing a good deal of variability due to food and energy prices, variability that is not primarily driven by labor market conditions or monetary policy. There is a dramatic difference in the unemployment-inflation relationship across these two periods. During the Great Inflation, unemployment fluctuated between roughly 4 percent and 10 percent, and inflation moved over a similar range. In the recent period, the unemployment rate also fluctuated between roughly 4 percent and 10 percent, but inflation has been relatively tame, averaging 1.7 percent and never declining below 1 percent or rising to 2.5 percent. Even during the financial crisis, core inflation barely budged. As a thought experiment, look at the right panel and imagine that you could see only the red line (inflation), and not the blue line (unemployment). Nothing in the red line hints at a major economic event, let alone the immense upheaval around the time of the global financial crisis. Notice that, in each period, there is only one episode in which unemployment drops below 4 percent. In the late 1960s, unemployment remained at or below 4 percent for four years, and during that time inflation rose steadily from under 2 percent to almost 5 percent. By contrast, the late 1990s episode of below-4-percent unemployment was quite brief, and during the episode and surrounding quarters inflation was reasonably stable and remained below 2 percent. To explore the Phillips curve relationship in these two periods more closely, we need to bring in the concept of the natural rate of unemployment. In standard economic thinking, an unemployment rate above the natural rate indicates slack in the labor market and tends to be associated with downward pressure on inflation; unemployment below the natural rate represents a tight labor market and is associated with upward inflation pressure. Figure 3repeats figure 2 but replaces unemployment with labor market slack as measured by unemployment minus the CBO's current estimate of the natural rate of unemployment at each point in time.6Periods of tight labor markets are shaded. During the Great Inflation, inflation generally rose in the tight, shaded periods and fell in the unshaded ones, just as conventional Phillips curve reasoning predicts. From 1995 to today, the large and persistent swings in the gap between unemployment and the natural rate were associated with, at most, a move of a few tenths in the inflation rate. Comparing the shaded and unshaded regions, you might see some association between slack and the minor ups and downs in inflation, but the pattern is not at all consistent. It is evidence like this that fuels speculation about the Phillips curve's demise. Whether dead, sick, or merely resting, many of the questions about the Phillips curve come down to figuring out what changed between these two periods, and why. Let us turn to a conceptual framework for examining these questions more systematically. A Simple Framework for Understanding Changes in the Jobs-Inflation RelationshipA natural starting point is the simplest form of a Phillips curve equation, which posits that inflation this year is determined by some combination of current labor market slack, inflation last year, and some other factors that I will leave aside for this discussion (figure 4):7 $$$$ Inflation(t)=-B Slack(t)+C Inflation(t-1)+Other(t)$$$$ The value ofBis often referred to as the slope of the Phillips curve. With a larger value ofB,any change in labor market slack translates into a bigger change in inflation. As we say, asBincreases, the Phillips curve steepens. The value ofCdetermines inflation's persistence--that is, how long any given change in inflation tends to linger. As the value ofCincreases, higher inflation this year translates more into higher inflation next year. A particularly nasty case arises whenBandCare both large. In this case, slack has a large effect on inflation, and that effect tends to be very persistent. One implication of a largeCis that, if a boom drives inflation up, it will tend to stay up unless offset by a subsequent bust.8 Figure 5shows regression estimates ofBandC,computed over 20-year samples starting with the sample from 1965 to 1984 and including each 20-year sample through 2017. During the Great Inflation samples, the value ofCis near 1, meaning that higher inflation one year tended to translate almost one-for-one into higher inflation the next. The Phillips curve is also relatively steep in the Great Inflation samples, with 1 extra percentage point of lower unemployment converting into roughly 1/2 percentage point of higher inflation. Thus, the Great Inflation presented that nasty case just described. Fortunately, things changed. The estimates of bothBandCfall in value as the estimation sample shifts forward in time. In the most recent samples, the Phillips curve is nearly flat, withBvery near zero, andCis about 0.25, meaning that roughly one fourth of any rise or fall in inflation carries forward. These results give numerical form to what we see in the right-hand panel of figure 3, covering the recent period: Large and persistent moves in the unemployment gap were associated with, at most, modest transitory moves in inflation. What Led to the Changes in the Phillips curve?These developments amount to a better world for households and businesses, which no longer experience or even fear the scourge of high and volatile inflation. To provide a sound basis for monetary policy, it is important to understand what happened and why, so we can avoid a return to the bad old days of the 1970s. Like many, I believe better monetary policy has played a central role.9 To understand the mechanism, let us ask how central banks could, presumably inadvertently, amplify and extend the duration of inflation's response to labor market tightness. To do so, the central bank could persistentlyeasethe stance of monetary policy in response to an uptick in inflation. No responsible central banker today would intentionally do this, but much research suggests that during the Great Inflation, misunderstandings about how the economy worked led the Fed effectively to behave in this manner.10Some policymakers may have believed the misguided notion that accommodating permanently higher inflation could purchase permanently higher employment.11Other policymakers misperceived the level of the natural rate of unemployment, which we now believe had shifted up markedly in the 1960s. With the higher natural rate, the labor market was much tighter and provided much greater upward pressure on inflation than policymakers realized in real time. As a result, they were continually "behind the curve."12 The channel through which monetary policy can amplify and extend inflation's response to shocks becomes even stronger when we take account of expectations. If people come to expect that upward blips in inflation will result in ongoing higher inflation, they will build that view into wage and price decisions. In this case, people's expectations become a force adding momentum to inflation, and breaking inflation's momentum can require convincing people to change their minds and behavior--never an easy task. Arguably, this is why a federal funds rate near 20 percent--roughly 10 percent in real terms‑‑was required in the early 1980s to turn the tide on high inflation. The cost, in the form of very high unemployment, is clear in the Great Inflation figures. The Great Inflation taught us that a main task of monetary policy is to keep inflation expectations anchored at some low level. This idea is behind the adoption in recent decades of inflation targets, such as the Fed's 2 percent objective, by central banks around the world. When monetary policy tends to offset shocks to inflation, rather than amplifying and extending them, and when people come to expect this policy response, a surprise rise or fall in labor market tightness will naturally have smaller and less persistent effects on inflation. Research suggests that this reasoning can account for a good deal of the change in the Phillips curve relationship.13It is also likely that many other factors have contributed to changes in inflation dynamics over recent decades. We do not fully understand the causes and implications of these changes, which raises risk management issues that I will take up now.14 A Favorable Outlook, but What Could Go Wrong?To set the stage, let us return to the situation facing the FOMC. The baseline forecasts of most FOMC participants and a broad range of others show unemployment remaining below 4 percent for an extended period, with inflation steady near 2 percent. I have made the case that this forecast is not too good to be true and does not signal the death of the Phillips curve. Instead, the outlook is consistent with evidence of a very flat Phillips curve and inflation expectations anchored near 2 percent. But we still must face the cautionary advice to beware when forecasts point to rarely seen outcomes. As a way of heeding this advice, the Committee takes a risk management approach, which has three important parts: monitoring risks; balancing risks, both upside and downside; and contingency planning for surprises. Let me describe a few of the risks and how we are thinking about them. Could Inflation Expectations Become Unanchored?First is the risk that inflation expectations might lose their anchor. We attribute a great deal of the stability of inflation in recent years to the anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations. And we are aware that it could be very costly if those expectations were to drift materially. As you probably know from our public communications, we carefully monitor survey- and market-based proxies for expectations, and we do not see evidence of a material shift in longer-term expectations (figure 6). The survey measures have been particularly steady for some time.15The financial market-based measures include both an expectations component and a volatile inflation premium component, so they tend to move around much more than the surveys, but we see no evidence of a material change in these measures, either. The risks to inflation expectations are, of course, two sided. Until this summer, inflation had remained stubbornly below 2 percent for several years. And major economies in much of the world have been struggling mainly with disinflationary forces. Thus, we have been and will remain alert for possible downward drift in expectations. Some argue the contrary case--that by only gradually removing accommodation as the unemployment rate has fallen, the FOMC may have fallen behind the curve, thereby risking an upward drift in expectations. From the standpoint of contingency planning, our course is clear: Resolutely conduct policy consistent with the FOMC's symmetric 2 percent inflation objective, and stand ready to act with authority if expectations drift materially up or down. Could Inflation Pressures Move up More than Expected in a Hot Economy?A second risk is that labor market tightness or tightness in other parts of the production chain might lead to higher inflation pressure than expected--the "revenge of the Phillips curve" scenario.16As I mentioned, the FOMC carefully monitors a wide array of early indicators of inflation pressure to evaluate this risk. Wages and compensation data are one important source of information. These measures have picked up some recently, but in a way that is quite welcome. Specifically, the rise in wages is broadly consistent with observed rates of price inflation and labor productivity growth and therefore does not point to an overheating labor market. Further, higher wage growth alone need not be inflationary. The late 1990s episode of low unemployment saw wages rise faster than inflation plus productivity growth without an appreciable rise in inflation. Despite what shows up in the aggregate wage and compensation data, however, I am sure that, like us, many of you are hearing widespread anecdotes about labor shortages and increasing bottlenecks in production. For example, as shown infigure 7, the words "shortage" and "bottleneck" are increasingly appearing in the Beige Book, the Federal Reserve's report summarizing discussions with our business contacts around the country.17The message we are hearing in our conversations is supported by a wide range of more conventional measures. For example, the survey of members of the National Federation of Independent Business finds firms increasingly reporting that job openings are hard to fill (figure 8). Further, these businesses now list "quality of labor" as their most important problem, as opposed to the more typical report of "poor sales." We review a wide variety of measures of this type, and these indicators show what I think most business people see: an economy operating with limited slack. Notice, however, that these measures are near levels that prevailed in the late 1990s or early 2000s, a period when core inflation remained under 2 percent. While the late 1990s case proves that elevated values of these tightness measures do not automatically translate into rising inflation, a single episode provides only limited reassurance. Thus, the FOMC takes seriously the possibility that tight markets for labor or other inputs could provide greater upward pressure on inflation than in the baseline outlook. Our best estimates, however, suggest that so long as inflation expectations remain anchored, a modest steepening of the Phillips curve would be unlikely to cause a significant rise in inflation or demand a disruptive policy tightening.18Once again, the key is the anchored expectations. Is the Natural Rate of Unemployment Lower Than Expected?A third risk--in this case an upside risk--is that the natural rate of unemployment could be even lower than current estimates. Some have argued that the Fed should be removing policy accommodation much more slowly, pushing the economy to see if the natural rate of unemployment is lower still. Advocates of this view note that over the past several years of policy normalization, the economy has continued to strengthen and unemployment has fallen, but inflation has remained quiet. As I discussed in a recent speech, many analysts have accounted for the lack of rising inflation pressure by lowering their estimate of the natural rate.19For example, since the start of 2016, the unemployment rate has fallen about 1 percentage point, and estimates of the natural rate from four well-known sources have fallen over that period between 0.3 percent and 0.7 percent (figure 9). If the natural rate is now materially lower than we believe, that would imply less upward pressure on inflation--the flip side of the "revenge of the Phillips curve" risk. Our policy of gradual interest rate normalization represents the FOMC's attempt to take both of these risks seriously. Removing accommodation too quickly could needlessly foreshorten the expansion. Moving too slowly could risk rising inflation and inflation expectations. Our path of gradually removing accommodation, while closely monitoring the economy, is designed to balance these risks. In wrapping up this discussion of risks to the favorable outlook, I should emphasize that I have chosen to focus on three risks that are all associated with the Phillips curve. There are, of course, myriad other risks. To name just a few, we must consider the strength of economies abroad, the effects of ongoing trade disputes, and financial stability issues. I hope my discussion of three particular risks gives a sense of how we approach these issues. ConclusionMany of us have been looking back recently on the decade that has passed since the depths of the financial crisis. In light of that experience, I am glad to be able to stand here and say that the economy is strong, unemployment is near 50-year lows, and inflation is roughly at our 2 percent objective. The baseline outlook of forecasters inside and outside the Fed is for more of the same. This historically rare pairing of steady, low inflation and very low unemployment is testament to the fact that we remain in extraordinary times. Our ongoing policy of gradual interest rate normalization reflects our efforts to balance the inevitable risks that come with extraordinary times, so as to extend the current expansion, while maintaining maximum employment and low and stable inflation. ReferencesBernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting," speech delivered at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. Blanchard, Olivier (2016). "The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief PB16‑1. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, January. Blinder, Alan S. (2018). "Is the Phillips Curve Dead? And Other Questions for the Fed,"Wall Street Journal,May 3. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018). "Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Gordon, Robert J. (2018). "Friedman and Phelps on the Phillips Curve Viewed from a Half Century's Perspective," NBER Working Paper Series 24891. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Pfajfar, Damjan, and John M. Roberts (2018). "The Role of Expectations in Changed Inflation Dynamics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-062. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Powell, Jerome H. (2018). "Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23-25. Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (2002). "The Evolution of Economic Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy (PDF)," paper presented at "Rethinking Stabilization Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 29-31. Stein, Herbert (1998).What I Think: Essays on Economics, Politics, and Life.Washington: AEI Press. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. -------- (2017). "Inflation, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Prospects for Growth: Reassessing the Fundamentals," 59th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, Ohio, September 26. 1.I am referring to the most recent forecast for year-end 2018 through 2020. The unemployment rate for each forecast bottoms out at 3.4 percent or 3.5 percent in 2019 and remains below 4 percent. Headline PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation is between 1.9 percent and 2.1 percent for all three years and forecasts. The sources for the forecast data are given in the notes to figure 1.Return to text 2.For example, there have been four periods with quarterly average unemployment below 4 percent since 1950. In an early 1950s episode, inflation ranged from below zero to 8 percent. Toward the end of the 1950s, unemployment was near 4 percent for a time, dipping to 3.9 percent for one quarter. During this low unemployment period, inflation rose steadily from under 1 percent to over 3 percent. The remaining two episodes with unemployment under 4 percent--one each in the 1960s and 1990s--are discussed later in the speech.Return to text 3.This question is asked in the title of a recent editorial by Alan Blinder (2018), and a Google search reveals many similar titles. The research on the topic is reviewed more fully later in the speech.Return to text 4.Herb Stein (1998) made the analogous point that one should doubt the assertion that some program will "cause the economy to perform outside the range of its past experience" (p. 217).Return to text 5.See note 2. Unless otherwise noted, all statements about inflation will be four-quarter percent changes in quarterly average data, and all statements about unemployment will be about the quarterly average unemployment rate.Return to text 6.This estimate is the CBO's current assessment of what the natural rate was at each period in the sample, not a measure of the natural rate as perceived in real time. I discuss the importance of this distinction in Powell (2018).Return to text 7.What is reported here is an updated version of results reported in Erceg and others (2018), and that work provides additional discussion. Note that the "Other" term includes a constant.Return to text 8.The text refers to whenCis less than 1, in which case a rise in inflation would ultimately die out on its own. WhenCis 1, the Phillips curve is of the "accelerationist" variety, and any offsetting rise in inflation due to labor market tightness would be permanent unless offset by an equal amount of subsequent slack. Blanchard (2016) has a good discussion of this issue.Return to text 9.The account I present of the role of anchored expectations in stabilizing the economy and favorably altering Phillips curve dynamics echoes a long-held view at the Fed. See Bernanke (2007) and Yellen (2015). Kiley (2015) reviews the recent research literature on this topic. Blanchard (2016) presents a very similar perspective.Return to text 10.To be clear, during the periods of rising inflation in the 1960s and 1970s, the FOMC was generally raising the federal funds rate, but with inflation rising, the real federal funds rate was rising much more slowly or even falling. In this sense, the effective stance of policy was tightening slowly or was easing.Return to text 11.Romer and Romer (2002) make this argument.Return to text 12.I discuss this argument in greater depth in Powell (2018).Return to text 13.Yellen (2017) gives a more detailed account of how a very flat Phillips curve with anchored expectations can account well for the recent inflation and unemployment data. See also note 9.Return to text 14.Many changes not directly related to policy might nonetheless have been precipitated by the improvement in policy. For example, Pfajfar and Roberts, (2018) present evidence that when inflation is more stable, people simply pay less attention to it and that this could help account for changes in the Phillips curve relationship.Return to text 15.That is, movements in these measures have been modest, especially taking into account precision of the surveys.Return to text 16.Gordon (2018) presents one version of the revenge hypothesis.Return to text 17.The length of the Beige Book has varied somewhat over time; for example, the Beige Book was redesigned in 2017, with the number of words reduced about 10 percent. It is unclear whether the number of important words like "shortage" would have been affected by that redesign, but if so, it would go in the direction of holding down the observed recent increase.Return to text 18.See, for example, Erceg and others (2018).Return to text 19.See Powell (2018).Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chairman Richard H. Clarida At Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. I see some familiar faces in the audience, and I am delighted to be at Peterson today to offer my first public remarks since being sworn in last month as Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. As some of you know, I have been a student of U.S. monetary policy for more than 30 years. So, for me, personally, it is a distinct honor and real privilege to have the opportunity to serve with my colleagues on the Board of Governors and, along with the 12 Reserve Bank presidents, on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Now, of course, I fully realize that I have participated in just one FOMC meeting to date, so my remarks today will not come with a patina earned from long experience as a monetary policymaker. That said, I thought it might be of interest to share my thinking on the current state of the U.S. economy, to explain how it informed my support for the FOMC's policy decision last month, and to discuss my views on the way forward for U.S. monetary policy.1 The Economic Expansion in Year 10The U.S. economic expansion, now in its 10th year, is marked by strong growth in the gross domestic product (GDP) and a job market that has been surprising on the upside for nearly two years. It is impossible today to know with much precision how much of the pickup in growth and the decline in unemployment that we have seen over the past two years is structural and how much is cyclical. Most likely, both factors are at work. That said, based on my reading of the accumulating evidence, I believe that trend growth in the economy may well be faster and the structural rate of unemployment lower than I would have thought several years ago. Let me elaborate. First, let's look at the demand side of the economy. Consider the benchmark revisions to the household saving rate. Recently revised Commerce Department data now show that the aggregate household saving rate is running at 6.7 percent of disposable income. This revised estimate is nearly double the previous estimate. The higher level suggests that, in contrast to the previous economic expansion from 2001 to 2007, when households were borrowing to maintain consumption while income growth slowed, households today, at least in the aggregate, are well positioned to maintain or even increase consumption relative to gains in income. To me, at this stage in the business cycle, a historically high household saving rate is a tailwind for the economy, not a headwind. And, of course, recent reductions in personal income tax rates are also a tailwind for the economy. Productivity and investment data provide another vantage point from which to assess both the demand and supply sides of the current expansion. Over the past few years, we have seen some pickup in productivity growth, albeit from a very depressed pace. By contrast, at a comparable stage in both the 2001-07 and 1982-90 economic expansions, productivity growth (as measured by an eight-quarter moving average) was actually slowing relative to its contemporaneous peak-to-present pace. I should also note that this recent pickup in productivity has coincided with a rebound in business investment, and that this increase in capital spending has been evident in both the equipment and intellectual property categories; it is not just an "oil patch" story. Business investment is being supported by recent changes in the tax code that lower the cost of capital as well as by continued strong profitability of U.S. companies. While capital investment is one important source of productivity growth and recent data on this front are encouraging, predicting future‑‑or even identifying past‑‑inflection points in productivity growth is notoriously difficult. Although it may be tempting simply to extrapolate a decade of disappointing productivity data into a distant future, a pickup in trend productivity growth is a possibility that deserves close monitoring.2 Let me now turn to the job market and inflation outlook. Average monthly job gains continue to outpace the increase needed to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force over the longer run. At 3.7 percent in September, the unemployment rate has not been this low since 1969. In addition, after remaining stubbornly sluggish throughout much of the expansion, wage growth is picking up. A sustained rise in inflation-adjusted, or "real," wages at or above the pace of productivity growth is typical in an economy operating in the vicinity of full employment, and we are starting to see some evidence of this. I certainly hope it continues. Now, some might see a rise in wages as leading to upside inflationary pressures, but here, again, the experience of earlier cycles is instructive. In the past two U.S. expansions, gains in real wages in excess of productivity growth were not accompanied by a material rise in price inflation. Of course, this time may be different, and as with growth, the job market could perform better or worse than the baseline outlook. However, for now, the increase in wages has been broadly consistent with the pickup in productivity growth that I have just discussed, and a rise in the still-low rate of labor force participation among the prime-age population provides scope for the job market to strengthen further without generating inflationary pressures. This outlook for the labor market also reflects my view that the structural, or longer-run, rate of unemployment‑‑that is, the unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation over the longer run--may be somewhat lower than I would have thought several years ago. What this means is that, even with today's very low unemployment rate, the labor market might not be as tight‑‑and inflationary pressures not as strong‑‑as I once would have thought. I am certainly not alone in this thinking. Over the past several years, most FOMC participants have been reducing their individual estimates of the longer-run level of the unemployment rate. The median assessment of FOMC participants fell from around 5-1/2 percent five years ago to 4-1/2 percent in the projections published last month. Outside estimates, such as those from the Congressional Budget Office and the Blue Chip Economic Indicators survey, show a similar pattern of downward revisions. This makes sense. With unemployment falling and wage gains thus far in line with productivity and expected inflation, the traditional indicators of cost-push price pressure are not flashing red right now. Both total and core personal consumption expenditure inflation are now running close to the FOMC's 2 percent objective. When thinking about the inflation outlook, I pay attention to market-based measures of inflation compensation from the TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) market as well as to surveys of inflation expectations. These "breakeven inflation rates" are simply the difference between yields on traditional Treasury securities and those on TIPS with comparable maturities. While these market-based measures are not perfect and need to be adjusted for liquidity and term premium factors, they can provide a useful signal about market inflation expectations, which can be combined with signals from surveys of expected inflation to get a read on inflation expectations. Breakeven inflation rates have only recently risen to a range that is in line‑‑but just barely‑‑with the expectation that inflation will remain close to our 2 percent inflation goal over the medium-to-longer run. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations also appear consistent with the Fed's inflation goal. In short, the labor market today is robust, and inflation is at or close to the Fed's 2 percent inflation goal. Thus, the economy is as near as it has been in a decade to meeting both of the Fed's dual-mandate objectives, which suggests to me that monetary policy at this stage of the economic expansion should be aimed at sustaining growth and employment at levels consistent with keeping inflation at or close to the 2 percent rate consistent with price stability. By contrast, until this year, the appropriate focus of policy had been to return employment and inflation to levels consistent with our dual-mandate objectives. With the economy now operating at or close to mandate-consistent levels for inflation and unemployment, the risks that monetary policy must balance are now more symmetric and less skewed to the downside. Policy Remains AccommodativeI supported the FOMC's decision last month to raise the target for the federal funds rate to a range of 2 to 2-1/4 percent. With the economy growing briskly, the labor market operating in the vicinity of full employment, and inflation running close to 2 percent, I saw our decision as another step in removing the extraordinary degree of accommodation put in place in the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis. However, even after our September decision, I believe U.S. monetary policy remains accommodative. The funds rate is just now‑‑for the first time in a decade‑‑above the Fed's inflation objective, but the inflation-adjusted real funds rate remains below the range of estimates for the longer-run neutral real rate, often referred to as r*, computed from the projections submitted by Board members and the Reserve Bank presidents. This longer-run r*, like the natural rate of unemployment, is both unobserved and time varying‑‑and thus must be inferred as a signal extracted from noisy macro and financial data. That said, and notwithstanding the imprecision with which r* is estimated, it remains to me a relevant consideration as I assess the current stance and best path forward for policy. The reason for this is because, as Milton Friedman argued in his classic American Economic Association presidential address, a central bank that seeks to consistently keep real interest rates below r* will eventually face rising inflation and inflation expectations, while a central bank that seeks to keep real interest rates above r* will eventually face falling inflation and inflation expectations.3My own and others' research suggests that the failure of the Fed to respect this principle contributed to the Great Inflation of the 1970s, while the incorporation of this principle into Fed policy in the 1990s and 2000s contributed to the achievement of stable and low inflation during and since those years.4So, even though estimates of r* are imprecise, I do not believe they should be ignored. Instead, when thinking about monetary policy, I believe it is best not to ignore entirely an admittedly imprecise estimate of r* today, but instead to update that estimate as new data on inflation, inflation expectations, employment, growth, and productivity arrive. Moreover, because monetary policy operates with a lag, and with inflation presently close to the 2 percent goal, it will be especially important to monitor inflation expectations closely‑‑using both surveys and financial market data‑‑to best calibrate the pace and destination for policy normalization. It will also be important to monitor both model-based and financial-market‑based estimates of expected future inflation-indexed real interest rates (for example, 5-year real rates 5 years forward)‑‑suitably adjusted for term premium and liquidity effects‑‑as one indicator of longer-run r*. Before the financial crisis, these 5-year real rates 5 years forward averaged around 2 percent after a term premium and liquidity adjustment. Since 2015, they have averaged about 0.50 percent but recently have approached 0.75 percent, also after a term and liquidity premium adjustment. Given that real interest rates and economic growth tend to move together over the longer run, one possible source of these upward revisions in forward real rates could be that financial market participants may have become more optimistic about the growth potential of our economy. Evidence also suggests that the term premium that investors require to hold longer-maturity bonds has risen as well. The Way ForwardIf the data come in as I expect, I believe that some further gradual adjustment in the federal funds rate will be appropriate. As I mentioned earlier, I believe monetary policy today remains accommodative, and that, with the economy now operating at or close to mandate-consistent levels for inflation and unemployment, the risks that monetary policy must balance are now more symmetric and less skewed to the downside. Raising rates too quickly could unnecessarily shorten the economic expansion while moving too slowly could result in rising inflation and inflation expectations down the road that could be costly to reverse. As I calibrate, in the months ahead, the pace and ultimate destination for monetary policy adjustments that will best allow the Fed to achieve its dual-mandate objectives, it will be important to me to evaluate a wide range of economic and financial market indicators to complement the predictions yielded by model-based scenarios. As I look ahead, if strong growth and robust employment gains were to continue into 2019 and be accompanied by a material rise in actual and expected inflation, that circumstance would indicate to me that additional policy normalization might well be required beyond what I currently expect. By contrast, if strong growth and employment gains were to continue and be accompanied by stable inflation, inflation expectations, and expectations for Fed policy, that situation, to me, would argue against raising short-term interest rates by more than I currently expect. ConclusionIn closing, with the economy operating as close as it has in a decade to the Federal Reserve's dual-mandate objectives of price stability and maximum employment, I believe monetary policy at this stage of the economic expansion should be aimed at sustaining growth and maximum employment at levels consistent with keeping inflation at or close to the 2 percent objective. Even after our most recent policy decision to raise the range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, monetary policy remains accommodative, and I believe some further gradual adjustment in the policy rate range will likely be appropriate. That said, at this stage in the business cycle, I believe it will be especially important to monitor a wide range of data to continually assess and calibrate the level of the policy rate that is consistent with meeting our objectives on a sustained basis. 1. I am grateful to Antulio Bomfim of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.Return to text 2. See Erik Brynjolfsson, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson (forthcoming), "Artificial Intelligence and the Modern Productivity Paradox: A Clash of Expectations and Statistics," in Ajay K. Agrawal, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, eds.,The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda(Chicago: University of Chicago Press); an earlier version is available atwww.nber.org/chapters/c14007.pdf.Return to text 3. Milton Friedman (1968), "The Role of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 58 (March), pp. 1-17.Return to text 4. Richard Clarida, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000), "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147-80; Richard Clarida (2015),"The Fed Is Ready to Raise Rates: Will Past Be Prologue?"International Finance,vol. 18 (Spring), pp. 93-107,https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2362.12059; Timothy Cogley and Thomas J. Sargent (2002), "Evolving Post-World War II U.S. Inflation Dynamics," in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001,vol. 16 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), pp. 331-87,https://www.nber.org/chapters/c11068.pdf; and Michael Woodford (2003),Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois The Role of the Federal Reserve in Ensuring Safe and Reliable PaymentsIt is a pleasure to be here in Chicago today to talk about payments. The confidence that payments will be timely and dependable is a cornerstone of America's dynamic and resilient economy.1 Today, Americans take the reliability and safety of their payments for granted. But that was not always the case. The nation's first 150 years were frequently disrupted by panics in the financial system that extended into the payment system, which was highly fragmented and inefficient. Before the Federal Reserve took on a role in the payment system, a check recipient could not count on receiving the full value written on the check and faced long and unpredictable delays in getting access to the funds. As a result of banks' efforts to avoid excessive clearance fees, it could take days, weeks, or more to clear checks. The Federal Reserve's second Chairman, William P.G. Harding, described the circuitous, opaque, and costly route one payment made: "…a bank in Rochester, N.Y., sent a check drawn on a Birmingham, Ala., account to a correspondent bank in New York, which sent it along to a bank in Jacksonville, Fla. From there, it traveled to Philadelphia, Baltimore and Cincinnati before it finally reached the originating bank in Birmingham."2The fragmentation of the payment system imposed costs on American merchants, households, community banks, and, ultimately, on the overall U.S. economy. Ensuring a reliable nationwide payment infrastructure was one of the motivations that led the Congress to create the Federal Reserve after the severe financial panic of 1907. Fostering a safe, efficient, and widely accessible payment infrastructure has been a crucial aspect of the Fed's mission from its founding in 1913. By creating a new core infrastructure for clearing and settling checks, the Fed was able to boost confidence in banks and America's payment system, ensure Americans received the full value of their checks, and speed up payments. That was the first, but not the last, time that the Fed played a central role in transforming America's retail payment system. By the 1970s, the payment system was staggering under the weight of paper checks. In 1973, Governor Jeffrey Bucher of the Federal Reserve Board described the exponential growth in check volume and the time-consuming and expensive process to clear paper checks as a "time bomb."3The Federal Reserve and payment system stakeholders faced a choice: continue making incremental changes to manage the growing avalanche of checks, or look to technology to facilitate transformational change. Working with the private sector, the Federal Reserve chose transformation, and the effect was dramatic. In partnership with the private sector, the Federal Reserve supported the implementation of the automated clearinghouse, or ACH system, to process payroll payments for individuals, bill payments for households, and vendor payments for businesses. Before the advent of the ACH, it would typically take a week for an employee to be able to access the funds from a paycheck. It would require first a trip to the bank during business hours to deposit the paycheck and then several business days for that bank to complete the time-consuming process of collecting the funds from the employer's bank.4With the advent of ACH, an employee could expect to access their pay from their bank on the same day it was deposited electronically by their employer. Today, the ACH operates with important roles for the private sector and the Fed, is available nationwide, and constitutes a vital piece of infrastructure supporting earlier access to funds and reliable settlement of payments.5 Moving to 24/7 Real-Time SettlementToday, our payment system is again at a crossroads. There is a growing gap between the transaction capabilities we need and expect in the digital economy--fast, convenient, and accessible to all--and the underlying settlement capabilities. Consumers and businesses increasingly expect to complete transactions with a simple keystroke, swipe, or tap. If I want to split a restaurant tab with my friends, I can use an app on my smartphone. But my friends have to be signed up for the same app to receive the payment, and they may have to wait for confirmation that the funds have moved from the app into their bank accounts before they can use the funds outside the app. Similarly, if I want to make a purchase from a vendor online, all I have to do is upload my payment information and touch a screen to complete the purchase immediately. But that payment in turn may not be immediately available to the seller. While we are seeing a growing demand for payments to be as instantaneous as the apps on our smartphones, in reality, under the hood, these payments currently rely on a patchwork of systems that can result in inefficiencies and delays, as well as uneven access. To meet the expectations of our 24/7 app economy, there is a growing demand for broadly and nationally accessible faster payments that make funds available immediately. Faster payments would allow consumers and businesses to send and immediately receive payments at any time of the day, any day of the year, and provide recipients the ability to use their funds anywhere they choose.6 Nascent faster payment services are emerging to address this demand from individuals and businesses for the capability to manage their finances more efficiently in real time. These faster payment innovations are striving to keep up with this demand, but gaps in the underlying infrastructure pose challenges associated with safety, efficiency, and accessibility. In many circumstances, the underlying infrastructure in place today cannot ensure that a fast payment is fully complete before the recipient seeks to use the funds. To complete a payment, the banks behind the transaction need to transfer funds between each other. Until this happens, the payment between them is like an "IOU." Today's systems that transfer funds between banks are not set up to work in a 24/7, real-time world. Instead, most faster payments settle funds between banks on a deferred basis. Deferred settlement entails a buildup of obligations--like IOUs between banks--that could present real risks to the financial system in times of stress. Although faster payment systems that rely on deferred settlements can incorporate certain measures to mitigate these risks, these measures may be appropriate for a nascent faster payment market only for a limited time. As we saw with the avalanche of paper checks prior to ACH, as the volume and value of faster payments grow over time, the potential risks of deferred settlement to the financial system are also likely to grow. To fully deliver on the promise of faster payments into the future, we need an infrastructure that can support continued growth and innovation, with a goal of settlement on a 24/7 basis in real time. To ensure the robustness of the payment system into the future, banks and other providers acting as their agents should have access to a settlement system that operates 24/7 and settles each payment as soon as an individual sends it. While everyone stands to benefit from faster payments, the benefits could be especially important for households and small business owners who face cash flow constraints. We know from the Fed's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking that four in 10 adults say they would need to cover an unexpected expense of $400 by borrowing or selling something, or simply be unable to pay. A forthcoming Fed research note estimates that a quarter of households have less than $400 combined in their bank accounts.7For these households, the difference between waiting for a payment to clear and receiving a payment in real time is not merely an inconvenience; it could tip the balance toward overdraft fees, bounced checks, or collections fees. To be clear, faster payments would not address the root causes of these households' financial fragility. Even so, faster payments could help reduce the strain on some. Similarly, many small businesses cite immediate access to working capital to finance inventories or pay employees as their number one constraint on growth.8Smaller businesses and merchants would benefit from faster payments because of their need to tightly manage how much of their capital is tied up in unused material or inventory. If a small business could count on its customers' payments being immediately accessible in its bank account, it could reduce its need for short-term financing to cover the costs of ordering materials and goods well in advance. The Role of the Federal Reserve in Faster PaymentsSo what is our role at this moment of opportunity for the payment system? In keeping with the Fed's historical role in payments, five years ago we launched a collaborative effort with a broad array of stakeholders to catalyze a safe, efficient, and accessible faster payment system for the United States. As part of that effort, 300 organizations representing consumers, businesses, banks, card companies, and technology providers, including many represented here today, came together to define expectations for the future of the retail payment system and to make recommendations on how to implement those expectations. The members of the task force told us that the Federal Reserve needed to develop a 24/7 settlement system.9The U.S. Treasury echoed this theme in a recent report.10 Over the past year, we have undertaken an assessment of what the Federal Reserve could do to modernize its infrastructure to support interbank settlement of faster payments. That assessment found that 24/7 payment-by-payment interbank settlement in real-time--what we refer to as real-time gross settlement (RTGS)--offers clear benefits in minimizing risk and maximizing efficiency. A 24/7 economy with 24/7 real-time payments needs 24/7 real-time settlement, and RTGS is the way to achieve this. That is where we believe that the Federal Reserve and the private sector together need to make investments for the future. In this regard, the U.S. retail payment system lags behind some other countries: the Reserve Bank of Australia and the European Central Bank have already implemented or are on the cusp of implementing RTGS systems to support private-sector faster payment services. The Federal Reserve and payment system stakeholders have an opportunity to upgrade America's payment system to meet the needs of households, businesses, and banks in the app economy. Today, we are publishing aFederal Registernotice that seeks public comment on potential steps the Federal Reserve could take to support the vision of RTGS of faster payments. The Reserve Banks could develop a service for RTGS that is available on a 24/7 basis to provide payment-by-payment interbank settlement in real time and at any time, on any day, including weekends and holidays. The Reserve Banks currently provide payment services to more than 11,000 banks across the country. A 24/7 RTGS service provided by the Reserve Banks could significantly improve the prospect that banks of all sizes will have equitable access to a real-time interbank settlement infrastructure for faster payments in the long term. This common infrastructure would support connections across banks, and faster payment service providers acting as their agents, with the potential to weave together the current patchwork of systems. As a result, we would also expect the overall safety of faster payments to increase. The capability to finalize interbank settlement before funds are made available to the recipient would avoid an undesirable buildup of risk in the system. The more banks that have access to real-time as opposed to deferred settlement mechanisms, the lower the risk would be from deferring settlement to the payment system as a whole. Although RTGS may be operationally demanding, it offers clear benefits from a risk and efficiency perspective over the long term. The development of a nationwide real-time interbank settlement infrastructure could also support the development of private-sector faster payment services, thereby increasing innovation and choice in the market. Banks and technology providers of all sizes may be able to develop new services or enhance existing services by capitalizing on the underlying interbank settlement infrastructure. This could ultimately benefit all consumers by lowering costs, increasing choice, and improving quality. In that regard, we are also seeking comment on whether the Reserve Banks should consider developing a liquidity management tool that would operate 24/7 in support of services for real-time interbank settlement of faster payments. The tool could support settlement services provided by the private sector or the Reserve Banks. The Federal Reserve has a responsibility to promote a payment system that serves the evolving needs of the public. We hope to solicit as wide a range of views as possible as we consider these and possibly other options to support prompt, secure, and resilient settlement in a 24/7 world. To that end, theFederal Registernotice poses a series of questions related to whether an RTGS is the appropriate strategic foundation for interbank settlement of faster payments. We also solicit views on the appropriate role for the Federal Reserve in such a system. We look forward to hearing from, and learning from, a broad array of stakeholders, including those who are actively involved in the provision of payment and banking services, as well as representatives of the consumers, households, and businesses who rely on the ability to make and receive payments every day. The future of payments will be determined by the actions we take today. We can wait and watch how these issues evolve on their own. But this will likely result in a fragmented patchwork of systems that entails inefficiencies and risks and could leave behind many households, small businesses, and smaller banks. Alternatively, we can work with other stakeholders to embrace innovation and design a faster payments infrastructure for the future to promote broad access and resilience. As technological change continues to drive payments innovation, we continue to focus on the same basic objective that motivated our initial engagement in the payment system a century ago: promoting a safe, efficient, and accessible payment system that serves the interests of all Americans. The Fed has the unique ability to provide the infrastructure to reliably settle obligations between banks using balances at the central bank. As such, we have a responsibility to serve the broad public interest by providing a flexible and robust payment infrastructure on which the private sector can innovate. We look forward to hearing from you on the important choices before us as we work to safeguard the integrity and efficiency of our payment system. 1.I am grateful to Susan Foley, John Maggs,Mark Manuszak, and Anjana Ravi of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.Noted by Federal Reserve Chairman W.P.G. Harding in Robert Kramer and W. Putnam Livingston, "Cashing in on the Checkless Society,"Harvard Business Review, September/October 1967, p. 143; Bill Medley,Highways of Commerce: Central Banking and the U.S. Payments System (PDF)(Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2017), p. 23.Return to text 3.Jeffrey Bucher, "The Check," (remarks at the Annual Meeting, Bank Stationers Association, Colorado Springs, CO, June 4, 1973).Return to text 4.Andre Pollack, "The New Look to Bankers' Hours,"New York Times, April 8, 1989, www.nytimes.com/1989/04/08/business/the-new-look-to-bankers-hours.html.Return to text 5.According to theFederal Reserve Payments Study 2016 (PDF), in 2015, the ACH system was used for 23.5 billion payments, totaling $145.3 trillion in value.Return to text 6.The Faster Payments Task Force viewed 24x7x365 service availability and final funds provided to the recipient within one minute as characteristics of a "very effective" faster payment service. Faster Payments Task Force, "Faster Payments Effectiveness Criteria (PDF)," January 26, 2016.Return to text 7.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2017(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2018); Neil Bhutta and Lisa Dettling, "Money in the Bank? Assessing Families' Liquid Savings Using the Survey of Consumer Finances," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, forthcoming).Return to text 8.For example, in 2015, 22 percent of small businesses reported cash flow (for example, meeting payroll or paying for inventory) as their top business challenge. See2015 Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms (PDF), March 2016.Return to text 9.Faster Payments Task Force,Final Report Part Two: A Call to Action, July 2017.Return to text 10.U.S. Department of the Treasury,A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation (PDF)(Washington: Department of the Treasury, July 2018).Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "Community Banking in the 21st Century" Sixth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri Good morning. I want to thank the conference organizers for inviting me to speak to you today.1It is an honor and a pleasure to be part of this unique annual event that brings together bankers, bank supervisors, and researchers to discuss the latest community banking research, recent trends in community banking practices, and policy issues that are on the minds of conference attendees. I want to start, first, by conveying my own perspective on the importance of community banks. Community banks have a long history of providing essential financial services to households, small businesses, and small farms in communities across the United States. Their ability to effectively provide these services speaks to the strength of the community banking business model--that is, establishing and maintaining local relationships, and offering customers a face-to-face interaction with a local banker. And it is something I have observed firsthand, especially for community banks in rural communities. Growing up in rural Colorado and Utah, I saw the importance of community bankers having local knowledge and being personally invested in the same communities that they serve. That local knowledge, and the relationship-based lending that is the hallmark of community banking, can stem losses during downturns, as community banks may be able to work with borrowers to avoid losses. Indeed, research has shown that small business lending at small banks declined less severely than at large banks during the last recession.2At the same time, I have seen the challenges that many community banks face. I want to be careful not to overstate those challenges--to paraphrase Mark Twain, the reports of your demise are greatly exaggerated--and I believe that the community bank model has many advantages and will continue to play an integral role in our financial system. These sorts of dynamics are one reason that community banks are an important topic for research. As you probably know, this is the sixth annual community banking conference cosponsored by the Federal Reserve and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), and it is the first conference for which the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is joining as a cosponsor. The organizers of the inaugural conference decided that, rather than holding a traditional academic-style conference, they would invite bankers and bank supervisors to hear what the researchers had to say and to share their real-world experience with the researchers. The hope was that these interactions would prove beneficial to all three groups. The positive feedback that we have received from conference attendees over the past five years strongly supports the wisdom of the organizers' decision. Over time, the conference has evolved, with some new features introduced each year. The Case Study Competition, which is sponsored by the CSBS, introduces undergraduates to community banking and some of the challenges that community bankers face. The Emerging Scholars Program was also added to the conference a few years ago. This program is intended to support Ph.D. students who are considering or working on a dissertation on a banking-related topic and encourage them to develop a research agenda that focuses on community banking issues. I would like to congratulate this year's winning case study team, Eastern Kentucky University, and emerging scholars, Jiayi Xu, Cao Fang, and Flora Ma. Not All Community Banks Are the SameTurning to the topic of today's speech, it occurs to me that we often speak of community banks as though they are all pretty much the same. But, in reality, there is considerable heterogeneity within the group of firms that are commonly considered to be community banks.3One important dimension of diversity is size, which can range anywhere from less than $100 million in assets to around $10 billion in assets. As noted by Chairman Powell when he spoke at this conference two years ago, looking at community banks as a monolithic group masks some important differences between the smallest and largest community banking organizations.4For example, essentially all of the decline in the number of community banking organizations over the past two decades has taken place among those with assets less than $100 million. And these smallest banking organizations have consistently had a lower average rate of return on assets than their larger peers. Another significant aspect of diversity among community banks is the type of market served--urban versus rural. These two types of areas differ in many respects, including the age distribution of the population, the share of the population with a college degree, homeownership rates, poverty rates, and the share of the population with internet access.5And while the national population has been growing over the past 20 to 30 years, many rural areas have experienced population declines, and the share of the population living in rural areas has been falling.6Furthermore, since 2008, most job growth in the United States has occurred in urban areas.7 Given these differing circumstances, it is not surprising that community banks operating in rural and urban areas tend to face different challenges. For example, the number of competitors faced by a banking organization tends to be larger in urban banking markets than in rural markets, while hiring and retaining high-quality employees can be more difficult in rural areas. And some observers have expressed concern about the implications of bank consolidation over the past two or three decades for access to banking services in rural areas while also wondering about the future viability of rural community banks. The number of community banks has been declining over the last 20 years, but community banks still account for more than 95 percent of banks operating in the United States. The decline has been roughly similar for urban and rural community banks, leaving the share of community banks that operate primarily in rural markets quite stable at just over 50 percent. While urban community banks are quite a bit larger than rural community banks on average, over the last 20 years, rural community banks have consistently earned higher rates of return on assets and rates of return on equity than their urban peers despite a more challenging economic environment. While the data present a compelling high-level picture, they do not tell the whole story. For example, averages across a large number of markets do not tell us what is going on in any individual market. In addition, much of the data that I am presenting today is aggregated to the county level, which obscures community-level dynamics: Some communities within a county may have lost banks or bank branches, while others may have gained. In the rural Mountain West, where I grew up, a single county can be physically larger than some Eastern states. And the demographics of the communities--for example, high- or low-income--that have lost or gained are also not visible, but important. Federal Reserve staff are engaged in efforts to further our understanding of the effects of losses of banks or bank branches on the people who live and work in the affected communities. National Trends in Urban versus Rural Community Banks over the Past 20 YearsThe number of banks in the United States fell by almost half over the past 20 years--from about 10,700 in 1997 to about 5,600 in 2017. About 97 percent of the decrease was accounted for by community banks. Looking at the trend in the number of urban and rural community banks (figure 1), we see that the number of banks in both of these categories has been falling over time. The rate of decline was steeper for rural banks than for urban banks before the financial crisis but has reversed in the post-crisis period. This reversal may be due to the fact that, as we will see momentarily, urban community banks suffered more severe losses in the immediate post-crisis period than did rural community banks. And the share of community banks that operate primarily in rural markets has increased slightly, from 53 percent to 54 percent. While there are more rural community banks than urban community banks, the latter consistently account for a larger volume of deposits, loans, and offices than the former. This difference is due, in part, to the average size of an urban community bank, in terms of total assets, being about two and a half to three and a half times that of the average rural community bank (figure 2). As community banks have increased in asset size, they have also grown their branch networks. The average number of branches for an urban bank is about 1.7 to 2 times that of a rural bank (figure 3). Looking next at the total amount of deposits held by all urban community banks and all rural community banks, we can see that both have been trending upward over time (figure 4). Growth in total loans outstanding was strong for both urban and rural community banks between 1997 and 2008 (figure 5). Declines in lending between 2008 and 2011 were more severe for urban community banks than rural ones. Coming out of the recent recessions, rural community banks have seen quite modest loan growth since 2011, while the pace of growth in urban community bank lending has been strong since 2013. This divergence in recent growth rates may be due to the fact that the recovery from the recent recession has been much more robust in urban areas than in rural areas of the country. When it comes to performance measures, rural community banks consistently outperform urban community banks with regard to return on assets (figure 6) and return on equity (figure 7). This difference was particularly pronounced during the financial crisis, when profitability fell much more sharply at urban community banks than at rural community banks. Looking at charge‑off rates (figure 8), we see that they have been quite similar for the two types of community banks over most of the past 20 years, except for the period from 2008 to 2013, when rural community banks had lower charge-off rates than urban community banks. This data suggest that, despite facing a more challenging economic environment, rural community banks appear to be holding their own relative to urban community banks. Market-Level Trends for All Banks and Community BanksNow I would like to shift my focus from the banks themselves to the communities they serve by exploring whether access to banking services--provided by community or larger banks--has been declining in urban or rural areas of the country. As of 2017, the average urban market was home to 18 community banks and just over 8 large banks, which represents a change from 21 community banks and 6 large banks in 1997 (figure 9). The average number of community banks per rural market has been remarkably stable over the past 20 years at right around 4, while the average number of large banks per rural market has increased from just under 1 to 1.4 (figure 10). These statistics indicate that, perhaps surprisingly, the average number of banks in rural markets has actually increased in the past 20 years. If we look at the number of bank branches rather than the number of competitors, we see a significant increase in the number of branches in the average urban market, with the entire increase coming from branches of large banks (figure 11). Over the same period, there was essentially no change in the number of branches in rural markets, with a slight shift upward in the share of branches accounted for by large banks (figure 12). Of course, there is substantial variation in the experiences of individual markets, as some local rural and urban markets gained and others lost bank branches. As the share of branches in the average banking market operated by community banks has declined, so, too, has the share of deposits held at community banks. This shift in deposit shares away from community banks, similar to the shift in branch shares, has been substantial in urban markets but only marginal in rural markets (figure 13). Community banks held almost half of all deposits at urban bank branches in 1997, but just over one-third in 2017. In rural markets, community banks collectively had a deposit market share of 80 percent in 1997, declining moderately to 77 percent in 2017. Despite the decline in the overall share of deposits held by community banks in urban and rural markets over the past 20 years, the average individual community bank operating in each type of market has seen almost no change in its deposit market share (figure 14). In other words, the decline in the share of market deposits held in aggregate by community banks is due to fewer community banks. The fact that the average individual community bank has maintained or increased its deposit market share since 2008 suggests that community banks have been able to compete quite successfully with larger banks in both urban and rural markets during and since the recent recession. Head OfficesAs I have mentioned, the average numbers of banks and bank branches have increased or remained constant in rural markets in recent years despite a wave of mergers that has greatly reduced the number of U.S. banking organizations. Industry consolidation has led to fewer banks but maintained most of the branches of the acquired banks. In addition, most mergers and acquisitions have involved expansion into new markets by the acquiring bank rather than acquisitions of local competitors, which has allowed local communities to continue to enjoy a variety of potential providers of banking services despite the industry consolidation.8 One unavoidable aspect of consolidation is a loss in the number of bank headquarters offices. The number of bank headquarters located in urban markets has fallen by half over the past 20 years, while the number in rural markets has fallen by 45 percent.9Consolidation has led to a doubling in the number of banking markets--almost all of which are rural--in which no banks are headquartered (figure 16). We hear anecdotally that banks are more attuned to the needs of the communities in which they are headquartered, so the significance of this loss could have an effect on the local markets. Qualitative Evidence at a More Micro LevelAs I previewed at the beginning of my remarks, data and averages often do not tell the whole story. At the end of the day, we care about bank branch locations because we care about the people and communities that they are serving or, in some cases, not serving adequately. So even if the data tell us that most rural markets are well served, we need to focus our attention on those markets that may not be as well served and how that is affecting the people who bank, or cannot bank, there. That is why the Federal Reserve System's Community Development function has undertaken a national series of listening sessions to assess the real effects of bank closures on rural communities. Reserve Bank staff members are conducting the sessions around the country to gather information from consumers and small business owners in rural communities that have been directly affected by bank closures. To identify where to conduct these sessions, we used data to identify rural towns that have experienced bank branch closures; in some cases, these towns lost the only bank in town and now have no remaining banks. Then we convened local residents and small business owners to ask them about what the loss of a bank meant to them and their community. For some residents, the closure has not been much of a problem. Most, if not all, of the listening session participants in Clark, South Dakota, noted that they do most of their routine banking online. Some in Clark even noted that they did not think ATMs (automated teller machines) were necessary, as most of the retail businesses in town offer cash back with debit card purchases. Nonetheless, residents of Clark spoke positively about the importance of the personal touch a local bank can provide. Residents liked familiar faces at the teller window and loan officers who understand the local economy when making small business loan decisions. However, online banking is not necessarily an opportunity for everyone. Indeed, even for community banks themselves, technology may be perceived as a threat or an opportunity, depending for example on whether the necessary infrastructure is available. In Nicholas County, Kentucky, which is located in Appalachia, many residents do not have access to high-speed internet; this lack of access has led most residents to travel outside of the county to conduct their banking needs. This situation is certainly not optimal for anyone, but it presents a particular challenge to the elderly, those without a car, and busy small business owners who do not have time to travel 25 miles each way to make change and deposit checks. In Centre County, Pennsylvania, we heard that the transportation challenge is particularly acute for the Amish--10 miles is a long way to travel by horse and buggy. The loss of a bank branch also has a ripple effect on a community as a whole. In the village of Brushton, New York, which lost its only bank branch in 2014, small business owners commented that when residents must leave the village to access banking services, they are more likely to shop, eat, and pay for services in other towns, which creates additional hardship for the small businesses of Brushton. Additionally, as the ability of community members to access cash has decreased, credit card use has increased. Small business owners in Brushton say that this growth in credit card usage has significantly increased the cost of doing business. Lastly, one theme that we heard loud and clear across the country was that the loss of a local bank meant the loss of an important civic institution. Banks do not just cash checks and make loans--they also place ads in small town newspapers, donate to local nonprofits, and sponsor local Little League teams. As towns lose banks and bankers, they also lose important local leaders. We will continue to conduct these listening sessions across the country throughout the fall. In fact, one of these listening sessions will take place next week just two hours down the road in Reynolds County, Missouri. We look forward to sharing the collective results of our efforts in a report that should be published in early 2019. ConclusionTo sum up, the numbers of urban and rural community banks have been declining over the past 20 years, but community banks continue to play an important role in both types of markets. Urban and rural community banks face different challenges, but, on average, both seem to be faring well in the post-crisis period. And the average rural banking market has not seen any decline in the number of banks or bank branches over recent years. For the local areas where the availability of banking services has declined, we are in the process of assessing the effects of this decline on the people who live and work in those communities. I look forward to continuing to engage in this area and monitor the developments in this most vital part of the banking ecosystem. 1.The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2.While small banks reduced small business lending by roughly 13 percent between 2009 and 2011, large banks reduced lending by nearly 30 percent. See Rebel A. Cole (2012),How Did the Financial Crisis Affect Small Business Lending in the United States?report developed under contract with the U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy (Washington: SBA, November).Return to text 3.For the purpose of my remarks today, "community bank" means a bank or thrift with less than $10 billion in assets (in constant 2005 dollars). I exclude from this definition any bank or thrift that has less than $10 billion in assets but is part of a larger organization with more than $10 billion in total banking assets. "Urban community bank" is one that derives more than half of its deposits from offices located in one or more metropolitan statistical areas, and "rural community bank" derives at least half of its deposits from nonmetro areas. Using the more nuanced Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) definition of a community bank, which takes into account both size and activities, would have very little effect on the trends that I will be discussing. The FDIC definition can be found in Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2012), "Defining the Community Bank (PDF)," inFDIC Community Banking Study(Washington: FDIC, December).Return to text 4.See Jerome H. Powell (2016), "Trends in Community Bank Performance over the Past 20 Years," speech delivered at "Community Banking in the 21st Century," Fourth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, St. Louis, Mo., September 29.Return to text 5.See U.S. Census Bureau (2016), "New Census Data Show Differences between Urban and Rural Populations," press release, December 8.Return to text 6.See Kim Parker, Juliana Menasce Horowitz, Anna Brown, Richard Fry, D'Vera Cohn, and Ruth Igielnik (2018), "Demographic and Economic Trends in Urban, Suburban and Rural Communities," in What Unites and Divides Urban, Suburban and Rural Communities (Washington: Pew Research Center, May); or John M. Anderlik and Richard D. Cofer, Jr. (2014), "Long-Term Trends in Rural Depopulation and Their Implications for Community Banks (PDF),"FDIC Quarterly, vol. 8 (2), pp. 44-59.Return to text 7.See Mark Muro and Jacob Whiton (2018), "Geographic Gaps Are Widening While U.S. Economic Growth Increases," Brookings Institution,The Avenue(blog), January 23; and Brian Thiede, Lillie Greiman, Stephan Weiler, Steven C. Beda, and Tessa Conroy (2017), "The Divide between Rural and Urban America, in 6 Charts,"U.S. News & World Report,March 20.Return to text 8.One way that economists measure the structure of a market is by measures of market concentration. Not surprisingly, rural markets are, on average, much more concentrated than urban markets. However, average concentration levels have been declining in rural markets while increasing slightly in urban markets over the past two decades.Return to text 9.The average urban market has more headquarters offices than the average rural market (figure 15). There are just over 8 banks headquartered in the average urban market (down from just over 14 in 1997), compared with an average of 1.3 banks headquartered in the average rural market (down from 2.4 in 1997).Return to text Accessible Version