Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--Federal banking agencies today issued a statement detailing rules and associated reporting requirements that are immediately affected by the enactment of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA). These changes affect company-run stress testing, resolution plans, the Volcker rule, high volatility commercial real estate exposures, examination cycles, municipal obligations as high-quality liquid assets, and other provisions. The statement from the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency describes interim positions the regulatory agencies will take before incorporating the changes into their regulations. Board Votes
WASHINGTON--The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) on Monday released the public portions of four foreign banking organizations' resolution plans, which are required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills. The plans must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure. Four firms were required to submit plans by July 1: Barclays PLC, Credit Suisse Group AG, Deutsche Bank AG, and UBS AG. The plans are focused on their U.S. operations. By regulation, resolution plans must be divided into public and confidential sections. To foster transparency, the agencies have required each firm's public section to summarize certain elements of the resolution plan and information explaining how the resolution plan would be executed. The public portions of the resolution plans areavailableon the FDIC and Board websites. The agencies will review both the confidential and public portions of the resolution plans.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by Lloyds Bank Corporate Markets plc, London, England, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Amboy Bancorporation and Amboy Bank, both of Old Bridge, New JerseyWritten Agreement dated June 29, 2009 (PDF)Terminated June 29, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Chicago Shore Corporation and Security Chicago Corporation, both of Chicago, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated October 28, 2016Terminated July 24, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday invited public comment on a proposal to adopt the ISO®20022 message format for the Fedwire®Funds Service. If approved, the proposed action would replace the Fedwire Funds Service's current, proprietary message format. Potential benefits to the adoption of the ISO 20022 message format include enhanced efficiency of both domestic and cross-border payments between the Fedwire Funds Service and other payment or messaging systems as well as a richer set of payment data that could help banks and other entities meet evolving requirements to screen payments for sanctions and anti-money laundering purposes. The proposed migration to the ISO 20022 message format would take place in three phases beginning in 2020 and ending in 2023. The Fedwire Funds Service is a real-time gross settlement system owned and operated by the Federal Reserve Banks. It enables participants to make final payments using their balances held at Reserve Banks or intraday credit provided by the Reserve Banks. The Fedwire Funds Service currently uses a proprietary message format that supports multiple types of payments- related communications. The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) is an independent, non-governmental organization comprised of 161 national standards bodies that publishes standards for a broad range of industries. Many foreign wire transfer systems, including those used by key U.S. trading partners, have already adopted ISO 20022. The Federal Reserve, in its 2015Strategies for Improving the Payment Systempaper recommended that the U.S. payments industry develop a strategy for adopting the ISO 20022 message format for U.S. payment transactions. Subsequent public and industry engagement and outreach indicate that the migration could be beneficial for Fedwire Funds Service participants. The Board's notice is attached. Comments are due 60 days after publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued a consent order against Community Trust Bank, Inc. of Pikeville, Kentucky, for unfair and deceptive practices, requiring the bank to pay approximately $4.75 million in restitution to approximately 11,000 consumers and make certain consumer compliance enhancements. As detailed in the consent order, the bank violated section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act in its offering of deposit account add-on products to consumers. The bank represented to consumers that all of the add-on product benefits would be effective upon enrollment when, in fact, consumers had to take additional steps to receive some of their benefits. The bank did not adequately disclose the additional steps prior to enrollment and did not explain to consumers that they would be billed regardless of benefit activation. The bank must begin making restitution payments to consumers after regulatory non-objection to the restitution plan, which is due within 60 days of the issuance of the consent order. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: United Bank Limited, Karachi, Pakistan and United Bank Limited, New York Branch, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated July 2, 2018. Consent Order of Prohibition against Michelle A. Kennedy, a former employee of Hinsdale Bank & Trust, Hinsdale, Illinois, for engaging in improper accounting practices. The Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: United Bank Limited, Karachi, Pakistan and United Bank Limited, New York Branch, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated October 28, 2013 (PDF)Terminated July 9, 2018. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Consistent with the recently enacted Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA), the Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued a statement describing how the Board will no longer subject primarily smaller, less complex banking organizations to certain Board regulations, including those relating to stress testing and liquidity. Upon enactment, EGRRCPA raised the threshold for Dodd-Frank enhanced prudential standards from $50 billion to $100 billion dollars in total consolidated assets for bank holding companies. This change did not require Board action to have an immediate effect, but did affect the application of several Board regulations. As a result, certain Board regulations are inconsistent with the new law. As described in the Board's statement, the Board will not take action to enforce certain regulations and reporting requirements for firms with less than $100 billion in total consolidated assets, such as rules implementing enhanced prudential standards and the liquidity coverage ratio requirements. The Board will continue to supervise the firms to ensure their safe and sound operation. The Board's statement also provides guidance on the Board's implementation of other EGRRCPA changes, including those relating to assessments and high volatility commercial real estate exposures. The Board will take the positions described in the statement in the interim until the Board incorporates EGRRCPA's changes into its regulations. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: East West Bank, Pasadena, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated November 9, 2015 (PDF)Terminated July 18, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Community Banks of Georgia, Inc., Jasper, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated May 24, 2011 (PDF)Terminated July 10, 2018 Grand Mountain Bancshares, Inc., Granby, ColoradoOrder to Cease and Desist, issued by the Office of Thrift Supervision dated November 9, 2009 (PDF)Terminated June 29, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday launched theConsumer Compliance Supervision Bulletin--a new publication that will provide bankers and others interested in consumer protection with high-level summaries of pertinent supervisory issues. The Bulletin complements other Federal Reserve System outreach programs for banking organizations, such as theConsumer Compliance Outlookpublication and its companion webinar series,Outlook Live. TheBulletin, which will be published by the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, is intended to enhance transparency regarding the Federal Reserve's consumer compliance supervisory program, and highlight violations that have been identified. It will also provide practical steps for institutions to consider when managing consumer compliance risks. The inaugural issue of theBulletinfocuses on the illegal discrimination practice known as "redlining," as well as discriminatory loan pricing and underwriting. The issue also discusses unfair or deceptive acts or practices involving overdrafts, loan officer misrepresentations, and products and services marketed to students. Finally, theBulletinbriefly highlights recent regulatory and policy developments. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Consumer Compliance Supervision Bulletin (PDF)
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At American Bankers Association Summer Leadership Meeting, Salt Lake City, Utah I want to thank the American Bankers Association for inviting me to speak.1This is an era of relatively rapid evolution in banking regulation, an area of human endeavor that is not commonly known for its speedy metamorphoses. But in the time since I became the Vice Chairman for Supervision at the Federal Reserve, we have seen agreement on the final pieces of the international framework for post-crisis regulation--the so-called Basel III endgame. The Federal Reserve has issued a number of proposed rule changes that would improve our capital and stress testing regime. And in late May, the Congress enacted the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA), which, among other things, directs us to further tailor our supervision and regulation of large banks with more than $100 billion in assets. In other words, the Congress wants to see action and has, to a certain degree, specified some of the steps we need to take. How we respond to that task, especially as it applies to large banks, will be the focus of my remarks today. But before I delve into those details, I want to provide an overview of what I hope you'll take away. First, I want to underscore that I believe tailoring of financial regulation is good public policy. The Federal Reserve Board is a firm adherent of the recent legislation's underlying principle that regulation should be tailored to risk. To an extent, as I will later describe, this principle is already embedded in several aspects of our supervisory framework. Second, the Federal Reserve will need to revise its framework to allow for a greater differentiation in the supervision and regulation of large firms. To date, our tailoring of regulations has been based largely‑‑but not exclusively‑‑on asset size, which reflects an unduly one-dimensional approach. We have been evaluating additional criteria that may provide for greater regulatory differentiation across large banks, and the recent legislation is consistent with the goals of that initiative. Specifically, the legislation recognizes that large banks have a variety of business models and risk profiles; supervision should be flexible enough to incorporate this heterogeneity. Third, I believe we already have a good start on a path forward for tailoring regulation. In my remarks today, I will touch upon some potential factors we have identified for tailoring the supervision and regulation of large banks. Tailoring: A Primary Component of Post-Crisis Supervision and RegulationI think everyone in this room would agree that--while there are important ways it can be improved--the body of post-crisis regulation adopted by the Federal Reserve and its fellow banking agencies has, taken as a whole, clearly made the U.S. financial system stronger and more resilient. In implementing these reforms, the Fed sought to achieve two parallel goals: (1) promoting the safety and soundness of individual banking organizations and (2) enhancing the stability of the broader U.S. financial system. A certain amount of tailoring was reflected from the beginning in how the Fed sought to achieve these goals. As the Board built its post-crisis framework, supervision and regulation were designed to increase in stringency in tandem with a firm's size and systemic footprint. This can be seen in stricter requirements in various elements of the regulatory capital framework that apply only to larger or more complex banks, including certain buffers and surcharges, the application of the supplementary leverage ratio, and the application of the qualitative objections as part of the Board's capital planning framework, among others. In April, the Board proposed the stress capital buffer, which would simplify its regulatory capital requirements for the largest banks by integrating the stress test results with the Board's non-stress capital requirements. Further, the Board recognized that the failure of one of the largest banking organizations could create spillovers that would undermine U.S. financial stability and harm consumers and the broader economy. To offset this risk, the Board has required these firms to internalize the cost of their potential failure in a tailored manner that corresponds with their importance to the U.S. financial system. These efforts include the Board's capital surcharge for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) and total loss-absorbing capacity requirements. The EGRRCPA and TailoringBut while theconceptof tailoring is inherent in how the Board thinks about supervision and regulation, reasonable people can disagree on the sufficiency of tailoring to date. In my view, we've made a good start in improving the efficiency of our regulatory regime. But we still have more to do to streamline our framework in a manner that more directly addresses firm-specific risks. The recent legislation requires us to reevaluate how we regulate banks that have between $100 billion and $250 billion in total assets. In particular, we need to make a tailoring-related decision in the near term: How will we decide which enhanced prudential standards should apply to which firms with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion? In applying enhanced prudential standards for firms with total assets of more than $100 billion, the Congress requires the Board to consider not only size but also capital structure, riskiness, complexity, financial activities, and any other factors the Board deems relevant. While we use similar factors to calibrate the largest firms' G-SIB surcharges, we have not used them more holistically to tailor the overall supervision and regulation of large banks that do not qualify as G-SIBs. Further, consistent with the legislation's tailoring requirements, the Board must proactively consider how firms with more than $250 billion in assets that do not qualify as G-SIBs may be more efficiently regulated by applying more tailored standards. In conjunction with changing regulations, we also need to consider how such changes would be reflected in supervisory programs, guidance, and regulatory reporting. As supervisors, we need to balance providing appropriate relief to firms with ensuring that firms are maintaining resources and risk‑management practices so they can be resilient under a range of conditions. We must also ensure we receive the right information in a timely manner so we can identify emerging risks. A Path ForwardBanks with Assets between $100 Billion and $250 BillionI want to spend the balance of my time focusing on the question I previously posed: On what basis will we decide to apply enhanced prudential standards to firms with total assets in the $100-billion to $250-billion range? The recent legislation directs the Board to consider factors other than size for differentiating supervision and regulation of large banking organizations. Before I talk about the "other" factors, let me acknowledge the merits of size as one relevant factor to include on the list. We know that the effect of a large bank's failure on the economy is greater than when a smaller bank fails, even though the two banks might be engaged in similar business lines. The recent financial crisis in 2008-09 saw a much more severe recession than other financial crises, such as the savings and loan crisis in the late 1980s that preceded the relatively mild recession of 1990-91, and this appears at least in part related to the size of the affected institutions. In fact, empirical research done at the Federal Reserve shows that stress among larger banks does more significant harm to the economy than stress at smaller banks, even after controlling for the aggregate size of bank failures.2We also know that larger banks are more operationally complex--even when not engaged in complex business lines--with a broader geographic scope and more layers of management than smaller banks. Therefore, it seems appropriate to me that a path forward for tailoring supervision and regulation of large banks should not ignore size, but consider it as one factor--although only one factor--along with other factors. Before the enactment of the recent legislation, we had begun work on considering additional factors that capture large firms' degree of complexity and interconnectedness that‑‑in conjunction with size‑‑may provide a better basis for tailoring supervision and regulation than size alone. The systemic effect of a bank's failure or distress is positively correlated with that organization's business, operational, and structural complexity. Generally, the more complex a banking organization is, the greater the expense and time necessary to resolve it. Similarly, financial institutions may be interconnected in many ways, as large banks commonly engage in transactions with other financial institutions that give rise to a wide range of contractual obligations. Financial distress at a large bank may materially raise the likelihood of distress at other firms given the network of contractual obligations throughout the financial system. So how do we gauge the degree of complexity and interconnectedness of large firms? Rather than formulating new and untested measures of these factors, I believe we would be well served to begin by looking to our body of post-crisis regulation as a source. I will highlight a few factors that already reside in various areas of our regulatory framework that I am considering. The G-SIB surcharge indicators are likely to be a helpful source in this effort. For example, one factor from that framework that we might consider for purposes of tailoring is cross-border activity. This would measure assets and liabilities related to transactions with foreign banks, individuals, and companies, among others. This factor measures both a firm's complexity and resolvability, as foreign operations add operational complexity in normal times and complicate the ability of the firm to undergo an orderly resolution in times of stress. Another factor from the G-SIB surcharge framework that could be useful is a firm's use of short-term wholesale funding, which may serve as a proxy for liquidity vulnerability. Historically, reliance on short-term, uninsured funding from sophisticated funding sources has created vulnerability to large-scale funding runs and increased risks related to financial sector interconnectedness. Specifically, this can lead to "fire sale" effects that may affect broader financial stability--which occurs when banks that fund long-term or illiquid assets with short-term deposits from financial intermediaries like pension funds and money market mutual funds need to rapidly sell less-liquid assets to maintain their operations. Outside of the G-SIB surcharge framework, the Board has employed a measure of nonbank activities in certain rulemakings. These activities, which are conducted outside of a regulated depository institution, represent another source of complexity for large banks. For example, some nonbank entities engage in complex trading that is not permitted in depository institutions because of their risk. Banks with Assets Greater Than $250 BillionIn addition to thinking about how we will tailor our regulation and supervisory programs for firms with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion, I believe the Board should also review the requirements applicable to the firms with more than $250 billion in total assets but below the G-SIB threshold. This review should ensure that our regulations continue to appropriately increase in stringency as the risk profiles of firms increase, consistent with our previously stated tailoring goals and the new legislation. The supervision and regulatory framework for these firms should reflect that there are material differences between those firms that qualify as U.S. G-SIBs and those that do not. For example, we know that non-G-SIBs with more than $250 billion in assets are generally less complex and less interconnected than U.S. G-SIBs and thus pose relatively less risk to financial stability. G-SIBs, on the other hand, have more complex activities, are more interconnected, and pose a far greater risk to financial stability should they fail. Yet at the moment, many aspects of our regulatory regime treat any bank with more than $250 billion in assets with the same stringency as a G-SIB. I believe there should be a clear differentiation. Next Steps from the Federal ReserveIn my view, the Board should make it a near-term priority to issue a proposed rule concerning tailoring of enhanced prudential standards for large banking firms. This proposal, of course subject to notice and comment, would address our statutory obligations under the recent legislation by proposing to tailor enhanced prudential standards in a manner that recognizes relative complexity and interconnectedness among large banks. The statute sets an 18-month deadline for this regulatory process, but we can and will move much more rapidly than this. In terms of capital requirements, both risk-based and leverage capital requirements should remain core components of regulation for large firms with more than $100 billion in total assets. Stress testing should continue to play an important role in assessing potential losses that large firms would suffer under a severely adverse economic scenario; the recent legislation recognized the importance of stress testing by requiring a supervisory stress test for these large firms. Therefore, the Board's proposed stress capital buffer, if finalized, would be critical for these firms. However, we could consider a number of changes for less complex and less interconnected firms related to their capital requirements. For example, such firms, even if above $250 billion in assets, could have less frequent company-run stress tests. For those below $250 billion in assets, the statute requires supervisory stress tests to be conducted "periodically", which suggests the legislature wanted us to at least consider a rhythm other than annually. Additionally, less complex and less interconnected firms could be exempted from requirements to calculate risk-weighted assets under the models-based advanced approaches to capital. I continue to strongly believe that liquidity regulation should be a primary component of supervision and regulation of large banks. We all saw the central role that liquidity risk played in the recent financial crisis. Minimum standardized liquidity measures and internal liquidity stress tests remain critical at firms with more than $100 billion in total assets. However, for less complex and less interconnected firms with assets greater than $100 billion, there may be opportunities to modify aspects of the standardized liquidity requirements as well as expectations around internal liquidity stress tests and liquidity risk management. Similarly, banks with more than $250 billion in assets that are not G-SIBs currently face largely the same liquidity regulation as G-SIBs. As I've said previously, I believe it would make sense to calibrate the liquidity requirements differently for these firms relative to their G-SIB counterparts. Resolution planning is especially critical to ensure that the largest banking firms structure their operations in ways that make it more possible for them to be resolved upon failure without causing systemic risks for the broader economy. But most firms with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion do not pose a high degree of resolvability risk, especially if they are less complex and less interconnected. Therefore, we should consider scaling back or removing entirely resolution planning requirements for most of the firms in that asset range. Further, we should consider limiting the scope of application of resolution planning requirements to only the largest, most complex, and most interconnected banking firms because their failure poses the greatest spillover risks to the broader economy. For firms that would still be subject to resolution planning requirements, we could reduce the frequency and burden of such requirements, perhaps by requiring more-targeted resolution plans. ConclusionIn conclusion, I believe we have a unique opportunity to further tailor our supervision and regulation framework for large banks in a manner that allows us to be more risk-sensitive while still meeting our core goals of promoting safety and soundness and enhancing financial stability. The recent legislation requires the Board to tailor its framework of supervision and regulation of large firms in a manner that continues to recognize size as one risk factor, but also more holistically incorporates other risk categories. In implementing this legislation, we should consider tailoring regulation further to take into account large banks' complexity and interconnectedness. Of course, the details of how we implement a tailored framework will be subject to debate, and you can expect the Federal Reserve to be highly engaged in the public feedback process. Implementing the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act is a high priority for the Board, and we look forward to hearing the range of views as we make progress. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. Pending research to be published by Federal Reserve Board staff in the near future suggests that an increase in bank stress results in poorer economic performance in a way that scales with bank size. Put another way, staff estimate that stress at a single bank with $250 billion in deposits would result in roughly an 84 percent decline in quarterly GDP growth, while stress among five banks each with $50 billion in deposits would result in roughly a 24 percent decline in quarterly GDP growth. Although both scenarios have $250 billion in total failed deposits, the negative impact is greater when the largest bank is stressed.Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Alternative Reference Rates Committee Roundtable, The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York (via prerecorded video) Good morning. I am sorry that I cannot be with you in person for this third roundtable hosted by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC), but I wanted to tape these remarks to make clear the Federal Reserve's full commitment to mitigating the risk to financial stability should a key reference rate cease to be available. We support the ARRC and its work. And support for the ARRC is not limited to the Federal Reserve System: the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Housing Finance Agency, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Financial Research, Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Treasury Department are all ex officio members of the ARRC. Since many have only recently begun to pay more attention to these issues, let me remind you of our reasons for convening the ARRC four years ago. The Federal Reserve began its role in co-chairing the Financial Stability Board's working group on interest rate benchmarks and joined in international efforts to strengthen LIBOR following reports that employees at several banks sought to manipulate these rates. We have served on the ICE Benchmark Administration's (IBA's) LIBOR Oversight Committee as an observer and actively worked with IBA in developing the reforms set out in IBA's Roadmap for LIBOR. Thanks in part to this, and thanks much more to the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority's (FCA's) efforts as the regulator of LIBOR, the safeguards against that type of manipulation happening again have been greatly and appropriately tightened. But as part of this process, we also examined data that we had begun to collect on the markets that underlie LIBOR and found that those markets had become extraordinarily thin. On most days, the banks that submit to LIBOR have been forced to rely on their own judgement and models in submitting to LIBOR rather than actual transactions. Many of them have become justifiably uncomfortable with a system that pins hundreds of trillions of dollars' worth of financial contracts to that type of judgement call. People may have some general sense of this, but because IBA does not release data on the transactions that actually underlie LIBOR, many may not be aware of how truly thin these markets have become. At the last roundtable, Jay Powell showed data on the volume of borrowing in wholesale unsecured U.S. dollar markets. That chart can be found in the ARRC's Second Report, which estimated that on a typical day the volume of three-month funding transactions was about $500 million. On many days there is much less. By way of comparison, we estimate that there are roughly $200 trillion of financial securities referencing U.S. dollar LIBOR. To help provide some further transparency, I will show data that we have on the number of transactions involved. These data are based on the information available to the Federal Reserve, which is fairly comprehensive but still may differ in some respects from that available to IBA, so I should caution that this is merely an informed estimate of the number of transactions underlying U.S. dollar LIBOR and may not be exact. As you can see in theslide, there are a few more transactions at the shorter LIBOR maturities. On average, we observe six or seven transactions per day at market rates that could underpin one- and three-month LIBOR across all of the panel banks. The longer maturities have even fewer transactions. There are two to three transactions each day for six-month LIBOR. On average, there is only one transaction that we see underlying one-year LIBOR, and many days there are no transactions at all. The secured overnight financing rate (SOFR) has only been in existence three months, and SOFR futures have only been trading for two months, but on a daily basis there are already more transactions underlying them than there are underpinning LIBOR. And SOFR itself reflects over $700 billion in overnight repurchase agreement (repo) transactions every day. One of the many benefits of using a rate so firmly anchored in a market of this depth is that no one can question whether SOFR is representative. It clearly is. With LIBOR reliant on expert judgment rather than direct transactions, many banks increasingly uncomfortable providing that judgment, and the official sector unable to compel them to do so indefinitely, it was obvious to us that this structure--which bases so many trillions of financial instruments on such a small number of underlying transactions--was potentially unstable. It was clear that the market needed to develop alternatives in case the worst happened, and this was the reason that we convened the ARRC four years ago. We asked the ARRC to identify a robust alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR and to develop a plan to promote its use. Sandie O'Connor will speak shortly about the ARRC's work, but I want to emphasize that this has been a model of cooperative effort between the private sector and the public sector. When the ARRC started, the interest rate benchmarks that they would eventually narrow their choice down to did not even exist. Those rates have not been easy to create, and as the ARRC expressed interest in a Treasury repo rate benchmark that would span the widest possible scope of the market, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York put great effort in working with the Federal Reserve Board and Office of Financial Research to create SOFR. The result, the rate the ARRC has chosen, reflects the largest and deepest rates market in the world and is a huge accomplishment for all of us. That accomplishment is only the start of what will be many. As I noted, just three months after SOFR has begun production, we have already seen the introduction of futures markets on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. LCH has now begun to offer clearing of SOFR overnight index and basis swaps, and CME Group will begin to do so within a few months. These are steps that the private sector must lead, and they have, but it is important that the public sector encourage the development of SOFR markets where it can. The ARRC has issued a first letter to U.S. regulators asking us to consider exemptions for legacy swaps seeking to incorporate the International Swaps and Derivatives Association's protocol or exemptions for amending to move from LIBOR to SOFR, and these are issues that we should look at seriously; we should avoid placing unintended hurdles in the way of those who may seek to transition from LIBOR. Here is something you don't hear often in the context of any large, complex undertaking involving input from a large number of stakeholders: The effort to implement SOFR is ahead of schedule. The ARRC has recognized that we have to make transitioning to SOFR as easy as it can be. That is the reason that it has added the creation of a forward-looking term rate as the final step in its Paced Transition Plan. As the ARRC has noted and the Financial Stability Board has now reiterated, this kind of forward-looking term rate will be useful in facilitating a transition away from LIBOR in some cash markets, such as corporate loans, but it is not primarily intended for use in derivatives markets. In fact, we have to encourage use of SOFR in derivatives markets to the fullest extent possible if a robust forward-looking term rate is to be created. For that reason, we also have to find ways to encourage uses of SOFR in those cash markets where it is appropriate. The European Investment Bank's recent announcement that it would issue a floating rate note paying a compound average of Sterling Overnight Index Average (SONIA) shows that this can be done.1In the spirit of encouraging this type of use of SOFR, I think it is appropriate for the Federal Reserve to consider publishing a compound average of SOFR that market participants could then use. It has been suggested that we could call it SAFR, for secured average financing rate, and this is something that we are encouraging our staff to explore. Publishing a compound average rate that encourages broader use of SOFR would help make our financial system more resilient. Sandie will talk more about the creation of the forward-looking term version of SOFR in her remarks. SAFR would not be a competitor to this forward-looking rate, it would be in alliance with it. If there were a large volume of products referencing the compound average rate, there would likely be related demand for futures contracts to hedge those positions, helping to make the forward rate more robust. It is important that we find ways to make it as easy as possible to use SOFR because the risks to LIBOR are, at this stage, quite considerable. Even as the ARRC and similar currency groups in other jurisdictions were being formed, the FCA was exerting considerable effort to convince banks to continue submitting to LIBOR. We have to be aware that two banks left the U.S. dollar panels despite this encouragement, and that the agreement that the FCA reached with the remaining banks to continue submitting voluntarily through the end of 2021 now has just three-and-a-half years left. And as Andrew Bailey noted last week, there is also the prospect that LIBOR could be judged to be nonrepresentative under the European Union's Benchmark Regulations, which would severely curtail the liquidity of products referencing LIBOR. Apart from the questions as to whether LIBOR will continue or whether IBA or the FCA may judge that it is not representative, market participants should consider whether a rate with so few transactions underlying it is really their best option. Do we really need or want to use other tenors of LIBOR in municipal or financial floating-rate notes? For some, the answer to this may still be yes, but it is then imperative that they work to incorporate safer fallback language into their contracts as quickly as they can. This is something that the ARRC has been working on intensively this year and much of today's roundtable will discuss. But for others, the safest thing you can do would be to move away from using LIBOR. Regardless of your answer to this question, we all have a stake in the ARRC's work, both in promoting SOFR and in promoting better contract language. I want to thank you all for coming to this roundtable, and want to thank Sandie and the ARRC for all the work that has made it possible. 1. See the European Investment Bank's announcement atwww.eib.org/investor_relations/press/2018/fi-2018-12-EIB%20issues%20markets%20first%20SONIA%20GBP%20benchmark%20with%20GBP%201bn%205y%20issuance.htm.Return to text Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from June 4 and June 13, 2018. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on June 12-13, 2018. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJune 12-13, 2018:HTML|PDF For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Monday announced that they have extended the next resolution plan filing deadline for 14 domestic firms by one year to December 31, 2019, to allow additional time for the agencies to provide feedback to the firms on their last submissions and for the firms to produce their next plan submissions. Resolution plans, required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills, describe an institution's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure. The 14 domestic firms are: Ally Financial Inc., American Express Company, BB&T Corporation, Capital One Financial Corporation, Citizens Financial Group, Fifth Third Bancorp, Huntington Bancshares Incorporated, KeyCorp, M&T Bank Corporation, Northern Trust Corporation, Regions Financial Corporation, SunTrust Banks, Inc., The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., and U.S. Bancorp. Pursuant to the Economic Growth, Regulatory Reform, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA), firms with less than $100 billion in total consolidated assets are no longer subject to resolution plan requirements. Separately, pursuant to EGRRCPA, in the next 18 months, the Board will determine which firms with more than $100 billion but less than $250 billion in total consolidated assets will be subject to the resolution plan requirement moving forward. The agencies will announce further actions as a result of the new law at a later date.
Chairman Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chairman Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on July 18, 2018. Good morning. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the Committee, I am happy to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress. Let me start by saying that my colleagues and I strongly support the goals the Congress has set for monetary policy--maximum employment and price stability. We also support clear and open communication about the policies we undertake to achieve these goals. We owe you, and the public in general, clear explanations of what we are doing and why we are doing it. Monetary policy affects everyone and should be a mystery to no one. For the past three years, we have been gradually returning interest rates and the Fed's securities holdings to more normal levels as the economy strengthens. We believe this is the best way we can help set conditions in which Americans who want a job can find one, and in which inflation remains low and stable. I will review the current economic situation and outlook and then turn to monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookSince I last testified here in February, the job market has continued to strengthen and inflation has moved up. In the most recent data, inflation was a little above 2 percent, the level that the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, thinks will best achieve our price stability and employment objectives over the longer run. The latest figure was boosted by a significant increase in gasoline and other energy prices. An average of 215,000 net new jobs were created each month in the first half of this year. That number is somewhat higher than the monthly average for 2017. It is also a good deal higher than the average number of people who enter the work force each month on net. The unemployment rate edged down 0.1 percentage point over the first half of the year to 4.0 percent in June, near the lowest level of the past two decades. In addition, the share of the population that either has a job or has looked for one in the past month--the labor force participation rate--has not changed much since late 2013. This development is another sign of labor market strength. Part of what has kept the participation rate stable is that more working-age people have started looking for a job, which has helped make up for the large number of baby boomers who are retiring and leaving the labor force. Another piece of good news is that the robust conditions in the labor market are being felt by many different groups. For example, the unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics have fallen sharply over the past few years and are now near their lowest levels since the Bureau of Labor Statistics began reporting data for these groups in 1972. Groups with higher unemployment rates have tended to benefit the most as the job market has strengthened. But jobless rates for these groups are still higher than those for whites. And while three-fourths of whites responded in a recent Federal Reserve survey that they were doing at least okay financially in 2017, only two-thirds of African Americans and Hispanics responded that way. Incoming data show that, alongside the strong job market, the U.S. economy has grown at a solid pace so far this year. The value of goods and services produced in the economy--or gross domestic product--rose at a moderate annual rate of 2 percent in the first quarter after adjusting for inflation. However, the latest data suggest that economic growth in the second quarter was considerably stronger than in the first. The solid pace of growth so far this year is based on several factors. Robust job gains, rising after-tax incomes, and optimism among households have lifted consumer spending in recent months. Investment by businesses has continued to grow at a healthy rate. Good economic performance in other countries has supported U.S. exports and manufacturing. And while housing construction has not increased this year, it is up noticeably from where it stood a few years ago. I will turn now to inflation. After several years in which inflation ran below our 2 percent objective, the recent data are encouraging. The price index for personal consumption expenditures, which is an overall measure of prices paid by consumers, increased 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in May. That number is up from 1.5 percent a year ago. Overall inflation increased partly because of higher oil prices, which caused a sharp rise in gasoline and other energy prices paid by consumers. Because energy prices move up and down a great deal, we also look at core inflation. Core inflation excludes energy and food prices and generally is a better indicator of future overall inflation. Core inflation was 2.0 percent for the 12 months ending in May, compared with 1.5 percent a year ago. We will continue to keep a close eye on inflation with the goal of keeping it near 2 percent. Looking ahead, my colleagues on the FOMC and I expect that, with appropriate monetary policy, the job market will remain strong and inflation will stay near 2 percent over the next several years. This judgment reflects several factors. First, interest rates, and financial conditions more broadly, remain favorable to growth. Second, our financial system is much stronger than before the crisis and is in a good position to meet the credit needs of households and businesses. Third, federal tax and spending policies likely will continue to support the expansion. And, fourth, the outlook for economic growth abroad remains solid despite greater uncertainties in several parts of the world. What I have just described is what we see as the most likely path for the economy. Of course, the economic outcomes we experience often turn out to be a good deal stronger or weaker than our best forecast. For example, it is difficult to predict the ultimate outcome of current discussions over trade policy as well as the size and timing of the economic effects of the recent changes in fiscal policy. Overall, we see the risk of the economy unexpectedly weakening as roughly balanced with the possibility of the economy growing faster than we currently anticipate. Monetary PolicyOver the first half of 2018 the FOMC has continued to gradually reduce monetary policy accommodation. In other words, we have continued to dial back the extra boost that was needed to help the economy recover from the financial crisis and recession. Specifically, we raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point at both our March and June meetings, bringing the target to its current range of 1-3/4 to 2 percent. In addition, last October we started gradually reducing the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities. That process has been running smoothly. Our policies reflect the strong performance of the economy and are intended to help make sure that this trend continues. The payment of interest on balances held by banks in their accounts at the Federal Reserve has played a key role in carrying out these policies, as the currentMonetary Policy Reportexplains. Payment of interest on these balances is our principal tool for keeping the federal funds rate in the FOMC's target range. This tool has made it possible for us to gradually return interest rates to a more normal level without disrupting financial markets and the economy. As I mentioned, after many years of running below our longer-run objective of 2 percent, inflation has recently moved close to that level. Our challenge will be to keep it there. Many factors affect inflation--some temporary and others longer lasting. Inflation will at times be above 2 percent and at other times below. We say that the 2 percent objective is "symmetric" because the FOMC would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below our objective. The unemployment rate is low and expected to fall further. Americans who want jobs have a good chance of finding them. Moreover, wages are growing a little faster than they did a few years ago. That said, they still are not rising as fast as in the years before the crisis. One explanation could be that productivity growth has been low in recent years. On a brighter note, moderate wage growth also tells us that the job market is not causing high inflation. With a strong job market, inflation close to our objective, and the risks to the outlook roughly balanced, the FOMC believes that--for now--the best way forward is to keep gradually raising the federal funds rate. We are aware that, on the one hand, raising interest rates too slowly may lead to high inflation or financial market excesses. On the other hand, if we raise rates too rapidly, the economy could weaken and inflation could run persistently below our objective. The Committee will continue to weigh a wide range of relevant information when deciding what monetary policy will be appropriate. As always, our actions will depend on the economic outlook, which may change as we receive new data. For guideposts on appropriate policy, the FOMC routinely looks at monetary policy rules that recommend a level for the federal funds rate based on the current rates of inflation and unemployment. The JulyMonetary Policy Reportgives an update on monetary policy rules and their role in our policy discussions. I continue to find these rules helpful, although using them requires careful judgment. Thank you. I will now be happy to take your questions.
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles was sworn in for his second term as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on Monday. The oath of office was administered by Chairman Jerome H. Powell in the Board Room. Vice Chairman Quarles has served as a member of the Board of Governors since taking office on October 13, 2017, to fill an unexpired term. He was confirmed to his second term by the United States Senate on July 17, 2018. His term as a Board member ends on January 31, 2032, and his term as Vice Chairman for Supervision ends on October 13, 2021. A biography of Vice Chairman Quarles is available on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/bios/. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.