Five federal financial regulatory agencies on Tuesday announced that they are jointly asking for public comment on a proposal that would simplify and tailor compliance requirements relating to the "Volcker rule." By statute, the Volcker rule generally restricts banking entities from engaging in prohibited proprietary trading and from owning or controlling hedge funds or private equity funds. The proposed changes are intended to streamline the rule by eliminating or modifying requirements that are not necessary to effectively implement the statute, while maintaining the core principles of the Volcker rule as well as the safety and soundness of banking entities. The proposal was jointly developed by the Federal Reserve Board, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after the proposal's publication in theFederal Register. Federal Register notice:HTML|PDF
WASHINGTON--The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that they will use to determine compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. These ratios replace the prior year's ratios, which were released on June 21, 2017. In general, section 109 prohibits a bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 also prohibits branches of banks controlled by out-of-state bank holding companies from operating primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 provides a process to test compliance with the statutory requirements. The first step in the process involves a loan-to-deposit ratio test that compares a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio to the host state loan-to-deposit ratio for banks in a particular state. A second step is conducted if a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio is less than one-half of the published ratio for that state or if data are not available at the bank to conduct the first step. The second step requires the appropriate agency to determine whether the bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the bank's interstate branches. A bank that fails both steps is in violation of section 109 and is subject to sanctions by the appropriate agency. The updated host state loan-to-deposit ratios are attached.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced the availability of the 2018 list of distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies, where revitalization or stabilization activities are eligible to receive Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) consideration under the community development definition. Distressed nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies and underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies are designated by the agencies in accordance with their CRA regulations. The criteria for designating these areas are available on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) website (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). The designations continue to reflect local economic conditions, including unemployment, poverty, and population changes. As with past releases, the agencies apply a one-year lag period for geographies that were listed in 2017 but are no longer designated as distressed or underserved in the current release. Revitalization or stabilization activities in these geographies are eligible to receive CRA consideration under the community development definition for 12 months after publication of the current list. The current and previous years' lists can be found on the FFIEC website, along with information about the data sources used to generate those lists.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced they are seeking public comment on revised resolution plan guidance for the eight largest, most complex U.S. banks. Resolution plans, commonly known as living wills, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. The resolution planning process helps ensure that a firm's failure would not have serious adverse effects on the financial stability of the United States. The proposed guidance would apply beginning with the July 1, 2019 resolution plan submissions of the firms. The proposed guidance is largely similar to the guidance issued by the agencies in April 2016, with updates to the agencies' expectations for how a firm's resolution strategy should address derivatives and trading activities, and the firm's payment, clearing, and settlement (PCS) activities. The update to the derivatives guidance sets expectations for firms regarding their capability to book, monitor, and identify their derivatives exposures, including for exposures that transfer risks between affiliates. The proposed guidance also reduces burden by eliminating certain information requirements. The proposed PCS update directs firms in their resolution planning to take account of both the firm's role as a user of PCS services and as a provider of PCS services for clients. Comments on this proposal will be accepted for 60 days after the proposal's publication in theFederal Register. Federal Register notice:HTML|PDF
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Utah Bankers Association 110th Annual Convention, Sun Valley Inn, Sun Valley, Idaho Good afternoon. It is a particular honor for me be here to address the Utah Bankers Association, which is like coming home intwoways: First, to Sun Valley, which is our family's deeply rooted second home--my wife's great grandfather established the first sawmill in the Wood River Valley near Hailey almost 150 years ago--and second, to Utah, the place that, like all of you, I dearly love and where I have always lived, despite a career that seems determined to keep taking me elsewhere. One of those elsewheres is Washington, and as a Utahan who has spent most of his career in the private sector advising and investing in the banking industry, I think I have a pretty good idea of how things look, from your vantage point, when someone from Washington shows up to give a speech. Since the financial crisis, bankers have had to adjust to challenging and evolving economic conditions and to many new regulations. At times, smaller and regional banks have been left wondering how actions in Washington focused on systemic vulnerabilities and the largest institutions were relevant to how they fund their businesses and in turn finance the aspirations of families, farmers, ranchers, and other entrepreneurs. I'll start today by trying to address those questions and provide a brief update on steps the Congress and the Federal Reserve are taking related to financial regulation. A decade after the crisis, implementation of the major post-crisis reforms is largely complete, and we have entered a new phase that is aimed at reviewing and improving regulations to ensure that they are achieving their aims in the most effective and efficient manner. I will explain more about that approach, and, relevant to your businesses, efforts to tailor regulation so it is appropriate for the size and business model of different institutions. I will also briefly describe pending regulatory changes passed last month by Congress, which I believe will further tailor regulations for banks, with particular benefit to community and regional banks. But I want to devote much of my time today to a broader message about the connection between these improvements in post-crisis regulation and the fundamental purpose of those regulations: to do what must be done to protect our economy from another severe financial crisis. Banks of all sizes have a shared interest in ensuring that regulation is efficient and appropriately tailored to promote a strong, fair, and competitive market for financial services. Likewise, banks have a shared interest in ensuring that regulation overall promotes a strong and stable financial system that keeps credit flowing to households and businesses in the communities you serve. Among the truths revealed by the financial crisis, one of the most important was the recognition that the vulnerabilities that had developed in the financial system were global in nature and that the problems our institutions and markets faced in the United States were inextricably connected to conditions and decisions outside our borders. Other governments likewise found that problems in the United States spilled over to their financial systems and economies. To cite just one example, it is well known now that the rapid growth of securitization of residential mortgages in the United States was a prominent factor driving up home lending and driving down lending standards. I think it is not as well known that a large share of those securities were being created, traded, and held by entities outside the United States. Some of the most important steps taken since the crisis to make our financial system more resilient have involved collecting information, identifying and monitoring stresses in the global financial system, and establishing and raising international standards. As I have noted, the improvements the Federal Reserve is making to financial regulation here in America, including tailoring, will help level the playing field for banks and help ensure you are able to continue to compete and serve your customers. The benefits of this for Utah banks are clear. But banks in Utah and elsewhere also benefit from a strong and stable global financial system, and as history has demonstrated, this in turn depends on strong international standards that help level the playing field. A strong and stable financial system depends also on transparency that helps both the private sector and regulators detect and deter vulnerabilities that could harm the U.S. economy. So I'd also like to talk to you today about one of the important international bodies created since the crisis to promote global financial stability, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and tell you why I believe America's active participation in the FSB is important to our nation, and even, as remote as it might seem, relevant to your businesses. But let me begin with a topic of more immediate interest and offer a brief overview of legislation and regulatory action by the Federal Reserve that I know is important to you and your institutions. First, a little context: like our economy, the condition of the U.S. banking industry is strong. First quarter profits for all banks hit a new record of $56 billion. Banks are well capitalized and positioned to increase lending to finance investment in a strengthening economy. Community banks are also doing well. According to Federal Reserve data on more than 5,000 community-based holding companies, community banks reported net income of $20.6 billion during 2017, up 4 percent from the year before. Like larger banks more recently, this result was the product of particularly strong loan activity, with recent year-over-year loan growth of 7.7 percent, which was substantially above the increase last year in the banking industry as a whole. Turning to recent regulatory developments, the big news, of course, is the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act sponsored by Senator Crapo, passed by Congress at the end of May and signed by the President. Before I get to that, let me briefly mention some things the Federal Reserve and other agencies have done--in some cases presaging steps taken in the new legislation--to reduce the regulatory burden on community and regional banks. One supervisory improvement is a Federal Reserve program called Bank Exams Tailored to Risk, or the BETR program. It uses financial metrics to differentiate the level of risk between banks before examinations and assist examiners in tailoring examination procedures to minimize the regulatory burden for firms that engage in low-risk activities, while subjecting higher-risk activities to more testing and review. Another initiative has been to shift a significant amount of the Federal Reserve's examination activity offsite. Additionally, the Federal Reserve, along with other agencies, took action to simplify the reporting responsibilities of smaller banks with a new streamlined Call Report form in 2017. Based on feedback from community banks, we and other regulators also increased the threshold for requiring an appraisal on commercial real estate loans from $250,000 to $500,000. Looking ahead, the Federal Reserve is developing a revised approach to determining "control" under the Bank Holding Company Act that could help banks raise capital and facilitate nonbank investments. I will now discuss the new law, which preserves the most important post-crisis reforms for the largest firms while directing the Federal Reserve and other agencies to make numerous changes that should reduce the regulatory burden for community and regional banks. On the Volcker rule, the legislation calls for exempting the vast majority of banks with $10 billion or less in assets from reporting requirements, which the Federal Reserve supported, due to the lack of trading activity that community banks engage in. This overtook efforts by the Fed and other regulatory agencies to refine the Volcker rule, but the bottom line is that this broad exemption is law and in the process of being implemented. Another change in the new legislation raises the asset threshold for bank holding companies eligible for the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement from $1 billion to $3 billion. The law also exempts bank holding companies with $50 billion to $100 billion in assets from enhanced prudential standards and exempts banks with less than $100 billion in assets from future stress testing. The lifting of this threshold importantly allows the Federal Reserve to tailor its rules for these firms moving forward while retaining the ability to protect the safety and soundness of the system. I mentioned steps related to Call Report streamlining, and the legislation addresses this topic also, allowing reduced Call Report requirements for certain banks with less than $5 billion in assets. For banks that are well managed and well-capitalized, the asset threshold was raised for a longer, 18-month examination cycle from $1 billion to $3 billion. The legislation would also exempt from an appraisal requirement rural properties for loans of less than $400,000, under certain circumstances. A common theme in the legislation and the Fed's steps to improve our regulation and supervision is tailoring. As the Fed continues to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of regulations, I expect tailoring will be a guiding principle. Let me now address international efforts to promote financial stability, specifically those centered in the Financial Stability Board. In the run-up to the crisis, as I'm sure you all know, decades of relative stability in the United States had left both the financial industry and government agencies complacent about potential threats. And even though financial crises had occurred during that time in some advanced economies, it is fair to say that the United States and other nations did not place a high probability on a crisis that could be global in nature. As a result, international coordination and collaboration on financial stability was limited, and there was a shortage of detailed and standardized information about financial conditions and vulnerabilities in different countries. As the crisis descended and the global nature of the problems became clear, the United States and other major economies, working through the Group of Twenty nations, created the Financial Stability Board to coordinate their efforts to stabilize the global financial system, reform international financial regulation, and share information.1The FSB includes central banks, finance ministries and regulators from 24 nations, the European Union, and also international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund and important global financial standard-setting bodies. Unlike other global organizations, the FSB includes multiple agencies from each government in recognition of the fact that financial stability is a responsibility shared across many parts of any government. From the United States, the Federal Reserve, the U.S. Treasury Department, and the Securities and Exchange Commission are members. Some of you may reasonably be wondering, at this point of the speech, how we got from rural appraisals in Utah to the Financial Stability Board in Switzerland. How are the conditions in 2008 and 2009 that led to creation of the FSB relevant to community banking? Let us remind ourselves how that global financial crisis and ensuing recession looked to communities in Utah and the bankers who serve them. Community banks, as we all know, engaged in little of the risky activity that was the basis of the crisis. But few community banks, I think, were unaffected by the competitive forces that were unleashed in the years leading up to 2008. When short-term wholesale funding froze up, and securitizing loans became impossible, and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac effectively failed, community banks were affected. And when your customers were hit hard by the crisis, community banks were affected too. In two years, from 2007 to 2009, the unemployment rate in Utah more than tripled. As it usually does, Utah weathered the Great Recession better than most places, but it was still the toughest economic times our state has faced in many decades, and of course, this profoundly affected banks and their customers. While that was occurring, the Federal Reserve and governments in other countries affected by the crisis were tackling several challenges in trying to strengthen financial regulation and oversight. One fundamental problem was information, specifically the lack of information about risks and vulnerabilities both within and across jurisdictions. The Federal Reserve and other U.S. agencies had some tools to help assess prudential risks for U.S.-based firms when the crisis hit. Information sharing about systemic financial vulnerabilities was more limited, particularly for conditions outside the United States. For one, we did not understand the importance of some financial vulnerabilities or had only limited information on them, such as interconnectedness across financial firms, and therefore we were unable to share information. We also failed to appreciate the ways in which the shadow banking system that had grown up outside the institutions we oversaw had become interconnected with those institutions. The existing global forums for discussion of these issues were considered less important or were focused on just one financial sector, and membership was often limited to a handful of industrial countries. We now understand the importance of taking a global view on financial vulnerabilities, and we are learning from each other about how to fill the gaps in understanding and data that exist. An additional challenge that the United States faced, in responding to the crisis and establishing more effective oversight and higher standards was the inability to enforce such rules in a global financial system without common, more uniform standards. If some of the activities threatening financial stability occurred outside the United States and in jurisdictions with lower standards, raising standards in the United States would be both ineffective in fully stabilizing the financial system, and could put U.S. firms at a competitive disadvantage, which would be only an added disincentive to embrace effective standards. Every nation, of course, seeking to make its financial system more resilient faced these same challenges and disincentives, an example of the problem of collective action that points nations toward international cooperation. If the FSB had been in place before the crisis and working on identifying and assessing vulnerabilities to financial stability, that may have allowed us to take action at an earlier stage, frame our response with more information, and possibly mitigate some of the devastating consequences. I can attest to the FSB's improvement over the pre-crisis discussions that took place internationally because during the first Bush Administration I was a delegate to the informal and more limited group that preceded the FSB. An important part of the FSB's work is to endorse minimum standards in different areas; for example, identifying the key attributes of effective resolution planning for systemically important firms. In addition, the FSB is in the early stages of some critical work that examines the effects that reforms and standards are having. Are they doing what we intended them to do? Have there been unintended consequences? Can we make the reforms more efficient; that is can we achieve the same effects while lowering the burden on institutions and supervisors? Once again, you might be wondering why something like resolution regime-planning should matter to community bankers. You might be hoping that I get back to the good news I delivered earlier, about steps being taken in Washington to tailor regulation and reduce the regulatory burden on community banks. But, of course, these are two sides of the same coin. Appropriately reducing the regulatory burden for community banks is possible when we can get an accurate picture of the risks and vulnerabilities in the broader financial system, which Utah's banks are part of and depend on. Tailoring does not mean abandoning our responsibility to promote a stable financial system, but embracing it, assisted by FSB efforts to ensure that reforms are having the intended effects and supported by the global standards that the FSB and other international standard-setting bodies are able to establish and promote. In closing, I want to address an issue relevant to any international organization, which is sovereignty. More specifically, we sometimes hear concerns that international bodies such as the FSB threaten our sovereignty by imposing rules on the United States, which would be a concern. Let me be clear: the FSB has no enforcement powers, no legal authority to command its members to do anything, and not even authority, as in some international organizations, to induce action based on contractual obligations. The FSB does not impose obligations, it addresses problems--problems that are of great importance to the United States and which, because of the global nature of the financial system, we cannot address alone. The United States and other governments created the FSB and participate in it because it is in our national interests to do so, and that is really the basis of its effectiveness. The United States is not weaker or less independent by participating in the FSB or other standard-setting bodies. On the contrary, when rightly structured our participation in these groups makes our financial system significantly stronger by ensuring that the U.S. perspective is part of the discussions and reflected in standards agreed to. Our consumers and businesses are more secure and prosperous because the FSB helps make sure that all countries are doing their share in promoting financial stability and not gaining an unfair advantage. Like some other effective organizations, a source of the FSB's power is that it functions by consensus. That can make reaching decisions more difficult, but it also yields decisions that can be truly effective solutions because all participants feel a stake in them. It is useful when the credibility and commitment of the decisions are especially important, such as when my Fed colleagues and I set monetary policy. At the FSB, relying on consensus helps 68 agencies and other members from two dozen countries with different perspectives and agendas come together around our shared interest in a stable global financial system. International negotiations and standard-setting is not the best approach to all problems, but in my past experience as a Treasury Department official, it is often the best way to tackle problems that are global in scope. By actively participating in the FSB and engaging with its members at a high level, the United States is supporting high international standards that are equal to those in the United States. Our standards will be most effective when other major economies embrace them in a consistent manner. The goal is to limit the risks of another financial crisis and do what we can to promote prosperity and a bright future for the people you serve so faithfully in the great state of Utah. 1. The FSB was created in April 2009 and was the successor of a less-formal group known as the Financial Stability Forum. Seewww.fsb.org/about/.Return to text
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the June 12-13 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the June 12-13 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Ameris Bancorp, Moultrie, Georgia, to acquire Hamilton State Bancshares, Inc. ("Hamilton"), and thereby indirectly acquire Hamilton's subsidiary bank, Hamilton State Bank, both of Hoschton, Georgia. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by TriCo Bancshares, Chico, California, to merge with FNB Bancorp and thereby indirectly acquire FNB Bancorp's subsidiary bank, First National Bank of Northern California, both of South San Francisco, California. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Results from the latest supervisory stress tests conducted as part of the Dodd-Frank Act will be released on Thursday, June 21, and the results from the related Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) will be released on Thursday, June 28, the Federal Reserve Board announced on Thursday. Results for both exercises will be released at 4:30 p.m. EDT. Stress tests help ensure that banks have adequate capital to absorb losses so that they can lend to households and businesses even in a serious recession. The Dodd-Frank Act stress tests are a forward-looking assessment of capital sufficiency using standard capital plan assumptions across all firms. CCAR evaluates the capital planning practices and capital adequacy of the largest domestic and foreign bank holding companies, using the firms' planned capital actions such as dividend payments and share buybacks and issuances. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Stress Tests and Capital Planning
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First South Bancorp, Inc., Spartanburg, South CarolinaWritten Agreement dated November 23, 2010Terminated June 19, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. A previously published enforcement action was erroneously re-published on June 21, 2018. The duplication has been removed and replaced with the correct enforcement action.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved action on Thursday by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Bank from 2-1/4 percent to 2-1/2 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved a rule to prevent concentrations of risk between large banking organizations and their counterparties from undermining financial stability. As demonstrated during the financial crisis, excessive exposure between the largest financial institutions spread contagion and eroded confidence in these institutions. The final rule, which implements part of the Dodd-Frank Act, is generally similar to the proposal, and applies credit limits that increase in stringency as the systemic footprint of a firm increases. Like the proposed rule, a global systemically important bank holding company, or GSIB, would be limited to a credit exposure of no more than 15 percent of the GSIB's tier 1 capital to another systemically important financial firm, reflecting Board staff's analysis of the increased systemic risk posed when the largest firms have significant exposure to one another. "This final rule is another step in sustaining an effective and efficient regulatory regime that keeps our financial system strong and protects our economy while imposing no more burden than is necessary to get the job done," Chairman Jerome H. Powell said. Like the proposal, a bank holding company with $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets would be restricted to a credit exposure of no more than 25 percent of its tier 1 capital to a counterparty. Foreign banks operating in the U.S. with $250 billion or more in total global consolidated assets, and their intermediate holding companies (IHCs) with $50 billion or more in total U.S. consolidated assets, would be subject to similar limits. "The final rule adds to the robust capital and liquidity positions of the financial system today by setting out clear limits on credit exposures among the largest banking firms," Vice Chairman Randal K. Quarles said. "I am pleased by the final rule's efficient approach to setting limits that are appropriately adjusted for firms of lesser systemic importance." Consistent with the recently passed Economic Growth, Regulatory Reform, and Consumer Protection Act, the limits in the final rule will apply only to GSIBs and bank holding companies with at least $250 billion in total consolidated assets. The Board will consider the extent to which additional standards, including credit exposure limits, should apply to holding companies with total consolidated assets between $100 billion and $250 billion at a later date. In response to comments, the final rule reduces regulatory burden by using common accounting definitions to simplify application of the exposure limits. In addition, a foreign bank's combined U.S. operations, though not its U.S. IHC, will be considered in compliance with the final rule if a comparable rule is in effect in the foreign bank's home country. GSIBs will be required to comply by January 1, 2020, and all other firms are required to comply by July 1, 2020. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF Information Collection:HTML|PDF Opening Statement by Chairman Jerome H. Powell Opening Statement by Vice Chairman of Supervision Randal K. Quarles Statement by Governor Lael Brainard Open Board Meeting on June 14, 2018
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition of Ashley Burrus, former Financial Services Specialist of Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, for engaging in improper practices regarding credit origination. The Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Patterson Bankshares, Inc., Patterson, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated June 1, 2010 (PDF)Terminated June 7, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Consent Order of Prohibition against Vasken Papazian, a former employee of East Cambridge Savings Bank, Cambridge, Massachusetts, for embezzling money from a bank customer. Consent Order of Prohibition against Connie Clabo, a former employee of SmartBank, Pigeon Forge, Tennessee, for misappropriating funds from the bank through false statements and accounting entries. Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Consent prohibition of Nathaniel Frazier, former Branch Manager of Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, for engaging in improper practices regarding credit origination Consent prohibition of Jeffrey Garrison, former Financial Services Specialist of Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, for engaging in improper practices regarding credit origination The Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Hometown Bancshares, Inc., Carthage, MissouriWritten Agreement dated April 28, 2009Terminated May 16, 2018 Other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released its annual determination of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of financial companies as required by section 622 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The act prohibits a financial company from combining with another company if the resulting company's liabilities would exceed 10 percent of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of all financial companies. Effective July 1, 2018, aggregate consolidated liabilities equal $20,283,121,945,000. This number, which is the average of the year-end financial sector liabilities of the preceding two years, will be the measure of aggregate consolidated liabilities for purposes of section 622 of the Dodd-Frank Act from July 1, 2018 through June 30, 2019. Financial companies subject to the limit include insured depository institutions, bank holding companies, savings and loan holding companies, foreign banking organizations, companies that control insured depository institutions, and nonbank financial companies designated for Board supervision by the Financial Stability Oversight Council. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisterNotice
The nation's largest bank holding companies are strongly capitalized and would be able to lend to households and businesses during a severe global recession, according to the results of supervisory stress tests released Thursday by the Federal Reserve Board. The most severe hypothetical scenario projects $578 billion in total losses for the 35 participating bank holding companies during the nine quarters tested. The "severely adverse" scenario, the most stringent scenario yet used in the Board's stress tests, features a severe global recession with the U.S. unemployment rate rising by almost 6 percentage points to 10 percent, accompanied by a steepening Treasury yield curve. The firms' aggregate common equity tier 1 capital ratio, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, would fall from an actual level of 12.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2017 to a minimum level of 7.9 percent in the hypothetical stress scenario. Since 2009, the 35 firms have added about $800 billion in common equity capital. "Despite a tough scenario and other factors that affected this year's test, the capital levels of the firmsafterthe hypothetical severe global recession arehigherthan the actual capital levels of large banks in the years leading up to the most recent recession," Vice Chairman Randal K. Quarles said. Several factors affected the post-stress capital ratios this year. Credit card balances are generally higher, producing increased losses under stress, totaling $113 billion this year. Additionally, recent changes to the tax code affected the firms and the effects were different across the firms. Several firms had immediate, one-time declines in their starting capital ratios because of certain accounting consequences of the tax changes. The tax law also eliminated some beneficial tax treatments that tended to raise post-tax income in times of stress. Capital is critical to banking organizations, the financial system, and the economy, because it acts as a cushion to absorb losses and helps to ensure that losses are borne by shareholders. The Board's stress scenarios assume deliberately stringent and conservative hypothetical economic and financial market conditions. The results are not forecasts or expected outcomes. This is the eighth round of stress tests led by the Federal Reserve since 2009 and the sixth round required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The 35 firms tested this year represent about 80 percent of the assets of all banks operating in the U.S. The Federal Reserve uses its own independent projections of losses and incomes for each firm. The Dodd-Frank Act stress tests are one component of the Federal Reserve's analysis during the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which is an annual exercise to evaluate the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of large bank holding companies. CCAR results will be released on Thursday, June 28, at 4:30 p.m. EDT. Also on Thursday, the Board announced that to be consistent with the recently passed Economic Growth, Regulatory Reform, and Consumer Protection Act, bank holding companies with less than $100 billion in total consolidated assets are no longer subject to supervisory stress testing, including both the Dodd-Frank Act stress tests and CCAR. As a result, the Board will not include CIT Group Inc., Comerica Incorporated, and Zions Bancorporation in this year's results and future cycles. The Board will have further information on its implementation of the new law at a later date. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2018: Supervisory Stress Test Methodology and Results (PDF)
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in May indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a solid rate. Job gains have been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined. Recent data suggest that growth of household spending has picked up, while business fixed investment has continued to grow strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have moved close to 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. Risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1-3/4 to 2 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Thomas I. Barkin; Raphael W. Bostic; Lael Brainard; Loretta J. Mester; Randal K. Quarles; and John C. Williams. Implementation Note issued June 13, 2018
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland on Thursday publishedBrowsing to Borrow: "Mom & Pop" Small Business Perspectives on Online Lenders. The report examines small business owners' perceptions of online lenders and their understanding and interpretation of the information that online lenders use to describe their credit products. Among the key findings from the study, most participants were aware of the products offered by online lenders. Although some had positive views, participants also had negative impressions of the industry. While browsing the websites of online lenders, participants generally reacted favorably to those with detailed product information and were often skeptical of those that withheld product details. When presented with sample online products, participants generally found the descriptions difficult to understand or lacking detail about costs and features. Many of the small business owners participating in the study indicated a need for clear disclosure of product costs and terms. The findings suggest that improved disclosures could benefit both borrowers and lenders. Clear disclosures could enable borrowers to better evaluate products suitable for their businesses and could help lenders engender trust and grow their customer base. The study explores small business owners' perceptions of nonbank online lenders as they are becoming more mainstream alternative providers of financing to small firms. For this study, Federal Reserve researchers conducted online focus groups with 42 small business owners from across the United States who had at least one but no more than 20 employees; had less than $2 million in annual revenues; and had sought credit for their businesses in the prior 12 months. The study follows the release of a 2015 report,Alternative Lending through the Eyes of "Mom & Pop" Small-Business Owners: Findings from Online Focus Groups. For more information, see the online version ofBrowsing to Borrow: "Mom & Pop" Small Business Perspectives on Online Lenders (PDF). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
As part of its annual examination of the capital planning practices of the nation's largest banks, the Federal Reserve Board on Thursday did not object to the capital plans of 34 firms and objected to the capital plan of one firm. Due in part to recent changes to the tax law that negatively affected capital levels, two firms will maintain their capital distributions at the levels they paid in recent years. Separately, one firm will be required to take certain steps regarding the management and analysis of its counterparty exposures under stress. The Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, or CCAR, in its eighth year, evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest U.S.-based bank holding companies, including the firms' planned capital actions, such as dividend payments and share buybacks. Strong capital levels act as a cushion to absorb losses and help ensure that banking organizations have the ability to lend to households and businesses even in times of stress. "Even with one-time challenges posed by changes to the tax law, the CCAR results demonstrate that the largest banks have strong capital levels, and after making their approved capital distributions, would retain their ability to lend even in a severe recession," said Vice Chairman Randal K. Quarles. When evaluating a firm's capital plan, the Board considers both quantitative and qualitative factors. Quantitative factors include a firm's projected capital ratios under a hypothetical scenario of severe economic and financial market stress. Qualitative factors include the strength of the firm's capital planning process, which incorporates risk management, internal controls, and governance practices that support the process. This year, 18 of the largest and most complex banks were subject to both the quantitative and qualitative assessments. The 17 other firms in CCAR were subject only to the quantitative assessment. The Board may object to a capital plan based on quantitative or qualitative concerns. The Board objected to the capital plan from DB USA Corporation due to qualitative concerns. Those concerns include material weaknesses in the firm's data capabilities and controls supporting its capital planning process, as well as weaknesses in its approaches and assumptions used to forecast revenues and losses under stress. The Board issued a conditional non-objection to the capital plans of both Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley and both firms will maintain their capital distributions at the levels they paid in recent years, which will allow them to build capital over the next year. Each firm's capital ratios, under the capital plans they originally submitted and with the one-time capital reduction from the tax law changes, fell below required levels when subjected to the hypothetical scenario. This one-time reduction does not reflect a firm's performance under stress and firms can expect higher post-tax earnings going forward. The Board also issued a conditional non-objection for the capital plan from State Street Corporation. The stress test revealed counterparty exposures that produced large losses under the hypothetical scenario, which assumes the default of a firm's largest counterparty under stress. The firm will be required to take certain steps regarding the management and analysis of its counterparty exposures under stress. The Federal Reserve did not object to the capital plans of Ally Financial, Inc.; American Express Company; BB&T Corporation; BBVA Compass Bancshares, Inc.; BMO Financial Corp.; BNP Paribas USA; Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; Barclays US LLC.; Capital One Financial Corporation; Citigroup, Inc.; Citizens Financial Group; Credit Suisse Holdings (USA); Discover Financial Services; Fifth Third Bancorp; HSBC North America Holdings, Inc.; Huntington Bancshares, Inc.; JP Morgan Chase & Co.; Keycorp; M&T Bank Corporation; MUFG Americas Holdings Corporation; Northern Trust Corp.; The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.; RBC USA Holdco Corporation; Regions Financial Corporation; Santander Holdings USA, Inc.; SunTrust Banks, Inc.; TD Group US Holdings LLC; U.S. Bancorp; UBS Americas Holdings LLC; and Wells Fargo & Company. U.S. firms have substantially increased their capital since the first round of stress tests led by the Federal Reserve in 2009. The common equity capital ratio--which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets--of the 35 bank holding companies in the 2018 CCAR has more than doubled from 5.2 percent in the first quarter of 2009 to 12.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2017. This reflects an increase of more than $800 billion in common equity capital to more than $1.2 trillion during the same period. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2018: Assessment Framework and Results (PDF)
Chairman Jerome H. Powell At "Price and Wage-Setting in Advanced Economies," an ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal Nine years into an expansion that has sometimes proceeded slowly, the U.S. economy is performing very well. Growth is meaningfully above most estimates of its long-term trend--though admittedly, that trend is not as strong as we would like it to be. The labor market is particularly robust, with unemployment at its lowest level since April 2000. Inflation has moved up close to our 2 percent objective, although we have yet to see it remain near that objective on a sustained basis. Today, most Americans who want jobs can find them. High demand for workers should support wage growth and labor force participation--the latter a measure on which the United States now lags most other advanced economies.1A tight labor market may also lead businesses to invest more in technology and training, which should support productivity growth. And groups such as some racial and ethnic minorities that still have higher unemployment and lower participation rates could see increasing benefits from a tight labor market.2In short, there is a lot to like about low unemployment. Achieving our statutory goal of maximum employment in a context of price stability and financial stability is both our responsibility and our challenge. Earlier in the expansion, as the economy recovered, the need for highly accommodative monetary policy was clear. But with unemployment low and expected to decline further, inflation close to our objective, and the risks to the outlook roughly balanced, the case for continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate is strong. Current Labor Market ConditionsAt 3.8 percent, the unemployment rate is below most estimates of its long-run level, which are now clustered in the mid-4s. Many other labor market indicators also suggest an economy near full employment. To name just a few, these indicators include an elevated level of job vacancies. For the first time since the Labor Department began collecting the data in 2000, there are now more job vacancies than there are people counted as unemployed. In addition, the rate at which workers are quitting their jobs is elevated, a sign that workers are able to find another job when they seek one. And surveys show that businesses are finding it difficult to fill vacancies, and that households perceive jobs as plentiful. Some other indicators are less clear. The labor force participation rate of prime-age workers has moved up in recent years but remains below pre-crisis levels.3In addition, wage growth has been moderate, consistent with low productivity growth but also an indication that the labor market is not excessively tight. Looking ahead, the job market is likely to strengthen further. Real gross domestic product in the United States is now reported to have risen 2-3/4 percent over the past four quarters, well above most estimates of its long-run trend. Expansionary fiscal policy is expected to add to aggregate demand over the next few years. Many forecasters expect the unemployment rate to fall into the mid-3s and to remain there for an extended period. If that comes to pass, it will mean the lowest unemployment in the United States since the late 1960s. A historical comparisonBecause we have so little experience with very low unemployment, it is interesting to compare today's labor market with that earlier period. Unemployment was below 4 percent from February 1966 through January 1970. During that time, inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures increased from below 2 percent in 1965 to about 5 percent in 1970. In hindsight, unemployment is now widely thought to have been unsustainably low at that time and to have contributed to escalating inflation. But how significant is this precedent for today? The U.S. economy has changed in many ways over the past 50 years. By some estimates, the natural rate of unemployment is substantially lower now.4For example, the Congressional Budget Office now estimates that the natural rate was about 53/4 percent (and rising) in the late 1960s, compared with 4-3/4 percent at present.5 Rising education levels do point to a decline in the natural rate since the 1960s, because more highly educated people are less likely to be unemployed. The share of the population with a college degree has risen from less than 15 percent in the late 1960s to nearly 40 percent now, and the share with less than a high school degree has declined from 45 percent to about 5 percent.6Another important difference from the 1960s is that inflation has been low and stable for an extended period, which has better anchored inflation expectations. Today policymakers have a greater appreciation of the role expectations play in inflation dynamics and a clearer commitment to maintaining low and stable inflation. Unfortunately, with the passage of a half-century and important changes in the structure of our economy and in central bank practices, in my view the historical comparison does not shed as much light as we might have hoped. Questions prompted by a tight labor marketThe lack of useful historical precedent leaves us with some uncertainty about the answers to several important and challenging questions. First, estimates of the natural rate of unemployment by Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants and others have drifted lower as unemployment has declined without much apparent reaction from inflation. How reliable are these estimates? Natural rate estimates have always been uncertain, and may be even more so now as inflation has become less responsive to the unemployment rate.7The anchoring of expectations is a welcome development and has likely played a role in flattening the Phillips curve. But a flatter Phillips curve makes it harder to assess whether movements in inflation reflect the cyclical position of the economy or other influences. Second, what would be the consequences for inflation if unemployment were to run well below the natural rate for an extended period? The flat Phillips curve suggests that the implications for inflation might not be large, although a very tight labor market could lead to larger, nonlinear effects. Research on this question is ambiguous, again reflecting the limited historical experience.8We should also remember that where inflation expectations are well anchored, it is likely because central banks have kept inflation under control. If central banks were instead to try to exploit the nonresponsiveness of inflation to low unemployment and push resource utilization significantly and persistently past sustainable levels, the public might begin to question our commitment to low inflation, and expectations could come under upward pressure. So far, we see no signs of this. If anything, some measures of longer-term inflation expectations in the United States have edged lower in recent years. Third, can persistently strong economic conditions pose financial stability risks? Of course, strong economic conditions are a good thing! Such conditions can make the financial system better able to absorb shocks through strong balance sheets and investor confidence. But we have often seen confidence become overconfidence and lead to excessive borrowing and risk-taking, leaving the financial system more vulnerable. Indeed, the fact that the two most recent U.S. recessions stemmed principally from financial imbalances, not high inflation, highlights the importance of closely monitoring financial conditions. Today I see U.S. financial stability vulnerabilities as moderate and broadly in line with their long-run averages. While some asset prices are high by historical standards, I do not see broad signs of excessive borrowing or leverage. In addition, banks have far greater levels of capital and liquidity than before the crisis. Fourth, while persistently strong economic conditions can pose risks to inflation and perhaps financial stability, we can also ask whether there may be lasting benefits. As I mentioned, a tight labor market could draw more people into the labor force. In fact, as the labor market has tightened, more workers have been moving back to work and off disability rolls.9There could also be benefits to productivity and potential growth. All told, though, the persistence of any such "positive hysteresis" benefits is uncertain, since, again, the historical evidence is sparse and inconclusive. Conclusion As is often the case, in the current environment, significant uncertainty attends the process of making monetary policy. Today, with the economy strong and risks to the outlook balanced, the case for continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate remains strong and broadly supported among FOMC participants. 1.See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2018),Economic Survey of the United States 2018(Paris: OECD).Return to text 2.These groups tend to both suffer most from labor market downturns and benefit most from improving labor markets.Return to text 3.The labor force participation rate is defined as the number of people either with a job or who have actively looked for work within the past four weeks, as a share of the total population. Prime-age refers to individuals from 25 to 54 years old.Return to text 4.The natural rate of unemployment is the unemployment rate over the longer term that is consistent with low and stable inflation. It comprises both the "frictional" unemployment of people who are temporarily between jobs or searching as they have reentered the labor force and the more "structural" unemployment of people whose skills or physical location are not a good match for the jobs available. For more discussion, see Janet L. Yellen (2017), "The Goals of Monetary Policy and How We Pursue Them," speech delivered at the Commonwealth Club, San Francisco, January 18.Return to text 5.Contemporaneous estimates of the natural rate (or "full employment") from the late 1960s were lower than current estimates for that period. For example, theEconomic Report of the Presidentfrom 1968 defined potential output as occurring when the unemployment rate is 4 percent. See Executive Office of the President of the United States (1968),Economic Report of the President(PDF)(Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, February), p. 61.Return to text 6.Other changes in the workforce since the late 1960s seem less likely to have much affected the natural rate of unemployment. There are many more women in the workforce now, but while women used to have higher unemployment rates than men, that is no longer the case. And while younger workers tend to have less stable employment patterns and higher unemployment rates than older workers, the working population is, on net, only a little bit older now than it was in the late 1960s. (The average age of people in the workforce declined through the 1970s as more of the baby-boom generation entered their working years, but it increased subsequently.)Return to text 7.For evidence on the changing effects of labor market utilization on inflation, internationally as well as in the United States, see Olivier Blanchard, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015), "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," inInflation and Unemployment in Europe,proceedings of the 2015 ECB Forum on Central Banking (Sintra, Portugal: European Central Bank), pp. 25-46. Regarding uncertainty about estimates of the natural rate, a classic reference is Douglas Staiger, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1997), "How Precise Are Estimates of the Natural Rate of Unemployment?" in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 195-246.Return to text 8.For one recent example, see Nathan R. Babb and Alan K. Detmeister (2017), "Nonlinearities in the Phillips Curve for the United States: Evidence Using Metropolitan Data," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-070 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June), http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.070.Return to text 9.See Ernie Tedeschi (2018), "Will Employment Keep Growing? Disabled Workers Offer a Clue," The Upshot,New York Times,March 15.Return to text