The federal bank regulatory agencies approved a final rule modifying their regulatory capital rules and providing an option to phase in over a period of three years the day-one regulatory capital effects of updated accounting standard known as the "Current Expected Credit Losses" (CECL) methodology. The final rule also revises the agencies' other rules to reflect the update to the accounting standards. In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued an update to the accounting standards for credit losses that included the CECL methodology, which replaces the existing incurred loss methodology for certain financial assets. During the phase-in, the agencies will continue to monitor the impact of CECL adoption. The final rule will take effect April 1, 2019. Banking organizations that choose to early adopt CECL may elect to adopt the rule as of the first quarter 2019. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Five federal financial regulatory agencies on Friday invited public comment on a proposal that would exclude certain community banks from the Volcker rule, consistent with the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA). The Volcker Rule generally restricts banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading and from owning or sponsoring hedge funds or private equity funds. The agencies are jointly proposing to exclude community banks with $10 billion or less in total consolidated assets and total trading assets and liabilities of 5 percent or less of total consolidated assets from the restrictions of the Volcker Rule. Additionally, consistent with EGRRCPA, the proposal would, under certain circumstances, permit a hedge fund or private equity fund to share the same name or a variation of the same name with an investment adviser that is not an insured depository institution, company that controls an insured depository institution, or bank holding company. The proposal was issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Comments will be accepted for 30 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The federal banking agencies today issued final rules that adopt without change the interim final rules issued in August that expanded the number of insured depository institutions and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks eligible for an 18-month on-site examination cycle, rather than a 12-month cycle. As authorized by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, the final rules generally allow qualifying insured depository institutions with less than $3 billion in total assets to benefit from an extended 18-month on-site examination cycle. The final rules also adopt without change the interim final rules' parallel changes for the on-site examination cycle of U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies remind banks, savings associations, and Farm Credit System institutions that they can continue to make loans during periods when the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is unavailable. The attached guidance issued in 2010 is generally applicable whenever the NFIP is unavailable. As explained in the guidance, lenders may continue to make loans subject to the federal flood insurance statutes without flood insurance during a period when the NFIP is not available. However, lenders must continue to make flood determinations, provide timely, complete, and accurate notices to borrowers, and comply with other parts of the flood insurance regulations. In addition, lenders must evaluate safety and soundness and legal risks and prudently manage those risks during the lapse period. Federal Reserve Board guidance FDIC guidance OCC guidance Farm Credit Administration guidance
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies remind banks, savings associations, and Farm Credit System institutions that they can continue to make loans during periods when the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is unavailable. The attached guidance issued in 2010 is generally applicable whenever the NFIP is unavailable. As explained in the guidance, lenders may continue to make loans subject to the federal flood insurance statutes without flood insurance during a period when the NFIP is not available. However, lenders must continue to make flood determinations, provide timely, complete, and accurate notices to borrowers, and comply with other parts of the flood insurance regulations. In addition, lenders must evaluate safety and soundness and legal risks and prudently manage those risks during the lapse period. Federal Reserve Board guidance FDIC guidance OCC guidance Farm Credit Administration guidance
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies remind banks, savings associations, and Farm Credit System institutions that they can continue to make loans during periods when the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is unavailable. The attached guidance issued in 2010 is generally applicable whenever the NFIP is unavailable. As explained in the guidance, lenders may continue to make loans subject to the federal flood insurance statutes without flood insurance during a period when the NFIP is not available. However, lenders must continue to make flood determinations, provide timely, complete, and accurate notices to borrowers, and comply with other parts of the flood insurance regulations. In addition, lenders must evaluate safety and soundness and legal risks and prudently manage those risks during the lapse period. Federal Reserve Board guidance FDIC guidance OCC guidance Farm Credit Administration guidance
The federal banking agencies on Thursday invited public comment on a proposal to update rules restricting the ability of a director or other management official to serve at more than one depository institution or depository holding company. The proposed changes would provide relief for community banks and better align with other rules. The current management interlock rules prohibit a director or other management official working at a depository organization--a term defined by regulation to mean either a depository institution or a depository holding company--with more than $2.5 billion in total assets from serving at the same time at an unaffiliated depository organization with more than $1.5 billion in total assets. The current thresholds were established by statutory amendment in 1996. The proposal seeks comment on raising both thresholds to $10 billion in total assets, given the consolidation and growth in the industry over the past 20 years. Management officials would generally remain prohibited from serving with multiple depository organizations that are above the new thresholds, limiting the potential risk of anticompetitive conduct at larger institutions. The agencies also invite public comment on other proposed approaches to raising the current thresholds. The proposal responds to comments received during the recent review required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. It was jointly issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice
WASHINGTON--The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examination procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small institution asset-size thresholds are not subject to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks and savings associations unless they choose to be evaluated as a large institution. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 2.59 percent increase in the CPI-W for the period ending in November 2018, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments will be effective as stated in the final rule that will be published in the Federal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (https://www.ffiec.gov/cra). Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The three federal banking agencies announced they are seeking public comment on a proposal to raise the threshold for residential real estate transactions requiring an appraisal from $250,000 to $400,000. The appraisal threshold has remained unchanged since 1994, and the agencies believe an increase would provide burden relief without posing a threat to the safety and soundness of financial institutions. All three agencies have approved the proposal, with the FDIC and the OCC acting on November 20. Comments will be accepted until 60 days after publication in the Federal Register. Rather than requiring an appraisal for transactions exempted by the threshold, the proposal would require the use of an evaluation consistent with safe and sound banking practices. Evaluations provide an estimate of the market value of real estate but could be less burdensome than appraisals because the agencies' appraisal regulations do not require evaluations to be prepared by state licensed or certified appraisers. In addition, evaluations are typically less detailed and costly than appraisals. Evaluations have been required for transactions exempted from the appraisal requirement by the current residential threshold since the 1990s. This proposal responds, in part, to comments the agencies received during their recent review of regulations that the current exemption level for residential transactions had not kept pace with price appreciation. Additionally, the proposal would incorporate the appraisal exemption for rural residential properties provided by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act and similarly require evaluations for these transactions. In addition, the proposal would require institutions to appropriately review all appraisals required by the agencies' appraisal rules to ensure their compliance with appraisal industry standards. Federal RegisternoticeHTML|PDF
Governor Lael Brainard At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. Financial stability is integral to achieving the Federal Reserve's objectives of full employment and price stability. We need only look back a decade to see the dramatic damage from financial vulnerabilities that increase unchecked: Millions of Americans lost their livelihoods and their homes, business losses and failures rose, and the government had to provide extraordinary support to the system. Since then, financial sector resilience has strengthened, and household balance sheets have been repaired over the course of a lengthy recovery. Today employment is strong, inflation is around target, and incomes are growing.1 If we learned anything from this experience, it is that we must be especially vigilant to safeguard the resilience of our financial system in good times when vulnerabilities may be building. That is why the Federal Reserve actively monitors the potential vulnerabilities to the financial system. Last week, for the first time, we released our assessment in theFinancial Stability Report.2Today I will offer a brief summary of the outlook, highlight areas where I see financial imbalances building, and touch on the implications for policy. Sustaining the ExpansionDomestic economic momentum has been strong, as evidenced by the labor market. With the November data, monthly payroll gains have averaged 170,000 over the past 3 months, well above the pace necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force. The share of the prime-age population (people ages 25 to 54) that is working is closing in on its pre-crisis level. By most measures, wages have accelerated over the past year and are now growing around 3 percent, the highest level since the crisis. These are welcome developments. While the most recent reading on core personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, inflation ticked down, indicators of underlying trend inflation remain encouraging overall, providing little signal of an outbreak of inflation to the upside, on the one hand, and reassurance that underlying trend inflation may be close to our target of 2 percent, on the other (figure 1). The economy has grown 3 percent over the past year, and there are good reasons to expect growth to remain solid next year, supported by the strong underlying momentum in domestic demand. Consumer spending looks to be robust going into the fourth quarter, and ongoing gains in income and employment provide positive fundamentals. In addition, business investment should be solid, even with recent declines in oil prices. Sizable fiscal stimulus has provided an important boost to demand this year and will likely contribute somewhat further next year, given the usual lags in outlays and in the effects of tax cuts on business and household spending. The most likely path for the economy is positive, although some tailwinds that have provided a boost are fading, and we may face some crosscurrents. The global growth that provided a strong tailwind going into this year has moderated. The earlier strong growth in Europe and Japan appears to be softening toward trend. China is shifting to an accommodative policy stance to contend with a challenging trade environment and lagged effects from its earlier tightening. Here at home, the impetus to growth from fiscal policy is likely to fade going into 2020. And after being exceptionally accommodative, financial conditions have tightened in recent months. Financial conditions are still supportive of growth by many measures (figure 2), but less so than last year. There are risks on both sides of the economy's likely path. In Europe, there are risks associated with deliberations over Italy's fiscal and debt trajectory and the United Kingdom's deliberations on the Brexit deal. Here at home, we hear from businesses that the uncertainty associated with trade policy and the implications for supply chains may weigh on business capital spending. Although it is reasonable to expect fiscal spending to be extended around current levels in real terms after the Bipartisan Budget Act expires, we cannot rule out that fiscal policy could become a headwind in 2020. The risks are two-sided. Business contacts report difficulties finding qualified workers and increased costs associated with inputs, tariffs, and transportation, along with somewhat greater ability to pass through those increases to consumer prices. Despite this, however, inflation remains muted overall. At 3.7 percent, the unemployment rate is at its lowest level in 49 years, and payrolls have been growing well above the pace that is consistent with labor market stabilization. Historically, the few periods when resource utilization has been similarly tight have seen elevated risks of either accelerating inflation or financial imbalances. Our goal now is to sustain the expansion by maintaining the economy around full employment and inflation around target. The gradual path of increases in the federal funds rate has served us well by giving us time to assess the effects of policy as we have proceeded. That approach remains appropriate in the near term, although the policy path increasingly will depend on how the outlook evolves. Assessing Vulnerabilities over the CycleThe last several times resource utilization approached levels similar to today, signs of overheating showed up in financial-sector imbalances rather than in accelerating inflation. In contrast to the past, the Federal Reserve now has a systematic forward-looking approach to identifying increases in financial vulnerabilities. This monitoring is the focus of regular Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee discussions. Last week, the Board released its firstFinancial Stability Reportto help inform the public and promote transparency and accountability as we carry out our financial stability responsibilities. While there has been substantial progress on reducing household debt burdens and increasing the resilience of the banking system, the Federal Reserve's assessment suggests that financial vulnerabilities associated with corporate debt are building against a backdrop of elevated risk appetite. Let me briefly review these developments in turn. In contrast to the years preceding the crisis, when household borrowing was growing at a pace far above that of gross domestic product (GDP), it has since come down and is now growing more slowly than the economy overall (figure 3). Moreover, while much of the increase before the crisis reflected borrowing that proved unsustainable, more recent borrowing has been concentrated among households with strong credit profiles. The regulated financial sector is also more resilient, owing to far-reaching reforms as well as favorable conditions. Large banks have increased both the size and quality of their capital buffers: The ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets at large banks has increased by half relative to the pre-crisis average. It is now close to levels seen at smaller banks, although the risk-weighted capital ratio at large banks has moved down somewhat over the past year (figure 4). In addition, insurers appear generally well capitalized; broker-dealers, including those not affiliated with large bank holding companies, have reduced their leverage; and the outstanding values of funding vehicles that embed significant leverage, such as certain securitized products, are much lower. In contrast, there has been some evidence of rising use of leverage by hedge funds over the past year and a half. Financial reform has reduced funding risks associated with banks and money market funds. Large banks subject to liquidity regulation rely less on unstable short-term wholesale funding and have thicker liquidity buffers. As a result of money market reforms, investors have migrated toward government-only funds, which pose low run risk, and away from prime institutional funds, which proved highly susceptible to runs during the crisis and required extraordinary government support (figure 5). In contrast, we are seeing elevated vulnerabilities in the nonfinancial business sector.3Business borrowing has risen more rapidly than GDP for much of the current expansion and now sits near its historical peak (figure 6). The run-up in corporate debt has brought the ratio of debt to assets close to its highest level in two decades on an overall basis, and this is also true for speculative-grade and unrated firms (figure 7). And whereas previously, mostly high-earning firms with relatively low leverage were taking on additional debt, analysis of detailed balance sheet information indicates that, over the past year, firms with high leverage, high interest expense ratios, and low earnings and cash holdings have been increasing their debt loads the most. Historically, high leverage has been linked to elevated financial distress and retrenchment by businesses in economic downturns. Regarding corporate bonds outstanding, recent years have witnessed little change in the relative shares of investment-grade bonds and high-yield bonds. Credit quality has deteriorated within the investment-grade segment, where the share of bonds rated at the lowest investment-grade level has reached near-record levels. As of mid-2018, around 35 percent of corporate bonds outstanding were at the lowest end of the investment-grade segment, which amounts to about $2-1/4 trillion. In comparison, the share of high-yield bonds outstanding that are rated "deep junk" has stayed flat at about one-third from 2015 to 2018, well below the financial crisis peak of 45 percent. In an economic downturn, widespread downgrades of these low-rated investment-grade bonds to speculative-grade ratings could induce some investors to sell them rapidly--for instance, because lower-rated bonds have higher regulatory capital requirements or because bond funds have limits on the share of non-investment-grade bonds they hold. This concern may be higher now than in the past, since total assets under management in bond mutual funds have more than doubled in the past decade to about $2.3 trillion this year. These funds now hold about one-tenth of the corporate bond market, and the redemption behavior of investors in these funds during a market correction is unclear. Bond sales could lead to large changes in bond prices and overall financial conditions if technological, market, or regulatory factors contribute to strains on market liquidity--a possibility that has been relatively untested over the course of the expansion. Further down the credit quality ladder, there has been sizable growth in leveraged lending, accompanied by a notable deterioration in underwriting standards. Net issuance of debt to risky borrowers, which had stopped growing in late 2016, rebounded over the past year. Leveraged loans outstanding rose about 12 percent over the past 12 months and now stand around $1 trillion overall.4 While leveraged loans have traditionally had important investor protections, loan covenants for new leveraged loans have weakened dramatically. Covenant-lite, or cov-lite, transactions now represent roughly 80 percent of the entire leveraged lending market--up from less than 30 percent a decade ago, when they were associated primarily with stronger borrowers. Deals increasingly involve features that increase opacity and risk, such as less subordinated debt; "EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) add backs," which could inflate the projected capacity of the borrowers to repay their loans; and "incremental facilities," which allow additional borrowing that is of equal seniority with the existing bank loan.5The share of newly issued large loans to corporations with high leverage (debt to EBITDA ratios above 6) now exceeds previous peak levels observed in 2007 and 2014 (figure 8). Previously, much of this deterioration in underwriting appeared to be concentrated among nonbank lenders, but this year has witnessed a deterioration in underwriting at the largest banks. The widening adoption of practices that make risk harder to measure suggests a heightened focus on industry risk-management practices is warranted.6 A substantial share of the leveraged loans are packaged in collateralized loan obligations (CLOs). Gross issuance of CLOs hit $71 billion in the first half of 2018. This pace represents an increase of about one-third compared with the same period in the previous year.7 Many large banks are engaged in the origination of leveraged loans with an intent to distribute, often to CLOs. The originate-to-distribute model exposes banks to pipeline risk--the risk that some originated loans may be difficult to distribute if market conditions deteriorate. Although banks have improved pipeline management over the past decade, risk-management practices may have weakened somewhat recently in the face of strong investor demand. The direct exposures of the banking system, in the form of loan portfolios and warehousing exposures, can be tracked. But there are also indirect exposures, including through bank investments in CLOs on the order of $90 billion, that bear vigilance. More broadly, bank lines to the nonbank financial sector have increased notably (figure 9). Loan funds have also become increasingly important in the leveraged loan market and are estimated to purchase about one-fifth of newly originated leveraged loans. If prices were to move sharply lower, a rush to redeem shares by open-ended mutual fund investors could lead to large sales of their relatively illiquid holdings, further exacerbating price declines and run incentives. To date, the default rate on leveraged loans has been at the low end of its historical range, and corporate credit conditions have been favorable, with low interest expenses and low expected default rates. However, if spreads rise sharply or economic conditions deteriorate significantly, we could see downgrades, refinancing challenges, rising delinquencies and defaults, and losses to investors. It is thus particularly notable that the run-up in business debt occurred against a backdrop of generally elevated valuations (figure 10). Even with the recent volatility in equity markets and the recent widening of corporate bond spreads, a range of asset prices remain high relative to historical benchmarks. In particular, yields on high-yield corporate bonds relative to Treasury securities remain somewhat narrow on a historical basis despite recent increases. Similarly, although they have moved up in recent months, spreads on leveraged loans remain in the low end of their range since the financial crisis, which is notable given the evidence of weakening protections. Finally, capitalization rates on commercial real estate properties, which measure annual income relative to prices for recently transacted properties, have been low relative to Treasury yields. The generally high appetite for risk that we saw over the past two years makes the equity, corporate debt, and other asset markets more vulnerable to swings in market sentiment. In addition to generating losses for investors, declines in valuations could make it more challenging for firms to obtain or extend financing--especially among risky, indebted firms--which in turn could be amplified by the high levels of risky corporate debt. Calibrating Policy over the CycleThe assessment of financial vulnerabilities that I have outlined naturally raises the following question for policymakers: What is the appropriate risk tolerance? It goes without saying we must take all appropriate steps to prevent another Great Financial Crisis from causing the greatest contraction in global economic activity since the Great Depression. But it is also worth remembering that financial imbalances played a key role in each of the past three U.S. downturns--the risky investments and maturity mismatches associated with the savings and loan crisis and junk bond collapse; the tech boom and bust; and, most dramatically, the subprime crisis. This suggests policy might seek to moderate financial vulnerabilities when they are likely to materially exacerbate an economic downturn, leading to deeper declines in output and higher levels of unemployment. Each of the past three U.S. recessions featured important financial imbalances, although they differed in important ways. Both economic theory and econometric evidence point to the risk that excesses in corporate debt markets could similarly amplify adverse shocks and contribute to job losses.8The economics are straightforward. Over-indebted businesses may face payment strains when earnings fall unexpectedly, and they may respond by pulling back on employment and investment. The slowdown in activity lowers investor demand for risky assets, thereby raising spreads and depressing valuations. In turn, business losses accumulate, and delinquencies and defaults rise, reducing the willingness or the ability of banks to lend. This dynamic feeds on itself, potentially amplifying moderate adverse shocks into more serious financial strains or a recession.9 Given the risks to the financial system and economy from this potential adverse feedback loop, a strong case can be made that the financial system's buffers should be fortified when the economy is strong. Reinforcing capital buffers during the strong part of the cycle means that banks will have a cushion to absorb losses and remain sound during a subsequent downturn. Thicker capital buffers help bolster the confidence of market participants when conditions deteriorate, helping prevent the downward spiral from a loss of confidence. And during the downturn, that extra buffer can be released to enable banks to continue lending and help mitigate its severity. History suggests that we should not expect the market to provide incentives for banks to build the necessary buffers when times are good; the essence of the cycle is that market sentiment become overconfident precisely when risk is actually highest. One of the roles for independent regulatory bodies such as the Federal Reserve is to serve as a counterweight. Moreover, as we saw in the last crisis, it is much costlier to rebuild capital in a downturn when earnings and risk appetite are low than to build buffers in an expansion when earnings are strong. At the Federal Reserve, the two important tools that can respond somewhat to rising vulnerabilities are the design of stress-test scenarios and the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The annual supervisory stress test examines the resilience of large bank holding companies to a severely adverse scenario, which includes salient risks that can be adjusted over time. In recent years, the scenarios have been designed to explore severe dislocations in corporate credit markets as a salient risk. Nonetheless, the stress tests have limitations as a countercyclical tool during buoyant periods. For instance, while the severity of the stresses can be varied from year to year to address emerging risks to some degree, it is difficult to introduce entirely new scenarios each year to target specific sectoral risks without introducing excessive complexity.10And while the stress tests and proposed stress capital buffer are designed to calibrate capital buffers for the riskiness of an institution's particular assets and exposures, the capital buffer does not vary systematically to counter the cyclicality that arises through elevated asset valuations and other channels.11The limited ability of the stress tests to increase loss-absorbing capacity during buoyant economic times is illustrated in the results from recent years, where scenarios have involved increasingly severe recessions and strains in corporate debt markets but generally lower declines in capital ratios. More broadly, capital ratios at the largest banks have been flat and, more recently, modestly lower. In contrast, the first goal of the CCyB is to directly build resilience at large bank holding companies when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses, which often follow periods of credit growth or rapid asset price appreciation. The second goal of the CCyB is to promote a more sustainable supply of credit over the economic cycle. The CCyB is expected to be reduced as credit growth slows in order to support credit supply at times when it might otherwise contract. As a rough rule of thumb, the criteria for implementing the CCyB described in the Board's framework of September 2016 are calibrated so that the CCyB will be above its minimum value of zero about one-third of the time--when financial vulnerabilities are assessed to be in the upper one-third of their historical distribution.12 There are several potential advantages to building additional resilience through the CCyB. First, countercyclical capital requirements are intended to lean against rising risks at a time when the degree of monetary tightening needed to achieve the same goal could be inconsistent with sustaining the expansion. And countercyclical capital requirements build resilience, unlike monetary policy. Second, the banks that are subject to the CCyB could achieve a modest buffer simply by safeguarding the capital they have built up or by reducing payouts moderately. Third, the CCyB is a simple, predictable, and slow-moving tool that applies equally across all large banks. It does not single out shortfalls in particular banks or result in hard-to-predict volatility in individual banks' stressed capital requirements. Finally and critically, the additional capital implied by the CCyB across the system can be released when conditions deteriorate to ensure the ability of large banks to lend into a downturn. A number of countries have raised their CCyB setting above zero, and we can learn from their experiences, which have generally been positive.13 ConclusionOur job now is to sustain the expansion by maintaining the economy around full employment and inflation near target. Recent history suggests that the business cycle and the financial cycle are increasingly intertwined. If history is any guide, as resource utilization continues to tighten, there is some risk that financial imbalances could grow. The U.S. financial system is much more resilient than before the crisis, owing importantly to strong financial reforms. Even so, the banking system's core capital and liquidity buffers have yet to be tested through a full cycle. At the same time, the appetite for risk among financial market participants rose notably over 2017 and much of 2018, and corporate borrowing has reached new heights amid rapid growth and deteriorating underwriting standards in riskier segments, such as leveraged lending. The mutual funds that have built up exposure to some of this risky debt have liquidity mismatches that could contribute to market dislocations in stressed conditions. This constellation of vulnerabilities could amplify adverse shocks that might materialize. At a time when cyclical pressures have been building and bank profitability has been strong, it might be prudent to ask large banking organizations to fortify their capital buffers, which could subsequently be released if conditions warrant. References Bank of England (2018).Financial Stability Report(PDF). London: BOE, November. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2018). "Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB)," webpage. Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler (1989). "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,"American Economic Review,vol. 79 (March), pp. 14-31. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013). "Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Policy Statement for Developing Scenarios for Future Capital Planning and Stress Testing Exercises," press release, November 7. -------- (2016). "Regulatory Capital Rules: The Federal Reserve Board's Framework for Implementing the U.S. Basel III Countercyclical Capital Buffer (PDF)," final policy statement, September 8. -------- (2018).Financial Stability Report(PDF). Washington: Board of Governors, November. Brainard, Lael (2014). "The Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda,"speech delivered at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, Washington, December 3. -------- (2018a). "An Update on the Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda," speech delivered at the Center for Global Economy and Business, Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, April 3. -------- (2018b). "Safeguarding Financial Resilience through the Cycle," speech delivered at the Global Finance Forum, Washington, April 19. López-Salido, David, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek (2017). "Credit-Market Sentiment and the Business Cycle,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 132 (August), pp. 1373‑1426. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, National Risk Committee (2018).Semiannual Risk Perspective(PDF). Washington: OCC, Fall. Vermilyea, Todd (2018). "Perspectives on Leveraged Lending," speech delivered at the Loan Syndications and Trading Association 23rd Annual Conference, New York, October 24,https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.iib.org/resource/resmgr/weekly_bulletin/10-24fedspeech_leveraged_len.pdf. 1. I am grateful to Michael Kiley and Namirembe Mukasa for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors (2018).Return to text 3. In addition to the discussion of vulnerabilities presented in the Board'sFinancial Stability Report,the increase in risks associated with nonfinancial corporate borrowing is highlighted in the fall 2018 reportSemiannual Risk Perspective, produced by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. See Office of the Comptroller (2018).Return to text 4. Estimates vary. The estimate of about $1 trillion in the Board'sFinancial Stability Reportexcludes lending to financial companies and generally excludes loan commitments by banks. The S&P Global Leveraged Loan Index is around $1.3 trillion. The estimate of $2.2 trillion in the Bank of England'sFinancial Stability Reportis for the global market, including bank loans.Return to text 5. An "add back" is an unusual, discretionary, or nonrecurring expense that is added back to earnings with the intent of normalizing EBITDA. Examples include legal expenses, insurance costs, or owner-related expenses.Return to text 6. For a recent discussion of developments informed by the Federal Reserve's supervisory work, particularly through its review of the Shared National Credit program, see Vermilyea (2018).Return to text 7. For a recent comparison of the subprime mortgage market and the global market for leveraged loans, see Bank of England (2018).Return to text 8. For example, López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2017) present empirical evidence linking corporate debt excesses to contractions in U.S. economic activity and review related research.Return to text 9. The broad contours of this dynamic are laid out theoretically in the literature on the financial accelerator. The classic reference is Bernanke and Gertler (1989).Return to text 10. For a discussion of the Federal Reserve's framework for designing scenarios, see Board of Governors (2013).Return to text 11. See Brainard (2014).Return to text 12. See Board of Governors (2016) and Brainard (2018a and 2018b).Return to text 13. Basel Committee (2018) reports the setting of the CCyB across countries.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. Financial stability is integral to achieving the Federal Reserve's objectives of full employment and price stability. We need only look back a decade to see the dramatic damage from financial vulnerabilities that increase unchecked: Millions of Americans lost their livelihoods and their homes, business losses and failures rose, and the government had to provide extraordinary support to the system. Since then, financial sector resilience has strengthened, and household balance sheets have been repaired over the course of a lengthy recovery. Today employment is strong, inflation is around target, and incomes are growing.1 If we learned anything from this experience, it is that we must be especially vigilant to safeguard the resilience of our financial system in good times when vulnerabilities may be building. That is why the Federal Reserve actively monitors the potential vulnerabilities to the financial system. Last week, for the first time, we released our assessment in theFinancial Stability Report.2Today I will offer a brief summary of the outlook, highlight areas where I see financial imbalances building, and touch on the implications for policy. Sustaining the ExpansionDomestic economic momentum has been strong, as evidenced by the labor market. With the November data, monthly payroll gains have averaged 170,000 over the past 3 months, well above the pace necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force. The share of the prime-age population (people ages 25 to 54) that is working is closing in on its pre-crisis level. By most measures, wages have accelerated over the past year and are now growing around 3 percent, the highest level since the crisis. These are welcome developments. While the most recent reading on core personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, inflation ticked down, indicators of underlying trend inflation remain encouraging overall, providing little signal of an outbreak of inflation to the upside, on the one hand, and reassurance that underlying trend inflation may be close to our target of 2 percent, on the other (figure 1). The economy has grown 3 percent over the past year, and there are good reasons to expect growth to remain solid next year, supported by the strong underlying momentum in domestic demand. Consumer spending looks to be robust going into the fourth quarter, and ongoing gains in income and employment provide positive fundamentals. In addition, business investment should be solid, even with recent declines in oil prices. Sizable fiscal stimulus has provided an important boost to demand this year and will likely contribute somewhat further next year, given the usual lags in outlays and in the effects of tax cuts on business and household spending. The most likely path for the economy is positive, although some tailwinds that have provided a boost are fading, and we may face some crosscurrents. The global growth that provided a strong tailwind going into this year has moderated. The earlier strong growth in Europe and Japan appears to be softening toward trend. China is shifting to an accommodative policy stance to contend with a challenging trade environment and lagged effects from its earlier tightening. Here at home, the impetus to growth from fiscal policy is likely to fade going into 2020. And after being exceptionally accommodative, financial conditions have tightened in recent months. Financial conditions are still supportive of growth by many measures (figure 2), but less so than last year. There are risks on both sides of the economy's likely path. In Europe, there are risks associated with deliberations over Italy's fiscal and debt trajectory and the United Kingdom's deliberations on the Brexit deal. Here at home, we hear from businesses that the uncertainty associated with trade policy and the implications for supply chains may weigh on business capital spending. Although it is reasonable to expect fiscal spending to be extended around current levels in real terms after the Bipartisan Budget Act expires, we cannot rule out that fiscal policy could become a headwind in 2020. The risks are two-sided. Business contacts report difficulties finding qualified workers and increased costs associated with inputs, tariffs, and transportation, along with somewhat greater ability to pass through those increases to consumer prices. Despite this, however, inflation remains muted overall. At 3.7 percent, the unemployment rate is at its lowest level in 49 years, and payrolls have been growing well above the pace that is consistent with labor market stabilization. Historically, the few periods when resource utilization has been similarly tight have seen elevated risks of either accelerating inflation or financial imbalances. Our goal now is to sustain the expansion by maintaining the economy around full employment and inflation around target. The gradual path of increases in the federal funds rate has served us well by giving us time to assess the effects of policy as we have proceeded. That approach remains appropriate in the near term, although the policy path increasingly will depend on how the outlook evolves. Assessing Vulnerabilities over the CycleThe last several times resource utilization approached levels similar to today, signs of overheating showed up in financial-sector imbalances rather than in accelerating inflation. In contrast to the past, the Federal Reserve now has a systematic forward-looking approach to identifying increases in financial vulnerabilities. This monitoring is the focus of regular Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee discussions. Last week, the Board released its firstFinancial Stability Reportto help inform the public and promote transparency and accountability as we carry out our financial stability responsibilities. While there has been substantial progress on reducing household debt burdens and increasing the resilience of the banking system, the Federal Reserve's assessment suggests that financial vulnerabilities associated with corporate debt are building against a backdrop of elevated risk appetite. Let me briefly review these developments in turn. In contrast to the years preceding the crisis, when household borrowing was growing at a pace far above that of gross domestic product (GDP), it has since come down and is now growing more slowly than the economy overall (figure 3). Moreover, while much of the increase before the crisis reflected borrowing that proved unsustainable, more recent borrowing has been concentrated among households with strong credit profiles. The regulated financial sector is also more resilient, owing to far-reaching reforms as well as favorable conditions. Large banks have increased both the size and quality of their capital buffers: The ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets at large banks has increased by half relative to the pre-crisis average. It is now close to levels seen at smaller banks, although the risk-weighted capital ratio at large banks has moved down somewhat over the past year (figure 4). In addition, insurers appear generally well capitalized; broker-dealers, including those not affiliated with large bank holding companies, have reduced their leverage; and the outstanding values of funding vehicles that embed significant leverage, such as certain securitized products, are much lower. In contrast, there has been some evidence of rising use of leverage by hedge funds over the past year and a half. Financial reform has reduced funding risks associated with banks and money market funds. Large banks subject to liquidity regulation rely less on unstable short-term wholesale funding and have thicker liquidity buffers. As a result of money market reforms, investors have migrated toward government-only funds, which pose low run risk, and away from prime institutional funds, which proved highly susceptible to runs during the crisis and required extraordinary government support (figure 5). In contrast, we are seeing elevated vulnerabilities in the nonfinancial business sector.3Business borrowing has risen more rapidly than GDP for much of the current expansion and now sits near its historical peak (figure 6). The run-up in corporate debt has brought the ratio of debt to assets close to its highest level in two decades on an overall basis, and this is also true for speculative-grade and unrated firms (figure 7). And whereas previously, mostly high-earning firms with relatively low leverage were taking on additional debt, analysis of detailed balance sheet information indicates that, over the past year, firms with high leverage, high interest expense ratios, and low earnings and cash holdings have been increasing their debt loads the most. Historically, high leverage has been linked to elevated financial distress and retrenchment by businesses in economic downturns. Regarding corporate bonds outstanding, recent years have witnessed little change in the relative shares of investment-grade bonds and high-yield bonds. Credit quality has deteriorated within the investment-grade segment, where the share of bonds rated at the lowest investment-grade level has reached near-record levels. As of mid-2018, around 35 percent of corporate bonds outstanding were at the lowest end of the investment-grade segment, which amounts to about $2-1/4 trillion. In comparison, the share of high-yield bonds outstanding that are rated "deep junk" has stayed flat at about one-third from 2015 to 2018, well below the financial crisis peak of 45 percent. In an economic downturn, widespread downgrades of these low-rated investment-grade bonds to speculative-grade ratings could induce some investors to sell them rapidly--for instance, because lower-rated bonds have higher regulatory capital requirements or because bond funds have limits on the share of non-investment-grade bonds they hold. This concern may be higher now than in the past, since total assets under management in bond mutual funds have more than doubled in the past decade to about $2.3 trillion this year. These funds now hold about one-tenth of the corporate bond market, and the redemption behavior of investors in these funds during a market correction is unclear. Bond sales could lead to large changes in bond prices and overall financial conditions if technological, market, or regulatory factors contribute to strains on market liquidity--a possibility that has been relatively untested over the course of the expansion. Further down the credit quality ladder, there has been sizable growth in leveraged lending, accompanied by a notable deterioration in underwriting standards. Net issuance of debt to risky borrowers, which had stopped growing in late 2016, rebounded over the past year. Leveraged loans outstanding rose about 12 percent over the past 12 months and now stand around $1 trillion overall.4 While leveraged loans have traditionally had important investor protections, loan covenants for new leveraged loans have weakened dramatically. Covenant-lite, or cov-lite, transactions now represent roughly 80 percent of the entire leveraged lending market--up from less than 30 percent a decade ago, when they were associated primarily with stronger borrowers. Deals increasingly involve features that increase opacity and risk, such as less subordinated debt; "EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) add backs," which could inflate the projected capacity of the borrowers to repay their loans; and "incremental facilities," which allow additional borrowing that is of equal seniority with the existing bank loan.5The share of newly issued large loans to corporations with high leverage (debt to EBITDA ratios above 6) now exceeds previous peak levels observed in 2007 and 2014 (figure 8). Previously, much of this deterioration in underwriting appeared to be concentrated among nonbank lenders, but this year has witnessed a deterioration in underwriting at the largest banks. The widening adoption of practices that make risk harder to measure suggests a heightened focus on industry risk-management practices is warranted.6 A substantial share of the leveraged loans are packaged in collateralized loan obligations (CLOs). Gross issuance of CLOs hit $71 billion in the first half of 2018. This pace represents an increase of about one-third compared with the same period in the previous year.7 Many large banks are engaged in the origination of leveraged loans with an intent to distribute, often to CLOs. The originate-to-distribute model exposes banks to pipeline risk--the risk that some originated loans may be difficult to distribute if market conditions deteriorate. Although banks have improved pipeline management over the past decade, risk-management practices may have weakened somewhat recently in the face of strong investor demand. The direct exposures of the banking system, in the form of loan portfolios and warehousing exposures, can be tracked. But there are also indirect exposures, including through bank investments in CLOs on the order of $90 billion, that bear vigilance. More broadly, bank lines to the nonbank financial sector have increased notably (figure 9). Loan funds have also become increasingly important in the leveraged loan market and are estimated to purchase about one-fifth of newly originated leveraged loans. If prices were to move sharply lower, a rush to redeem shares by open-ended mutual fund investors could lead to large sales of their relatively illiquid holdings, further exacerbating price declines and run incentives. To date, the default rate on leveraged loans has been at the low end of its historical range, and corporate credit conditions have been favorable, with low interest expenses and low expected default rates. However, if spreads rise sharply or economic conditions deteriorate significantly, we could see downgrades, refinancing challenges, rising delinquencies and defaults, and losses to investors. It is thus particularly notable that the run-up in business debt occurred against a backdrop of generally elevated valuations (figure 10). Even with the recent volatility in equity markets and the recent widening of corporate bond spreads, a range of asset prices remain high relative to historical benchmarks. In particular, yields on high-yield corporate bonds relative to Treasury securities remain somewhat narrow on a historical basis despite recent increases. Similarly, although they have moved up in recent months, spreads on leveraged loans remain in the low end of their range since the financial crisis, which is notable given the evidence of weakening protections. Finally, capitalization rates on commercial real estate properties, which measure annual income relative to prices for recently transacted properties, have been low relative to Treasury yields. The generally high appetite for risk that we saw over the past two years makes the equity, corporate debt, and other asset markets more vulnerable to swings in market sentiment. In addition to generating losses for investors, declines in valuations could make it more challenging for firms to obtain or extend financing--especially among risky, indebted firms--which in turn could be amplified by the high levels of risky corporate debt. Calibrating Policy over the CycleThe assessment of financial vulnerabilities that I have outlined naturally raises the following question for policymakers: What is the appropriate risk tolerance? It goes without saying we must take all appropriate steps to prevent another Great Financial Crisis from causing the greatest contraction in global economic activity since the Great Depression. But it is also worth remembering that financial imbalances played a key role in each of the past three U.S. downturns--the risky investments and maturity mismatches associated with the savings and loan crisis and junk bond collapse; the tech boom and bust; and, most dramatically, the subprime crisis. This suggests policy might seek to moderate financial vulnerabilities when they are likely to materially exacerbate an economic downturn, leading to deeper declines in output and higher levels of unemployment. Each of the past three U.S. recessions featured important financial imbalances, although they differed in important ways. Both economic theory and econometric evidence point to the risk that excesses in corporate debt markets could similarly amplify adverse shocks and contribute to job losses.8The economics are straightforward. Over-indebted businesses may face payment strains when earnings fall unexpectedly, and they may respond by pulling back on employment and investment. The slowdown in activity lowers investor demand for risky assets, thereby raising spreads and depressing valuations. In turn, business losses accumulate, and delinquencies and defaults rise, reducing the willingness or the ability of banks to lend. This dynamic feeds on itself, potentially amplifying moderate adverse shocks into more serious financial strains or a recession.9 Given the risks to the financial system and economy from this potential adverse feedback loop, a strong case can be made that the financial system's buffers should be fortified when the economy is strong. Reinforcing capital buffers during the strong part of the cycle means that banks will have a cushion to absorb losses and remain sound during a subsequent downturn. Thicker capital buffers help bolster the confidence of market participants when conditions deteriorate, helping prevent the downward spiral from a loss of confidence. And during the downturn, that extra buffer can be released to enable banks to continue lending and help mitigate its severity. History suggests that we should not expect the market to provide incentives for banks to build the necessary buffers when times are good; the essence of the cycle is that market sentiment become overconfident precisely when risk is actually highest. One of the roles for independent regulatory bodies such as the Federal Reserve is to serve as a counterweight. Moreover, as we saw in the last crisis, it is much costlier to rebuild capital in a downturn when earnings and risk appetite are low than to build buffers in an expansion when earnings are strong. At the Federal Reserve, the two important tools that can respond somewhat to rising vulnerabilities are the design of stress-test scenarios and the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The annual supervisory stress test examines the resilience of large bank holding companies to a severely adverse scenario, which includes salient risks that can be adjusted over time. In recent years, the scenarios have been designed to explore severe dislocations in corporate credit markets as a salient risk. Nonetheless, the stress tests have limitations as a countercyclical tool during buoyant periods. For instance, while the severity of the stresses can be varied from year to year to address emerging risks to some degree, it is difficult to introduce entirely new scenarios each year to target specific sectoral risks without introducing excessive complexity.10And while the stress tests and proposed stress capital buffer are designed to calibrate capital buffers for the riskiness of an institution's particular assets and exposures, the capital buffer does not vary systematically to counter the cyclicality that arises through elevated asset valuations and other channels.11The limited ability of the stress tests to increase loss-absorbing capacity during buoyant economic times is illustrated in the results from recent years, where scenarios have involved increasingly severe recessions and strains in corporate debt markets but generally lower declines in capital ratios. More broadly, capital ratios at the largest banks have been flat and, more recently, modestly lower. In contrast, the first goal of the CCyB is to directly build resilience at large bank holding companies when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses, which often follow periods of credit growth or rapid asset price appreciation. The second goal of the CCyB is to promote a more sustainable supply of credit over the economic cycle. The CCyB is expected to be reduced as credit growth slows in order to support credit supply at times when it might otherwise contract. As a rough rule of thumb, the criteria for implementing the CCyB described in the Board's framework of September 2016 are calibrated so that the CCyB will be above its minimum value of zero about one-third of the time--when financial vulnerabilities are assessed to be in the upper one-third of their historical distribution.12 There are several potential advantages to building additional resilience through the CCyB. First, countercyclical capital requirements are intended to lean against rising risks at a time when the degree of monetary tightening needed to achieve the same goal could be inconsistent with sustaining the expansion. And countercyclical capital requirements build resilience, unlike monetary policy. Second, the banks that are subject to the CCyB could achieve a modest buffer simply by safeguarding the capital they have built up or by reducing payouts moderately. Third, the CCyB is a simple, predictable, and slow-moving tool that applies equally across all large banks. It does not single out shortfalls in particular banks or result in hard-to-predict volatility in individual banks' stressed capital requirements. Finally and critically, the additional capital implied by the CCyB across the system can be released when conditions deteriorate to ensure the ability of large banks to lend into a downturn. A number of countries have raised their CCyB setting above zero, and we can learn from their experiences, which have generally been positive.13 ConclusionOur job now is to sustain the expansion by maintaining the economy around full employment and inflation near target. Recent history suggests that the business cycle and the financial cycle are increasingly intertwined. If history is any guide, as resource utilization continues to tighten, there is some risk that financial imbalances could grow. The U.S. financial system is much more resilient than before the crisis, owing importantly to strong financial reforms. Even so, the banking system's core capital and liquidity buffers have yet to be tested through a full cycle. At the same time, the appetite for risk among financial market participants rose notably over 2017 and much of 2018, and corporate borrowing has reached new heights amid rapid growth and deteriorating underwriting standards in riskier segments, such as leveraged lending. The mutual funds that have built up exposure to some of this risky debt have liquidity mismatches that could contribute to market dislocations in stressed conditions. This constellation of vulnerabilities could amplify adverse shocks that might materialize. At a time when cyclical pressures have been building and bank profitability has been strong, it might be prudent to ask large banking organizations to fortify their capital buffers, which could subsequently be released if conditions warrant. References Bank of England (2018).Financial Stability Report(PDF). London: BOE, November. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2018). "Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB)," webpage. Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler (1989). "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,"American Economic Review,vol. 79 (March), pp. 14-31. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013). "Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Policy Statement for Developing Scenarios for Future Capital Planning and Stress Testing Exercises," press release, November 7. -------- (2016). "Regulatory Capital Rules: The Federal Reserve Board's Framework for Implementing the U.S. Basel III Countercyclical Capital Buffer (PDF)," final policy statement, September 8. -------- (2018).Financial Stability Report(PDF). Washington: Board of Governors, November. Brainard, Lael (2014). "The Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda,"speech delivered at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, Washington, December 3. -------- (2018a). "An Update on the Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda," speech delivered at the Center for Global Economy and Business, Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, April 3. -------- (2018b). "Safeguarding Financial Resilience through the Cycle," speech delivered at the Global Finance Forum, Washington, April 19. López-Salido, David, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek (2017). "Credit-Market Sentiment and the Business Cycle,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 132 (August), pp. 1373‑1426. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, National Risk Committee (2018).Semiannual Risk Perspective(PDF). Washington: OCC, Fall. Vermilyea, Todd (2018). "Perspectives on Leveraged Lending," speech delivered at the Loan Syndications and Trading Association 23rd Annual Conference, New York, October 24,https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.iib.org/resource/resmgr/weekly_bulletin/10-24fedspeech_leveraged_len.pdf. 1. I am grateful to Michael Kiley and Namirembe Mukasa for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors (2018).Return to text 3. In addition to the discussion of vulnerabilities presented in the Board'sFinancial Stability Report,the increase in risks associated with nonfinancial corporate borrowing is highlighted in the fall 2018 reportSemiannual Risk Perspective, produced by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. See Office of the Comptroller (2018).Return to text 4. Estimates vary. The estimate of about $1 trillion in the Board'sFinancial Stability Reportexcludes lending to financial companies and generally excludes loan commitments by banks. The S&P Global Leveraged Loan Index is around $1.3 trillion. The estimate of $2.2 trillion in the Bank of England'sFinancial Stability Reportis for the global market, including bank loans.Return to text 5. An "add back" is an unusual, discretionary, or nonrecurring expense that is added back to earnings with the intent of normalizing EBITDA. Examples include legal expenses, insurance costs, or owner-related expenses.Return to text 6. For a recent discussion of developments informed by the Federal Reserve's supervisory work, particularly through its review of the Shared National Credit program, see Vermilyea (2018).Return to text 7. For a recent comparison of the subprime mortgage market and the global market for leveraged loans, see Bank of England (2018).Return to text 8. For example, López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2017) present empirical evidence linking corporate debt excesses to contractions in U.S. economic activity and review related research.Return to text 9. The broad contours of this dynamic are laid out theoretically in the literature on the financial accelerator. The classic reference is Bernanke and Gertler (1989).Return to text 10. For a discussion of the Federal Reserve's framework for designing scenarios, see Board of Governors (2013).Return to text 11. See Brainard (2014).Return to text 12. See Board of Governors (2016) and Brainard (2018a and 2018b).Return to text 13. Basel Committee (2018) reports the setting of the CCyB across countries.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. Financial stability is integral to achieving the Federal Reserve's objectives of full employment and price stability. We need only look back a decade to see the dramatic damage from financial vulnerabilities that increase unchecked: Millions of Americans lost their livelihoods and their homes, business losses and failures rose, and the government had to provide extraordinary support to the system. Since then, financial sector resilience has strengthened, and household balance sheets have been repaired over the course of a lengthy recovery. Today employment is strong, inflation is around target, and incomes are growing.1 If we learned anything from this experience, it is that we must be especially vigilant to safeguard the resilience of our financial system in good times when vulnerabilities may be building. That is why the Federal Reserve actively monitors the potential vulnerabilities to the financial system. Last week, for the first time, we released our assessment in theFinancial Stability Report.2Today I will offer a brief summary of the outlook, highlight areas where I see financial imbalances building, and touch on the implications for policy. Sustaining the ExpansionDomestic economic momentum has been strong, as evidenced by the labor market. With the November data, monthly payroll gains have averaged 170,000 over the past 3 months, well above the pace necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force. The share of the prime-age population (people ages 25 to 54) that is working is closing in on its pre-crisis level. By most measures, wages have accelerated over the past year and are now growing around 3 percent, the highest level since the crisis. These are welcome developments. While the most recent reading on core personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, inflation ticked down, indicators of underlying trend inflation remain encouraging overall, providing little signal of an outbreak of inflation to the upside, on the one hand, and reassurance that underlying trend inflation may be close to our target of 2 percent, on the other (figure 1). The economy has grown 3 percent over the past year, and there are good reasons to expect growth to remain solid next year, supported by the strong underlying momentum in domestic demand. Consumer spending looks to be robust going into the fourth quarter, and ongoing gains in income and employment provide positive fundamentals. In addition, business investment should be solid, even with recent declines in oil prices. Sizable fiscal stimulus has provided an important boost to demand this year and will likely contribute somewhat further next year, given the usual lags in outlays and in the effects of tax cuts on business and household spending. The most likely path for the economy is positive, although some tailwinds that have provided a boost are fading, and we may face some crosscurrents. The global growth that provided a strong tailwind going into this year has moderated. The earlier strong growth in Europe and Japan appears to be softening toward trend. China is shifting to an accommodative policy stance to contend with a challenging trade environment and lagged effects from its earlier tightening. Here at home, the impetus to growth from fiscal policy is likely to fade going into 2020. And after being exceptionally accommodative, financial conditions have tightened in recent months. Financial conditions are still supportive of growth by many measures (figure 2), but less so than last year. There are risks on both sides of the economy's likely path. In Europe, there are risks associated with deliberations over Italy's fiscal and debt trajectory and the United Kingdom's deliberations on the Brexit deal. Here at home, we hear from businesses that the uncertainty associated with trade policy and the implications for supply chains may weigh on business capital spending. Although it is reasonable to expect fiscal spending to be extended around current levels in real terms after the Bipartisan Budget Act expires, we cannot rule out that fiscal policy could become a headwind in 2020. The risks are two-sided. Business contacts report difficulties finding qualified workers and increased costs associated with inputs, tariffs, and transportation, along with somewhat greater ability to pass through those increases to consumer prices. Despite this, however, inflation remains muted overall. At 3.7 percent, the unemployment rate is at its lowest level in 49 years, and payrolls have been growing well above the pace that is consistent with labor market stabilization. Historically, the few periods when resource utilization has been similarly tight have seen elevated risks of either accelerating inflation or financial imbalances. Our goal now is to sustain the expansion by maintaining the economy around full employment and inflation around target. The gradual path of increases in the federal funds rate has served us well by giving us time to assess the effects of policy as we have proceeded. That approach remains appropriate in the near term, although the policy path increasingly will depend on how the outlook evolves. Assessing Vulnerabilities over the CycleThe last several times resource utilization approached levels similar to today, signs of overheating showed up in financial-sector imbalances rather than in accelerating inflation. In contrast to the past, the Federal Reserve now has a systematic forward-looking approach to identifying increases in financial vulnerabilities. This monitoring is the focus of regular Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee discussions. Last week, the Board released its firstFinancial Stability Reportto help inform the public and promote transparency and accountability as we carry out our financial stability responsibilities. While there has been substantial progress on reducing household debt burdens and increasing the resilience of the banking system, the Federal Reserve's assessment suggests that financial vulnerabilities associated with corporate debt are building against a backdrop of elevated risk appetite. Let me briefly review these developments in turn. In contrast to the years preceding the crisis, when household borrowing was growing at a pace far above that of gross domestic product (GDP), it has since come down and is now growing more slowly than the economy overall (figure 3). Moreover, while much of the increase before the crisis reflected borrowing that proved unsustainable, more recent borrowing has been concentrated among households with strong credit profiles. The regulated financial sector is also more resilient, owing to far-reaching reforms as well as favorable conditions. Large banks have increased both the size and quality of their capital buffers: The ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets at large banks has increased by half relative to the pre-crisis average. It is now close to levels seen at smaller banks, although the risk-weighted capital ratio at large banks has moved down somewhat over the past year (figure 4). In addition, insurers appear generally well capitalized; broker-dealers, including those not affiliated with large bank holding companies, have reduced their leverage; and the outstanding values of funding vehicles that embed significant leverage, such as certain securitized products, are much lower. In contrast, there has been some evidence of rising use of leverage by hedge funds over the past year and a half. Financial reform has reduced funding risks associated with banks and money market funds. Large banks subject to liquidity regulation rely less on unstable short-term wholesale funding and have thicker liquidity buffers. As a result of money market reforms, investors have migrated toward government-only funds, which pose low run risk, and away from prime institutional funds, which proved highly susceptible to runs during the crisis and required extraordinary government support (figure 5). In contrast, we are seeing elevated vulnerabilities in the nonfinancial business sector.3Business borrowing has risen more rapidly than GDP for much of the current expansion and now sits near its historical peak (figure 6). The run-up in corporate debt has brought the ratio of debt to assets close to its highest level in two decades on an overall basis, and this is also true for speculative-grade and unrated firms (figure 7). And whereas previously, mostly high-earning firms with relatively low leverage were taking on additional debt, analysis of detailed balance sheet information indicates that, over the past year, firms with high leverage, high interest expense ratios, and low earnings and cash holdings have been increasing their debt loads the most. Historically, high leverage has been linked to elevated financial distress and retrenchment by businesses in economic downturns. Regarding corporate bonds outstanding, recent years have witnessed little change in the relative shares of investment-grade bonds and high-yield bonds. Credit quality has deteriorated within the investment-grade segment, where the share of bonds rated at the lowest investment-grade level has reached near-record levels. As of mid-2018, around 35 percent of corporate bonds outstanding were at the lowest end of the investment-grade segment, which amounts to about $2-1/4 trillion. In comparison, the share of high-yield bonds outstanding that are rated "deep junk" has stayed flat at about one-third from 2015 to 2018, well below the financial crisis peak of 45 percent. In an economic downturn, widespread downgrades of these low-rated investment-grade bonds to speculative-grade ratings could induce some investors to sell them rapidly--for instance, because lower-rated bonds have higher regulatory capital requirements or because bond funds have limits on the share of non-investment-grade bonds they hold. This concern may be higher now than in the past, since total assets under management in bond mutual funds have more than doubled in the past decade to about $2.3 trillion this year. These funds now hold about one-tenth of the corporate bond market, and the redemption behavior of investors in these funds during a market correction is unclear. Bond sales could lead to large changes in bond prices and overall financial conditions if technological, market, or regulatory factors contribute to strains on market liquidity--a possibility that has been relatively untested over the course of the expansion. Further down the credit quality ladder, there has been sizable growth in leveraged lending, accompanied by a notable deterioration in underwriting standards. Net issuance of debt to risky borrowers, which had stopped growing in late 2016, rebounded over the past year. Leveraged loans outstanding rose about 12 percent over the past 12 months and now stand around $1 trillion overall.4 While leveraged loans have traditionally had important investor protections, loan covenants for new leveraged loans have weakened dramatically. Covenant-lite, or cov-lite, transactions now represent roughly 80 percent of the entire leveraged lending market--up from less than 30 percent a decade ago, when they were associated primarily with stronger borrowers. Deals increasingly involve features that increase opacity and risk, such as less subordinated debt; "EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) add backs," which could inflate the projected capacity of the borrowers to repay their loans; and "incremental facilities," which allow additional borrowing that is of equal seniority with the existing bank loan.5The share of newly issued large loans to corporations with high leverage (debt to EBITDA ratios above 6) now exceeds previous peak levels observed in 2007 and 2014 (figure 8). Previously, much of this deterioration in underwriting appeared to be concentrated among nonbank lenders, but this year has witnessed a deterioration in underwriting at the largest banks. The widening adoption of practices that make risk harder to measure suggests a heightened focus on industry risk-management practices is warranted.6 A substantial share of the leveraged loans are packaged in collateralized loan obligations (CLOs). Gross issuance of CLOs hit $71 billion in the first half of 2018. This pace represents an increase of about one-third compared with the same period in the previous year.7 Many large banks are engaged in the origination of leveraged loans with an intent to distribute, often to CLOs. The originate-to-distribute model exposes banks to pipeline risk--the risk that some originated loans may be difficult to distribute if market conditions deteriorate. Although banks have improved pipeline management over the past decade, risk-management practices may have weakened somewhat recently in the face of strong investor demand. The direct exposures of the banking system, in the form of loan portfolios and warehousing exposures, can be tracked. But there are also indirect exposures, including through bank investments in CLOs on the order of $90 billion, that bear vigilance. More broadly, bank lines to the nonbank financial sector have increased notably (figure 9). Loan funds have also become increasingly important in the leveraged loan market and are estimated to purchase about one-fifth of newly originated leveraged loans. If prices were to move sharply lower, a rush to redeem shares by open-ended mutual fund investors could lead to large sales of their relatively illiquid holdings, further exacerbating price declines and run incentives. To date, the default rate on leveraged loans has been at the low end of its historical range, and corporate credit conditions have been favorable, with low interest expenses and low expected default rates. However, if spreads rise sharply or economic conditions deteriorate significantly, we could see downgrades, refinancing challenges, rising delinquencies and defaults, and losses to investors. It is thus particularly notable that the run-up in business debt occurred against a backdrop of generally elevated valuations (figure 10). Even with the recent volatility in equity markets and the recent widening of corporate bond spreads, a range of asset prices remain high relative to historical benchmarks. In particular, yields on high-yield corporate bonds relative to Treasury securities remain somewhat narrow on a historical basis despite recent increases. Similarly, although they have moved up in recent months, spreads on leveraged loans remain in the low end of their range since the financial crisis, which is notable given the evidence of weakening protections. Finally, capitalization rates on commercial real estate properties, which measure annual income relative to prices for recently transacted properties, have been low relative to Treasury yields. The generally high appetite for risk that we saw over the past two years makes the equity, corporate debt, and other asset markets more vulnerable to swings in market sentiment. In addition to generating losses for investors, declines in valuations could make it more challenging for firms to obtain or extend financing--especially among risky, indebted firms--which in turn could be amplified by the high levels of risky corporate debt. Calibrating Policy over the CycleThe assessment of financial vulnerabilities that I have outlined naturally raises the following question for policymakers: What is the appropriate risk tolerance? It goes without saying we must take all appropriate steps to prevent another Great Financial Crisis from causing the greatest contraction in global economic activity since the Great Depression. But it is also worth remembering that financial imbalances played a key role in each of the past three U.S. downturns--the risky investments and maturity mismatches associated with the savings and loan crisis and junk bond collapse; the tech boom and bust; and, most dramatically, the subprime crisis. This suggests policy might seek to moderate financial vulnerabilities when they are likely to materially exacerbate an economic downturn, leading to deeper declines in output and higher levels of unemployment. Each of the past three U.S. recessions featured important financial imbalances, although they differed in important ways. Both economic theory and econometric evidence point to the risk that excesses in corporate debt markets could similarly amplify adverse shocks and contribute to job losses.8The economics are straightforward. Over-indebted businesses may face payment strains when earnings fall unexpectedly, and they may respond by pulling back on employment and investment. The slowdown in activity lowers investor demand for risky assets, thereby raising spreads and depressing valuations. In turn, business losses accumulate, and delinquencies and defaults rise, reducing the willingness or the ability of banks to lend. This dynamic feeds on itself, potentially amplifying moderate adverse shocks into more serious financial strains or a recession.9 Given the risks to the financial system and economy from this potential adverse feedback loop, a strong case can be made that the financial system's buffers should be fortified when the economy is strong. Reinforcing capital buffers during the strong part of the cycle means that banks will have a cushion to absorb losses and remain sound during a subsequent downturn. Thicker capital buffers help bolster the confidence of market participants when conditions deteriorate, helping prevent the downward spiral from a loss of confidence. And during the downturn, that extra buffer can be released to enable banks to continue lending and help mitigate its severity. History suggests that we should not expect the market to provide incentives for banks to build the necessary buffers when times are good; the essence of the cycle is that market sentiment become overconfident precisely when risk is actually highest. One of the roles for independent regulatory bodies such as the Federal Reserve is to serve as a counterweight. Moreover, as we saw in the last crisis, it is much costlier to rebuild capital in a downturn when earnings and risk appetite are low than to build buffers in an expansion when earnings are strong. At the Federal Reserve, the two important tools that can respond somewhat to rising vulnerabilities are the design of stress-test scenarios and the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The annual supervisory stress test examines the resilience of large bank holding companies to a severely adverse scenario, which includes salient risks that can be adjusted over time. In recent years, the scenarios have been designed to explore severe dislocations in corporate credit markets as a salient risk. Nonetheless, the stress tests have limitations as a countercyclical tool during buoyant periods. For instance, while the severity of the stresses can be varied from year to year to address emerging risks to some degree, it is difficult to introduce entirely new scenarios each year to target specific sectoral risks without introducing excessive complexity.10And while the stress tests and proposed stress capital buffer are designed to calibrate capital buffers for the riskiness of an institution's particular assets and exposures, the capital buffer does not vary systematically to counter the cyclicality that arises through elevated asset valuations and other channels.11The limited ability of the stress tests to increase loss-absorbing capacity during buoyant economic times is illustrated in the results from recent years, where scenarios have involved increasingly severe recessions and strains in corporate debt markets but generally lower declines in capital ratios. More broadly, capital ratios at the largest banks have been flat and, more recently, modestly lower. In contrast, the first goal of the CCyB is to directly build resilience at large bank holding companies when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses, which often follow periods of credit growth or rapid asset price appreciation. The second goal of the CCyB is to promote a more sustainable supply of credit over the economic cycle. The CCyB is expected to be reduced as credit growth slows in order to support credit supply at times when it might otherwise contract. As a rough rule of thumb, the criteria for implementing the CCyB described in the Board's framework of September 2016 are calibrated so that the CCyB will be above its minimum value of zero about one-third of the time--when financial vulnerabilities are assessed to be in the upper one-third of their historical distribution.12 There are several potential advantages to building additional resilience through the CCyB. First, countercyclical capital requirements are intended to lean against rising risks at a time when the degree of monetary tightening needed to achieve the same goal could be inconsistent with sustaining the expansion. And countercyclical capital requirements build resilience, unlike monetary policy. Second, the banks that are subject to the CCyB could achieve a modest buffer simply by safeguarding the capital they have built up or by reducing payouts moderately. Third, the CCyB is a simple, predictable, and slow-moving tool that applies equally across all large banks. It does not single out shortfalls in particular banks or result in hard-to-predict volatility in individual banks' stressed capital requirements. Finally and critically, the additional capital implied by the CCyB across the system can be released when conditions deteriorate to ensure the ability of large banks to lend into a downturn. A number of countries have raised their CCyB setting above zero, and we can learn from their experiences, which have generally been positive.13 ConclusionOur job now is to sustain the expansion by maintaining the economy around full employment and inflation near target. Recent history suggests that the business cycle and the financial cycle are increasingly intertwined. If history is any guide, as resource utilization continues to tighten, there is some risk that financial imbalances could grow. The U.S. financial system is much more resilient than before the crisis, owing importantly to strong financial reforms. Even so, the banking system's core capital and liquidity buffers have yet to be tested through a full cycle. At the same time, the appetite for risk among financial market participants rose notably over 2017 and much of 2018, and corporate borrowing has reached new heights amid rapid growth and deteriorating underwriting standards in riskier segments, such as leveraged lending. The mutual funds that have built up exposure to some of this risky debt have liquidity mismatches that could contribute to market dislocations in stressed conditions. This constellation of vulnerabilities could amplify adverse shocks that might materialize. At a time when cyclical pressures have been building and bank profitability has been strong, it might be prudent to ask large banking organizations to fortify their capital buffers, which could subsequently be released if conditions warrant. References Bank of England (2018).Financial Stability Report(PDF). London: BOE, November. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2018). "Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB)," webpage. Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler (1989). "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,"American Economic Review,vol. 79 (March), pp. 14-31. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013). "Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Policy Statement for Developing Scenarios for Future Capital Planning and Stress Testing Exercises," press release, November 7. -------- (2016). "Regulatory Capital Rules: The Federal Reserve Board's Framework for Implementing the U.S. Basel III Countercyclical Capital Buffer (PDF)," final policy statement, September 8. -------- (2018).Financial Stability Report(PDF). Washington: Board of Governors, November. Brainard, Lael (2014). "The Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda,"speech delivered at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, Washington, December 3. -------- (2018a). "An Update on the Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda," speech delivered at the Center for Global Economy and Business, Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, April 3. -------- (2018b). "Safeguarding Financial Resilience through the Cycle," speech delivered at the Global Finance Forum, Washington, April 19. López-Salido, David, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek (2017). "Credit-Market Sentiment and the Business Cycle,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 132 (August), pp. 1373‑1426. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, National Risk Committee (2018).Semiannual Risk Perspective(PDF). Washington: OCC, Fall. Vermilyea, Todd (2018). "Perspectives on Leveraged Lending," speech delivered at the Loan Syndications and Trading Association 23rd Annual Conference, New York, October 24,https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.iib.org/resource/resmgr/weekly_bulletin/10-24fedspeech_leveraged_len.pdf. 1. I am grateful to Michael Kiley and Namirembe Mukasa for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors (2018).Return to text 3. In addition to the discussion of vulnerabilities presented in the Board'sFinancial Stability Report,the increase in risks associated with nonfinancial corporate borrowing is highlighted in the fall 2018 reportSemiannual Risk Perspective, produced by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. See Office of the Comptroller (2018).Return to text 4. Estimates vary. The estimate of about $1 trillion in the Board'sFinancial Stability Reportexcludes lending to financial companies and generally excludes loan commitments by banks. The S&P Global Leveraged Loan Index is around $1.3 trillion. The estimate of $2.2 trillion in the Bank of England'sFinancial Stability Reportis for the global market, including bank loans.Return to text 5. An "add back" is an unusual, discretionary, or nonrecurring expense that is added back to earnings with the intent of normalizing EBITDA. Examples include legal expenses, insurance costs, or owner-related expenses.Return to text 6. For a recent discussion of developments informed by the Federal Reserve's supervisory work, particularly through its review of the Shared National Credit program, see Vermilyea (2018).Return to text 7. For a recent comparison of the subprime mortgage market and the global market for leveraged loans, see Bank of England (2018).Return to text 8. For example, López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2017) present empirical evidence linking corporate debt excesses to contractions in U.S. economic activity and review related research.Return to text 9. The broad contours of this dynamic are laid out theoretically in the literature on the financial accelerator. The classic reference is Bernanke and Gertler (1989).Return to text 10. For a discussion of the Federal Reserve's framework for designing scenarios, see Board of Governors (2013).Return to text 11. See Brainard (2014).Return to text 12. See Board of Governors (2016) and Brainard (2018a and 2018b).Return to text 13. Basel Committee (2018) reports the setting of the CCyB across countries.Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California It's a pleasure to be here at Stanford, an honor to be invited to speak by SIEPR and the Bill Lane Center--two institutions for which I have long had fondness and respect--and a great luxury to have the chance to talk for an hour with a group of people who share my love for a part of the world we call the West. Most of my day job enmeshes me, of necessity, in either broad systemic questions of global financial stability or the impossibly arcane minutiae of our convoluted and labyrinthine financial regulatory system. Both of those are perfectly worthy occupations but inescapably require a relentlessly global outlook. Yet my first intellectual passion as a very young man was for the history and life of a specific part of the world--the Western United States, as place and idea. Your own presence here in the audience suggests that many of you have been moved at some point in your life, as I have been, by the words of Wallace Stegner: So, that is why I say it is a pleasure and an honor but most especially a luxury for me to speak to an audience that shares my concern for and love of the West on the topic of how the preoccupations of my day job--banking and finance--affect this particular part of the world. We all know that throughout the history of the West, banking and finance have played an important role as vital infrastructure for the economy. That remains true today, although it is often overlooked in the traditional litany of issues critical to the West. A strong banking industry is necessary for households and businesses to engage in the spending, saving, and investment that constitute economic activity, and one of the purposes of financial regulation is to ensure that banks continue to be able to serve this purpose. So it is my plan today to talk about the economy of the West and link the recent and future performance of the western economy to the central and supportive role banks play as vital infrastructure in their communities. Defining the WestLet's start by defining our terms. What do we mean by the West? Before this audience, I approach this question with respect and a little caution, because I know that in a broad sense, it is what the Center for the American West has been addressing since its founding. That aside, it makes sense to use a definition, as the center often does, that includes parts of states in the middle of the country whose economies, heavily dependent on natural resources, ranching, and farming, more closely resemble Montana and New Mexico than they do states on the Eastern seaboard. Nevertheless, for the purposes of these remarks, I am going to use a less expansive definition comprising the 13 westernmost states. I do so partly because this is a common definition of the West, and because it is the one used by the U.S. Census Bureau in dividing the country into four regions and this has helped me gather data for this speech more readily. (Figure 1) The first thing to mention that distinguishes the West from the rest of the country is apparent on this map--land area. The West is large and would appear even larger of course, if it weren't necessary to shrink the vastness of Alaska to fit on one page. Even using my more modest definition, the West still represents half of the land area of the United States. This is important in this context because of one theme I will be exploring today, which is the economy of the rural West and the banking services available there. As this map should make plain, when we talk about rural America, to a significant extent we are talking about the rural West. Another way to put it is that while the West is half of the United States geographically, it is only a quarter of its population.2Eight of the 13 states in our definition of the West are among the dozen in the nation with the lowest population density.3Even after subtracting the large share of unpopulated government-owned land in the West, the overwhelming majority of the West is rural. Yet it is also true that, as most of you know, the West is the most urban region of the country. Five of the 15 largest metro areas in the United States are located in the West, and 90 percent of the entire region's population lives in cities, compared to 81 percent of the country as a whole.4,5Nevada and Utah are among the least densely populated states, but 90 percent or more of their residents live in cities. Like the rest of the country, the West is urbanizing. I will return to the differences between urban and rural areas, but first, let's look at the economy of the West. The Economy of the West: From Boom to BoomThe West accounts for 25 percent of U.S. gross domestic product, almost exactly the share of the U.S. population in the West. This isn't entirely a coincidence, because population relates to labor supply, which is one determinant of economic output. I mention this because it is also true that the change in population over time has a bearing on the economic health of communities and regions, and is part of the story for economic growth in the western United States. In recent years, that story has been a very positive one. The U.S. economy is strong, and the western economy is especially strong. While we don't have state or regional numbers for this year, from 2015 through 2017, GDP, after adjusting for inflation, grew two to nearly three times as fast in the West as in the rest of the United States. Since the Great Recession ended in 2010, real GDP has grown twice as fast in the West as in the Northeast, about 50 percent faster than in the Midwest, and a third faster than in the South.6 But there is another distinction to the western economy, one that many in this audience know well, that brings these high-flying results down to earth. While the good times are typically very good in the West, the bad times are usually pretty bad, and that was certainly true during the Great Recession. From 2008 through 2010, the western economy contracted four times as much as the average for all of the United States. The same is true for per capita personal income, which contracted more sharply in the West than elsewhere, as job losses in the western region during the recession were worse than elsewhere. Taking a longer perspective, however, even with the booms and the busts that have characterized the West for upwards of 200 years, the West is still the fastest growing region of the United States. Since 2000, real GDP has grown twice as fast in the West as in the Northeast and Midwest, and about 30 percent faster than in the South. Since 1988, the numbers are roughly the same. Per capita personal income grew faster in the West during good years, outweighing the sharper losses during the recession and since 2000 has grown about 20 percent faster in the West than in the rest of the country. This picture of the West leading the nation in economic growth is also reflected in population, a key factor in that growth. From 2010 to 2017, the population of the West increased 7.4 percent, compared to 5.3 percent for the nation.7One might guess that this strong growth is primarily in cities, and in fact reflects the drain of population from smaller towns that is reported to be happening all over the United States. But in fact, population gains in the West are quite well balanced between cities and towns, and smaller towns are doing better in the West than elsewhere in holding and even increasing their populations. In the cities of the West, those communities of 50,000 or more, the population grew 7.8 percent from 2010 to 2017, eclipsed by the 10 percent growth in southern cities but well above the 2 percent to 3 percent increase in the cities of the Northeast and Midwest.8At the same time, the West led the other regions of the United States in growth for towns and cities from 10,000 to 50,000 in size, and likewise for towns between 5,000 and 10,000. Now let's look at small towns, those with 5,000 or fewer residents. It is this cohort of towns and their people that to my mind is really the essence of rural America. There is a widespread impression that small towns all over America are shrinking and that population is shifting to larger towns and cities, and that is the story we can see in much of the regional data. From 2010 to 2017, the average small town shrank by 2 percent in the Northeast, by 1.4 percent in the Midwest, and only grew 1.3 percent in the South, while larger towns and cities grew substantially faster there and elsewhere. What about the West, where urbanization is happening more quickly than anywhere else? In fact, the average western small town grew 7.8 percent in those seven years, which is roughly the same healthy pace of growth registered in western towns and cities from the smallest to the largest. With a nod to Mark Twain, the message here is that reports of the death of small towns, at least in the West, have been greatly exaggerated. I don't mean to minimize the challenges small towns face, because they are considerable, or suggest that western small towns are immune to them, because they certainly are not. But the more positive message I come away with here is that a rising tide of prosperity in the West seems to be lifting communities large and small, and that the many instances of small towns in decline that we all hear about are counterbalanced by other small towns growing healthily. Another lesson is that population growth and the attendant economic growth in the West is not zero sum, and that small towns can still grow healthily while the metropolises of the West continue to attract people, partly from outside the region. I will return to the issue of how the economies of the urban and rural West differ, but the backdrop is that population data are promising for both. Banking in the WestNow that I have outlined how the economy of the West relates to that of the rest of the United States, let me do the same for banking in the West. There is a lot to this topic, but my focus is banking as it is experienced at the retail level by households and small- and medium-sized businesses. Again, I use the Census Bureau's list of 13 states to define the West, and for a simpler comparison, and in honor of Frank Church, I will refer to the other 37 states as "eastern" even though they cover several regions. Some of you are old enough to remember Frank Church, the U.S. Senator from Idaho--a Stanford grad and hero of mine when I was a teenager. When he ran for president in 1976 and had some success in the primaries, he was challenged by the press that said his victories were limited to the West, and he replied "What do you mean I can't win an eastern state? I won Nebraska!" One dimension to how households and most businesses experience banking is the number of banks competing for their services, and one difference between the West and the East is that the West has fewer banks, even if we count them on a per capita basis.9In addition, banks in the West tend to be larger. One reason for the disparity in the average number and size of banks is that historically, a larger share of western states allowed statewide branching or had relatively limited branching restrictions, leading to the development of fewer and larger banks.10 In metropolitan areas of the West, the average number of banks was 23 in 2017, compared to 27 in eastern metro areas. In rural counties of the West, customers had access to an average of 4.6 banks in 2017, compared to 5.4 banks in the East. In both urban and rural areas, in both the East and the West, the average number of banks increased in the years leading up to the financial crisis but has been declining since then. While there is certainly more to say about banking services in cities, I want to focus on rural areas for the moment. Over the last 20 years, rural westerners have consistently had access to something like 20 percent fewer banks than rural easterners, which amounts to about one less bank per rural county. That may not sound like much, but that one less bank, on average, can make a big difference to the households and small businesses inhabiting those rural counties. In any community, access to credit is essential for economic growth. In any community, but especially in rural communities, small businesses are key drivers of growth. Small businesses heavily rely on banks for funding, and community banks, those with less than $10 billion in assets, account for a disproportionate share of bank lending to small businesses. But across the country, the number of community banks has fallen by half over the past 20 years, mostly due to consolidation. This fall has been slightly larger in the West than the East, but the reason I highlight this trend is that I believe it has significant consequences for rural communities in the West. The reason returns me to that map I showed earlier. The West is vast, and many rural communities in the West must deal with the challenges of isolation from larger towns and cities that few communities in the East face. Rural westerners have access to far fewer banks overall than rural easterners, but that understates the disparity when some western counties are the size of Maryland or Massachusetts and many are more than a hundred miles across, so that access to a limited number of banks can be difficult or out of reach. To provide some perspective on this challenge, let me share what westerners in one small town have to say about their access to banking services. This account is culled from a series of public meetings that the Federal Reserve is convening in communities all around the country, in support of our responsibilities overseeing community banks and promoting community development. Not quite a month ago, we held one such session in my home state of Utah, in the town of Green River, population 940, located on the eastern side of the state. It is just off an isolated stretch of interstate, and its economy depends on those passersby and tourism related to outdoor recreation. In 2014, Green River lost its only bank, and around that time, banks closed in several nearby communities. As a result, most residents of Green River who need banking services must drive the 52 miles to Moab, Utah. This loss has had a profound effect on households and businesses, essentially turning back the clock in Green River by decades, as far as its access to the banking system. Business owners say their work days have been curtailed by the need to drive two or three times a week to Moab to obtain change and make deposits. Businesses have become banks for many residents, agreeing to cash their checks. Because of this new service to residents, and the long distance to a real bank, retail businesses say they are carrying much larger amounts of cash, which has heightened security concerns and prompted some merchants to invest in new safes. Security is also a concern for residents who no longer have access to safety deposit boxes for valuables and important papers. Faster and more efficient electronic payments hold some promise to bridge these gaps, eventually, and the Federal Reserve is working hard on this and making significant progress. But one thing that technology cannot do is replace the knowledge and perspective of a local banker who is part of the community. Relationship-based lending that is the hallmark of community banking can stem losses during downturns, since community banks may be able to work with borrowers to avoid losses. Research has shown that small business lending at smaller banks declined less severely than at large banks during the last recession. Community banks face considerable competition. One of the reasons that community banks continue to succeed in many places is their understanding of their customers' needs and opportunities to invest in families and businesses. The loss of this relationship, for a community, means that needs will go unmet, and opportunities will be lost. In some communities, of course, this may be unavoidable, if a town has lost a major employer and has no new industry or plan to replace the jobs lost. But let me remind you of the very encouraging data I cited on the growth of small towns in the West. Overall, rural communities are growing at a healthy pace, and growing communities need banks. It is my hope that the opportunity for the future that this population growth suggests will support the local banks that communities need to thrive. A significant part of the Federal Reserve's recent regulatory focus has been aimed at streamlining regulations and reducing the regulatory burden on smaller and regional banks. The Fed, along with the other banking agencies, recently proposed a community bank leverage ratio that is designed to simplify significantly the standards banks must abide by for holding capital.11As a result, qualifying community banks will only need to calculate and meet a single measure of capital adequacy, rather than multiple measures. We have also proposed a reduction in the burden of reporting requirements for community banks, and expect soon to propose an exemption for community banks to the Volcker rule.12For a subset of the smallest banks--those with less than $5 billion in total assets--we have also lengthened the amount of time between supervisory examinations and expanded eligibility of small bank holding companies that qualify for an exemption to the Federal Reserve's capital rules, a policy that was designed to promote local ownership of small banks and to help maintain banks in rural areas.13 Most recently, the Federal Reserve spearheaded a proposal to tailor regulation that applies to firms that are larger than community banks, but the potential failure of which generally does not pose risks to the financial system.14These are firms with between $100 billion and $250 billion in total assets. Those changes are designed to reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens on specific institutions without any loss of resiliency for the financial system. By these steps, I believe the Federal Reserve is helping community banks remain competitive and play the central role they have long played as vital infrastructure for rural communities. The future of community banks in these communities is one reason that I'm optimistic about the economic prospects of small towns in the West, which continue to grow even as the region and the nation overall becomes more urban. That's a good thing, because small towns, and especially their values, have long helped define the West, and I hope will continue to do so. 1. Wallace Stegner, "The American West as Living Space," University of Michigan Press, 1988.Return to text 2. Source: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations were done using data from the following website: "List of states and territories of the United States by population," Wikipedia, last modified November 18, 2018.Return to text 3. Source: "List of states and territories of the United States by population density," Wikipedia, last modified October 12, 2018.Return to text 4. Source: "List of metropolitan statistical areas," Wikipedia, last modified November 29, 2018.Return to text 5. Source: "Urbanization in the United States," Wikipedia, last modified November 10, 2018.Return to text 6. Statistics presented in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs are derived from the following website: "Comparative Economic Indicators: Year vs. Year Analysis of Growth and Change," Regional Economic Analysis Project.Return to text 7. Source:https://www.census.gov/popclock/data_tables.php?component=growth.Return to text 8. Statistics presented in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs are derived from the following website: "The West and South Lead the Way," United States Census Bureau, last modified October 1, 2018.Return to text 9. The source for statistics presented in this paragraph and the next three paragraphs is Federal Reserve Board staff calculations using bank Reports of Condition and Income filed with the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Thrift Financial Reports filed with the Office of Thrift Supervision, and Summary of Deposits filed with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.Return to text 10. Even though state banking restrictions were eliminated in most states decades ago, the differences in the number of banks across states have persisted.Return to text 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies propose community bank leverage ratio for qualifying community banking organizations," news releases, November 21, 2018.Return to text 12. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies issue proposal to streamline regulatory reporting for qualifying small institutions," news release, November 7, 2018.Return to text 13. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies issue interim final rules expanding examination cycle for qualifying small banks and U.S. branches of foreign banks," news release, August 23, 2018 and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board issues interim final rule expanding the applicability of the Board's small bank holding company policy statement," news release, August 28, 2018. Of course, while the holding companies of community banks may be eligible for an exemption from capital rules, the subsidiary banks are still subject to capital requirements.Return to text 14. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles," news release, October 31, 2018.Return to text Accessible Version
Chairman Jerome H. Powell At the Inaugural Janet L. Yellen Award for Excellence in Community Development, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Anna. It's an honor to be part of this important occasion. Tonight is an opportunity to recognize the vital contributions of the Federal Reserve's community development staff, and an opportunity to honor Chair Yellen, who did so much to advance the Fed's community development mission. Briefly, I would like to focus on the importance of promoting a strong economy that extends opportunity to all and on the role our community development staff plays to advance that goal. The Federal Reserve's mission is to promote a strong economy and sound financial system; I am glad to say we have made a great deal of progress toward those goals. Unemployment is 3.7 percent, the lowest in nearly half a century. Over 17 million jobs have been created during this expansion, with an additional 250,000 created in October. Beyond the labor market, there are other signs of economic strength. The steady decline in the unemployment rate is mirrored by the decline in financial hardship reported by respondents to the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking over the past five years.1Wage gains, increased household wealth, and elevated consumer confidence are supporting robust consumer spending. Since the crisis, we have also taken numerous steps to make the financial system safer and stronger, leaving it better equipped to support the financial needs of consumers and communities through good times and bad.2 However, the benefits of this strong economy and sound financial system have not reached all Americans. The aggregate statistics tend to mask important disparities by income, race, and geography. Moreover, the economy faces a number of longer-term challenges.3While there have been gains in the pace of wage growth recently, wages for lower-income workers have grown quite slowly over the past few decades. Productivity has picked up in recent months after several years of very slow growth, but it is not clear whether this is a trend that will be sustained. An aging population is limiting growth in labor supply, which in turn limits potential growth. And a decades-long decline in economic mobility in the United States reflects the difficulty faced by lower-income Americans in moving up the economic ladder.4 The Fed's community development function plays a key role in helping us carry out our broad responsibilities. Information gathered by the community development staff ensures that the perspectives of individuals and communities inform the Fed's research, policy, and actions. Soliciting diverse views on issues affecting the economy and financial markets improves the quality of our research, the fairness of our policies, and the transparency of our actions. Raising awareness of emerging economic trends and risks makes regulation and supervision more responsive to evolving consumer financial services markets and technologies. The Fed's community development function also advances our Community Reinvestment Act responsibilities by analyzing and disseminating information related to local financial needs and successful approaches for attracting and deploying capital. These efforts strengthen the capacity of both financial institutions and community organizations to meet the needs of the communities they serve. In addition to providing us with a richer, more nuanced understanding of current economic and financial conditions, the Federal Reserve's community development staff is deeply engaged in helping lower-income and underserved communities overcome their challenges and capitalize on their assets. One thing that was apparent during the recession and the uneven recovery that followed was that people and the places they live are linked. When one struggles, both struggle. Successful community development invests in and builds up both the physical infrastructure and human capital in underserved areas. The Federal Reserve is uniquely positioned to bring together diverse stakeholders to disseminate information, exchange ideas, and identify shared interests that foster local partnerships and comprehensive solutions. This event is an opportunity to recognize your efforts to advance solutions that build resilient and more prosperous communities. I want to thank Ariel Cisneros--our distinguished inaugural recipient of the Yellen Award for Excellence in Community Development--as well as each of you for your individual and collective service to this effort. And speaking of service: It is fitting that this award for excellence in community development will today and thenceforth be given in honor of Janet Yellen. During your tenure as Chair, Janet, you elevated the importance of economic and financial inclusion and the Fed's role in community development. You reminded us that an inclusive economy is a vibrant economy. Governor Brainard, the principal oversight governor for community development, and I are honored to carry this message forward. The economy benefits when we successfully tap into the underutilized potential of more of our fellow Americans.5 Thank you, Janet, for everything that you accomplished as Chair and over a lifetime of public service that thankfully continues today. And congratulations, Ariel, for what you have accomplished in service to others, which has made you such a deserving recipient of this award. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2017(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2018).Return to text 2. Jerome H. Powell,"Brief Remarks on the U.S. Economy"(speech at Rhode Island Business Leaders Day, Washington, D.C., September 27, 2018).Return to text 3. Jerome H. Powell,"Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy"(speech at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24, 2018).Return to text 4. Raj Chetty, David Grusky, Maximilian Hell, Nathaniel Hendren, Robert Manduca, and Jimmy Narang, "The Fading American Dream: Trend in Absolute Income Mobility since 1940,"Science,vol. 356 (April 2017), 398–406; Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 129 (November 2014), 1553–623.Return to text 5.Janet L. Yellen,"So We All Can Succeed: 125 Years of Women's Participation in the Economy"(speech delivered at "125 Years of Women at Brown," a conference sponsored by Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, May 5, 2015).Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the Inaugural Janet L. Yellen Award for Excellence in Community Development, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Chairman Powell. It is my honor to introduce Chair Yellen.1 When I first arrived at the Board, Chair Yellen offered me the opportunity to lead the Committee on Consumer and Community Affairs--even though I had little experience in this area. I greatly appreciate the opportunity she gave me. After visits to 16 communities across the country--both rural and urban--I can attest to the richness of our community development work. It helps us see the economy as it is experienced by Americans in their communities. It provides a valuable perspective on our monetary policy goals by putting names and faces on the aggregate unemployment statistics. It helps us spot problems in consumer credit in overstretched communities well before they show up in national statistics. And it is essential in helping our banks meet their affirmative obligations to the low- and moderate-income communities they serve and to understand what is likely to be most effective in lifting up the lives of people in challenged communities. Janet Yellen's experience as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco during some of the most challenging economic times for our country no doubt shaped her commitment to the Federal Reserve's community development work.2One associate from the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank recounts a meeting at the height of the crisis when staff suggested their exhausted boss should take a break from the round-the-clock emergency meetings. Then-President Yellen stated that she had an obligation to continue working until such time that families were no longer losing their homes, their livelihoods, and their pensions. That moment encapsulates Chair Yellen's consistent orientation to how our work touches the lives of American families. It is perhaps no accident that Chair Yellen delivered her first speech as Chair at a community reinvestment conference.3 In navigating the Federal Open Market Committee's objectives of price stability and full employment, Chair Yellen was attentive to low- and moderate-income communities, recognizing that Americans on the most precarious rungs of the ladder often feel the impacts of a downturn soonest and the longest.4Chair Yellen brought the subject of economic disparities to the forefront of our conversations, consistently emphasizing the importance of an economy that works for everyone.5 As Chair, Janet Yellen continued her practice of meeting with community members, where she had in-depth conversations about disparities in employment, labor force participation, income, and wealth, recognizing these direct interactions provide valuable insights no statistic or report can fully capture. For instance, she visited the Manufacturing Technology Center on Cuyahoga Community College's Metropolitan Campus where she participated in a roundtable discussion on the state of manufacturing workforce development in Northeast Ohio.6 We are committed to continuing Chair Yellen's legacy. In our service to the American people, we recognize that our monetary policy, financial stability, and supervisory activities have an important influence on the financial health of Americans in communities across the country. Promoting community development is one of the key purposes and functions of the Federal Reserve, and we have a responsibility to ensure that consumer and community perspectives inform Federal Reserve policy, research, and actions, including vulnerable communities.7 In his inaugural remarks as Chairman, Jay Powell underscored that it is our duty at the Federal Reserve to "approach every issue through a rigorous evaluation of the facts, theory, empirical analysis, and relevant research."8That lens informs our community development responsibilities: we seek to learn from the experience of manufacturing workers, homeowners, community bankers, nonprofit executives, community organizers, and small business owners to help inform our policymaking.9 Under Chair Yellen's leadership, the Board of Governors established a Community Advisory Council (CAC) to help provide regular insights into the conditions facing low- and moderate-income communities.10Recently, CAC members provided informative public comments to the Board on the Community Reinvestment Act and current market conditions within low- and moderate-income communities.11 Under Chair Powell’s leadership, Eric Belsky, Anna Boyd, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland President Loretta Mester--who chairs the Committee on Research, Public Information, and Community Affairs for Reserve Bank presidents--and community development staff across the System are continuing to advance this agenda. Over the past year, all 12 Reserve Banks have adopted a common community development strategic plan that seeks to advance the economic resilience and mobility of low- and moderate-income households and communities and to enhance public awareness of these issues. During Chair Yellen's 16 years as a public servant in the Federal Reserve, her words, actions, and research demonstrated a deep commitment to striving for an inclusive economy and recognizing the challenges faced by underserved communities.12From her speeches to her policy deliberations, Janet made clear that her duty was to serve Main Street and all Americans. The Award for Excellence in Community Development that we are establishing tonight memorializes Janet Yellen's commitment to the people and places that make up our vibrant economy, including those who face challenges. Going forward, we will look to celebrate staff within the System like Ariel Cisneros--the first to receive this award in Janet Yellen's name--thus honoring those who innovate, trailblaze, and embody the same deep-seated commitment to low- and moderate-income communities that Janet Yellen espouses. With that, it is my great pleasure to introduce Chair Janet Yellen. 1. I am grateful to Charlene van Dijk for her assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. See the Federal Reserve History website atwww.federalreservehistory.org/people/janet_l_yellen.Return to text 3. Janet L. Yellen,"What the Federal Reserve Is Doing to Promote a Stronger Job Market"(speechat the 2014 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference, Chicago, Illinois, March 31, 2014).Return to text 4. "Differences in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups tend to widen sharply during recessions, as less advantaged groups shoulder an outsized share of total layoffs, and these differences shrink during recoveries. For example, in the second quarter of 2017, the unemployment rate for black adult men was a little more than 3 percentage points higher than for white adult men. This differential, while sizable, is nonetheless close to the smallest gap seen since comparable data became available in the mid-1970s." Lael Brainard,"Why Persistent Employment Disparities Matter for the Economy's Health" (speech at "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C., September 26, 2017).Return to text 5. Janet L. Yellen,Opening Remarks(speech at the "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy," a community development research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C., April 2, 2017).Return to text 6. Janet L. Yellen,"Inflation, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy"(speechat the "Prospects for Growth: Reassessing the Fundamentals" 59th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, Ohio, September 26, 2017).Return to text 7. See the 10th edition of theFederal Reserve SystemPurposes & Functions(PDF).Return to text 8. See Jerome H. Powell,Remarks(speech at the Ceremonial Swearing-inat the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C., February 13, 2018.Return to text 9. For examples of the Federal Reserve's analysis of community and household economic issues, see theSurvey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking,Small Business Credit Survey, andInvesting in America's Workforce.Return to text "10. "The Community Advisory Council (CAC) was formed by the Federal Reserve Board in 2015 to offer diverse perspectives on the economic circumstances and financial services needs of consumers and communities, with a particular focus on the concerns of low- and moderate-income populations."www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cac.htm.Return to text 11. Lael Brainard,"Community Investment in Denver"(speech atthe Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Denver Branch, Denver, Colorado, October 15, 2018).Return to text 12. Janet L. Yellen served as a member of the Board of Governors from August 12, 1994, to February 17, 1997; President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco from 2004 to 2010; Vice Chair of the Board of Governors from October 4, 2010, to February 3, 2014; and Chair and Executive Officer of the Board of Governors from February 3, 2014, through February 3, 2018 (www.federalreservehistory.org/people/janet_l_yellen).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Thursday announced that the resolution plans of four foreign-based banks had weaknesses, but did not have "deficiencies," which are weaknesses severe enough to result in additional prudential requirements if not corrected. The agencies determined that the plans of the four firms--Barclays, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, and UBS--have "shortcomings," which are less severe weaknesses that require additional work in their next plan. These shortcomings in the four firms' plans include weaknesses in how each firm communicates and coordinates between its U.S. operations and its foreign parent in stress. Credit Suisse also had a shortcoming related to estimating the liquidity needs of its U.S. intermediate holding company in a resolution. Resolution plans, required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. For foreign banking organizations, resolution plans are focused on their U.S. operations; however, the agencies acknowledge that the preferred outcome for these four foreign-based banks is a successful home country resolution using a single point of entry resolution strategy. The agencies sent feedback letters to each firm detailing the shortcomings and specific actions that can be taken to address them. The firms must address the shortcomings in their next resolution plans, which are due July 1, 2020, and are expected to implement certain resolution projects in the interim. Since the 2007 financial crisis, the four firms have improved their resolvability by significantly reducing the size and risk profiles of their U.S. operations and increasing their capital and liquidity levels. At the same time, the resolvability of firms will change as both the firms and markets continue to evolve. The agencies expect the firms to remain vigilant in assessing their resolvability. Also on Thursday, the agencies announced that they have finalized resolution plan guidance applying to the eight largest and most complex domestic banking organizations. The final guidance is largely similar to the proposal issued in June 2018, and provides additional information for the firms regarding their resolution planning capabilities in areas such as capital, liquidity, and payment, clearing, and settlement activities. While the capital and liquidity sections of the final guidance remain largely unchanged from the proposed guidance and the guidance from 2016, the agencies intend to provide additional information on resolution liquidity and internal loss absorbing capacity in the future. Final Guidance
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the December 18-19 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the December 18-19 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Cadence Bancorporation, Houston, Texas, to acquire State Bank Financial Corporation (SBFC), Atlanta, Georgia, and thereby indirectly acquire SBFC's subsidiary bank, State Bank and Trust Company, Macon, Georgia. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the proposals by: Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved action on Wednesday by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Bank from 2-3/4 percent to 3 percent, effective December 20, 2018. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Thursday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Dallas, increasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 2-3/4 percent to 3 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the action listed below: Frank Smith, President and Chief Executive OfficerFarmers State Bank, Pine Bluffs, WyomingNotice of intent to prohibit from the banking industry, dated December 11, 2018 Mark Kiolbasa, Executive Vice PresidentFarmers State Bank, Pine Bluffs, WyomingNotice of intent to prohibit from the banking industry, dated December 11, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. * On December 13, the headline for this press release was corrected to note that the Board has initiated an enforcement action and that the individuals are not former employees of the bank.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the enforcement action listed below: Diane Ludwig, former employeeFirst Community Bank, Beemer, NebraskaConsent prohibition order, dated December 19, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board along with four other regulatory agencies on Monday issued a joint statement encouraging depository institutions to explore innovative approaches to both meet their Bank Secrecy Act/anti-money laundering (BSA/AML) compliance obligations and to further strengthen the financial system against illicit financial activity. The statement recognizes that private sector innovation, including new ways of using existing tools or adopting new technologies--such as artificial intelligence--can help banks and credit unions identify and report money laundering, terrorist financing, and other illicit financial activity. The agencies will not penalize firms that maintain effective anti-money laundering programs but choose not to pursue innovative approaches. To assist depository institutions in this effort, the statement also makes clear that regulators are committed to continued engagement with the private sector and other interested parties. The agencies have or will establish projects or offices that will work to support the implementation of responsible innovation and new technology in the financial system. While banks and credit unions should continue to follow existing protocols for communication with their respective regulator, these projects or offices may also serve as central points of contact to facilitate communication related to innovation and new technology. Today's joint statement results from a working group formed by the Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the U.S. Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence that aims to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the BSA/AML regime. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System's offices in Washington, D.C., will be closed on Wednesday, December 5, 2018, in observance of the national day of mourning for former President George H.W. Bush. Chairman Powell's appearance before the Joint Economic Committee has been postponed. The Beige Book will still be published at 2 p.m. EST, as scheduled. All other previously scheduled releases will be postponed until Thursday, December 6. Federal Reserve Bank payment systems will operate normally. Reserve Bank cash offices will fulfill orders for currency and coin according to normal operating procedures. Information about the Board's release calendar is available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/calendar.htm, and Reserve Bank services information is available athttps://www.frbservices.org/app/status/serviceStatus.do.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Friday that it will maintain the current modeling framework for loan allowances in its supervisory stress test through 2021. In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued a new accounting standard for credit losses known as the Current Expected Credit Losses (CECL) methodology. The Board and other banking agencies have given firms the option to phase in the initial effects of CECL on regulatory capital over three years. During the phase-in, the agencies will continue to monitor the impact of CECL adoption. For purposes of the Board's supervisory stress test--the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)--the Board will not alter its current modeling framework, as it relates to CECL, for the 2019, 2020 and 2021 cycles. The Board intends to evaluate appropriate future enhancements to the current framework as best practices for implementing CECL are developed. Bank holding companies required to perform company-run stress tests as part of CCAR will be required to incorporate CECL into those stress tests starting in the 2020 cycle. However, the Board will not issue supervisory findings on those firms' allowance estimations in the CCAR exercise through 2021. The statement from the Board contains additional information. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Household spending has continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment has moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remain near 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee judges that some further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. The Committee judges that risks to the economic outlook are roughly balanced, but will continue to monitor global economic and financial developments and assess their implications for the economic outlook. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2-1/4 to 2‑1/2 percent. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman; John C. Williams, Vice Chairman; Thomas I. Barkin; Raphael W. Bostic; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; Richard H. Clarida; Mary C. Daly; Loretta J. Mester; and Randal K. Quarles. Implementation Note issued December 19, 2018
Growth in card payments has accelerated, according to new electronic payments data collected by the Federal Reserve. Card payments increased 10.1 percent by number and 8.4 percent by value from 2016 to 2017, each larger than the increases of 7.8 percent by number and 6.3 percent by value from 2015 to 2016. Remote payments claimed a greater share of total general-purpose card transactions over the 2016 to 2017 period, and the number of in-person chip-authenticated card payments also posted substantial gains. Check payments and automated teller machine (ATM) withdrawals declined by number yet increased in value. The annual supplementary data, which were collected between the triennial Federal Reserve Payments Studies (FRPS), show that the sum of credit card, non-prepaid debit card, and prepaid debit card payments increased 11.3 billion from 112.2 billion to 123.5 billion payments by number and increased $500 billion from $6 trillion to $6.5 trillion by value from 2016 to 2017. The increase in the number of card payments in 2017 was boosted by continued strong growth in the number of card payments made remotely, including for shopping and bill paying. The number of in-person chip-authenticated card payments also recorded a noteworthy gain in 2017, increasing to 41.6 percent of all in-person general-purpose card payments. For the first time, chip-authenticated payments captured more than half of the value of in-person general-purpose card payments. Key findings of the study include: The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta have reported on national aggregate volumes and trends in noncash payments in the United States since 2001. The triennial reports and the annual supplements are available at:www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/fr-payments-study.htm
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meeting on November 8, 2018. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lael Brainard At "The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market" Fourth Annual Conference Hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York I am pleased to join the fourth annual conference on the evolving structure of the U.S. Treasury market. Four years ago, the Treasury "flash rally" served as a wake-up call for regulators and market participants alike that the structure of the Treasury market had changed radically from the conventional view. Since the surprising sharp spike in Treasury prices on October 15, 2014, the public sector has devoted significant effort and resources to monitoring the ongoing changes in the Treasury market. The interagency working group's (IAWG)Joint Staff Reporton the events of October 15, the Treasury Department's request for information on the report's recommendations, and the subsequent collection of transactions data by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) through its Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) system have offered us a much better understanding of this market.1 But the market is not resting, and neither can we. Even in the past year, much has changed in the Treasury market, and technology is continuing to drive rapid transformation in the competitive landscape. I would like to talk about the changes we are seeing, what we are learning from the TRACE data, and emerging developments that are important to monitor. In particular, I want to highlight an initiative that the Federal Reserve is considering to expand the public sector's access to transactions data in order to help ensure the IAWG is able to keep up with the market. Still ChangingAt the first Treasury conference in 2015, market participants were still processing the results of theJoint Staff Report.2It came as a surprise to many that the high-frequency trading activity conducted by "proprietary trading firms," or PTFs, accounted for a majority of trading in the interdealer platforms that are so central to the Treasury market. Indeed, the names of the largest proprietary trading firms were new even to some seasoned professionals. At that time, the discussion often drew a very bright line between traditional dealers and proprietary trading firms and, in particular, the trading activities associated with each. The distinction between broker-dealers and proprietary trading firms remains important today with regard towhythey are trading, but less and less with regard tohowthey are trading. Now, as then, broker-dealers intermediate financial transactions primarily to serve their clients' needs, and, for this reason, they are required to register with FINRA. Conversely, the hallmark of proprietary trading firm activity was and still is high-frequency proprietary trading. Proprietary trading firms trade for their own account rather than that of a client, which places them outside of FINRA's jurisdiction and many other forms of oversight. This distinction remains important today. But the distinction inhowbroker-dealers and proprietary trading firms trade was already starting to blur by the time of the first conference. For example, some of the larger dealers had already invested heavily in electronic trading systems by 2015. Since that time, the distinctions have blurred considerably further. Almost all midsize and large dealers now possess autoquoting capabilities and deploy them on Treasury trading platforms. Several primary dealers have even entered direct partnerships with proprietary trading firms, effectively outsourcing some parts of their market-making operations. The evolution of the dealer business model to incorporate advanced technology is not limited only to trading activity. A number of developers of emerging financial technologies, or fintech, have arisen in recent years to provide dealers and other market participants with back-office tools that reduce costs by automating routine processes, streamlining regulatory reporting, and more efficiently allocating capital, collateral, and margin among competing uses. On the front end, dealers are increasingly offering their customers web-based research and analytic tools, trading and execution engines, and even apps that allow clients access to internal software for pricing and structuring transactions. The landscape for proprietary trading firms has changed considerably in recent years, too. Since 2015, we have witnessed the first initial public offering by a proprietary trading firm, as well as a few high-profile mergers and acquisitions.3The industry is contending with declining revenue growth and diminished returns by expanding operations into new asset classes and geographies. Proprietary trading firms are also adapting in other ways. Some have begun to offer broker-dealer services themselves or appear to be contemplating such a business model change. Still others have entered joint ventures with one another to finance new investment in faster microwave communications and defray the high costs of that infrastructure.4Third-party providers are also offering high-speed links to firms that wish to engage in high-frequency trading without investing directly in microwave tower infrastructure. We have seen important recent changes among infrastructure providers as well. CME Group's acquisition of NEX and the BrokerTec platform has recently been finalized, with direct implications for the structure of the Treasury market.5We have also witnessed the conclusion of J.P. Morgan's exit from broker-dealer settlement services in the triparty Treasury repo market and the transition to BNY Mellon Government Securities Services Corp. as a subsidiary offering Treasury market settlement services. Beyond these changes, some new trading platforms are experimenting with the very structure of the market.6These platforms are promoting new trading models such as all-to-all trading, in which many buy-side and sell-side participants transact directly, and direct streaming, in which live continuous, executable prices are delivered electronically under bilaterally or multilaterally negotiated terms. These services can potentially bridge all of the venues of the Treasury market, connecting not just dealers and proprietary trading firms, but also those entities with buy-side clients. And, finally, the macroeconomic landscape has undergone some significant changes that have important implications for the Treasury market. At the time of the flash rally in October 2014, the Federal Reserve was still actively purchasing Treasury securities, and the federal funds rate was still at the effective lower bound. With the economy now at or beyond full employment and inflation around target, the Federal Open Market Committee has since gradually increased its target for the federal funds rate to between 2 and 2-1/4 percent, and normalization of the balance sheet is well under way. Since October 2017, the portfolio of the System Open Market Account has decreased in size from $4.2 trillion to about $3.9 trillion. What Have We Learned So Far?Against this changed backdrop and with more than a year's worth of information from the TRACE data available, it is a good time to ask what we have learned since the initial market event and what questions remain. First, the initiation of policy normalization and the ongoing reduction of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet do not appear to have sparked a deterioration in Treasury market liquidity. Standard metrics such as bid-ask spreads have not materially changed for benchmark securities since 2014. Market functioning has also been orderly during a number of recent events that were characterized by high trading volume and elevated price volatility, such as in early February of this year. Second, some segments of the market seem much more active than observers may have feared before the collection of TRACE data. In particular, according to the TRACE data as shown infigure 1, off-the-run trading accounts for 27 percent of overall trading volume, while deep off-the-run notes and bonds--seasoned securities older than the first or second off-the-run--account for 14 percent of all coupon activity.7Likewise, the data show that Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) trade in significant volumes as well. Due to the TRACE data, we are now able to measure with reasonable precision the transaction volumes in these securities. Off-the-run and TIPS activity is largely concentrated in the dealer-to-client (DTC) and voice venues of the market, segments into which the public sector had only limited insight before the TRACE data. While substantial analysis with respect to pricing and liquidity remains to be done in these market segments, the early results allow us to conclude that these securities do trade in meaningful amounts. Third, although there was speculation that proprietary trading firms had already eclipsed bank dealers in benchmark Treasury trading or would come to threaten the dealer business model more broadly, neither has occurred.8Based on the TRACE data, as shown infigure 2, we can now state with a reasonable amount of confidence that dealers generally--and primary dealers particularly--still intermediate the majority of activity in all Treasury securities.9In the market for Treasury bills in particular, primary dealers play an important role in allocating issuance to investors. This can be seen where most activity in bills occurs, as shown infigure 3, which depicts the share of trading volume of bills in the DTC, interdealer broker (IDB), and interdealer segments of the market. Federal Reserve staff analysis of the TRACE data reveals that nearly three-fourths of total trading volume of bills is in the DTC market, where dealers are, of course, the main intermediary. From this and other analysis, there is substantial evidence that the dealer business model plays a central role in this market and will continue to do so into the future.10 That said, proprietary trading firms do occupy an important space in the Treasury market alongside dealers, and it is clear that they, too, are here to stay. When it comes to areas where speed is paramount--for instance, in trading across and between asset classes and trading venues‑‑proprietary trading firms are deploying technology and infrastructure in ways that are having lasting effects. This is evident in the Treasury market in the intervals following economic data releases. Again turning to the TRACE data, we see infigure 4a depiction of average trading volumes of all Treasury securities across five-minute intervals on days in which the Employment Situation report, gross domestic product data, or consumer price index data are announced. The TRACE volume data indicate that the immediate surge in trading activity following these announcements occurs mainly in the electronic IDB venue, where proprietary trading firms dominate. In short, the TRACE data are enabling us to put some old puzzles to rest. Our analysis makes clear that the Treasury market has adapted well to the post-crisis regulatory regime, the normalization of monetary policy, and technological changes in trading processes, and that both broker-dealers and proprietary trading firms play important, often complementary, roles in the market structure that has emerged. Looking AheadOf course, the structure of the Treasury market will continue to evolve, along with changes in technology and the broader financial environment. Looking forward, we will need to ask more of the data as we seek to understand what is next for the structure of the Treasury market. As I mentioned earlier, experimentation with new protocols is occurring now. Although all-to-all trading in the Treasury market was contemplated at the first conference, direct streaming largely was not, which might prompt us to ask what else is on the horizon. In addition to direct streaming, another development that bears watching is the batch auction platforms that have arisen in the voice IDB market, something that has not received as much attention from market participants. Started after the financial crisis, batch auctions are now conducted by a number of IDB firms at regular intervals throughout the trading day. Like any closed auction, the IDB collects anonymous bids and offers for a specific security in specific amounts during a relatively short window of time, generally on the order of a few minutes. After the batch auction closes, the orders are matched, and participants are notified of their awards.11Figure 5, based on TRACE data, depicts average trading volumes of TIPS securities in the IDB venue of the market across five-minute intervals. As you can see, the level of activity rises significantly at intervals, which correspond to the timing of the auctions. While it is not a large part of the overall market, this activity appears to be an important innovation for segments often deemed to be less liquid--in particular, for off-the-run and TIPS trading on voice IDBs. Before the collection of the TRACE data, there was limited insight into this area of the market, which made it difficult to assess the significance of such innovations. No doubt there are other innovations that have yet to be assessed. Recently, the debate over liquidity has turned toward the participation of proprietary trading firms in the off-the-run segment of the market, an area outside of their traditional domain. All-to-all and direct-streaming platforms are also attempting to establish a foothold in the off-the-run segment by offering new services. I look forward to further analysis as the structure of the market continues to evolve. Keeping UpAs the Treasury market has evolved, the public sector has had to evolve as well in order to keep up. Many of the recommendations in theJoint Staff Reporthave now been implemented. Our colleagues at Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and FINRA deserve credit for the work to begin collecting Treasury transaction data on FINRA's TRACE system. My hope is that you will take away from my remarks, along with those of my colleagues from other agencies, a comprehensive picture of how all of the IAWG agencies are using the data to work through the many issues that intersect with our various policy missions and mandates. As the market continues to innovate and the broader financial environment continues to shift, we will maintain our focus on the resilience of the Treasury market specifically and the financial system more broadly.12In this regard, the staff at the Federal Reserve continues to work on important issues raised by the events of October 15, 2014. Markets have been able to weather several episodes of short-lived market turbulence well in the past few years. But the fact that sharp market movements--some on the order of seven or eight standard deviations outside the norm--can occur even in the absence of clear news drivers remains a concern and highlights the potential risks to financial stability posed by the high-speed transmission of price and liquidity shocks across multiple markets and trading venues. The TRACE data now allow us to monitor events when equity and bond markets move sharply. For instance, take the turbulence in equity and bond markets on February 5, 2018. While trading volumes in both the electronic IDB and DTC market segments were markedly higher than average, some metrics of liquidity, such as market depth near the top of the order book on major electronic IDB platforms, deteriorated and remained low through the week. The pattern of a spike in trading volumes followed by a persistent decline in market depth has been characteristic of three recent market turmoil episodes: (1) the Treasury flash rally on October 15, 2014; (2) the flash crash in the British pound on October 7, 2016; and (3) the spike in the VIX on February 5, 2018.13Figure 6shows this pattern for February 5, 2018. These seemingly contradictory dynamics are easier to reconcile if the prevalent role played by high-speed electronic trading in the Treasury market is taken into account, particularly under stressed conditions. As previously noted in theJoint Staff Report,high-speed market makers are able to manage perceived risks from sudden adverse price moves by greatly reducing the sizes of orders placed on electronic execution venues while, at the same time, increasing order placement rates as much as needed to accommodate increased trading volumes without the need to widen bid-ask spreads. That said, the ability of high-speed market makers to nearly simultaneously adjust liquidity provision across multiple closely linked markets can create potential challenges for large institutional investors seeking to reliably aggregate posted liquidity among otherwise distinct trading venues.14The dynamic nature of liquidity provision by high-speed market makers makes static measures of liquidity, such as posted bid-ask spreads and market depth, less useful. For the purposes of improving our assessment of financial stability, it is therefore necessary to look for alternative ways of gauging liquidity and transaction costs in these markets. For example, measures such as implementation shortfall aim to account directly for the difference between the original decision price and the final execution price for a trade split into multiple smaller transactions.15As IAWG staff members continue to refine the TRACE data to assess market resilience more accurately in light of changes in structure and speed, it will be important to incorporate alternative measures of liquidity and transaction costs. Separately, the increased role of managed funds is also having an effect on the Treasury market. TRACE data can help us keep up with that development as well. As in other asset classes, 3 p.m. has become an important liquidity point during the trading day for Treasury securities. There is a regular spike in trading activity around 3 p.m., as can be seen infigure 7, which depicts average trading volumes across five-minute intervals. Federal Reserve staff analysis reveals that the 3 p.m. spike in trading volumes tends to be fairly evenly divided between the DTC and IDB market segments, suggesting that both dealers and proprietary trading firms play an important role during this narrow window of activity. In the DTC market, the increase around 3 p.m. would be consistent with trading related to mutual fund daily and end-of-month portfolio rebalancing. In the electronic IDB market, the increase around 3 p.m. would be consistent with the increased role of proprietary trading firms in intraday intermediation and the possible closeout of positions toward the end of the main part of the trading day. From a market resilience perspective, it would be valuable to analyze these systematic intraday spikes in trading volumes, particularly as they may influence price formation and liquidity provision in the Treasury market. The large spike in flows toward the end of the trading day points to a financial stability consideration that is worth flagging. The Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG) has done valuable work in mapping out clearing and settlement patterns in the Treasury market. One issue that this analysis highlights is the currently limited potential for same day, or T+0, settlement on transactions conducted near the end of the day. The flash events we have seen in the Treasury market so far have occurred early enough in the day to allow time for prices to recover before market close, and they have not been accompanied by any participant's failure to perform, let alone a major participant, platform, or exchange. As the TMPG's work shows, most transactions in the Treasury market settle the next day, or T+1. As can be seen infigure 8, Federal Reserve staff analysis based on the transactions recorded in TRACE shows that same-day settlement volumes, on average, represent only about 4 percent of total daily volume, with the rest concentrated primarily on one-day settlement. Same-day settlement volumes since the inception of TRACE have never exceeded roughly 10 percent of the daily total. Fortunately, we have not recently observed a large liquidation of Treasury holdings for cash at the end of the same day. But we cannot rule out that this will always be the case. It is not clear from the TRACE data whether the market could accommodate a large sale of Treasury securities later in the day, perhaps associated with a need to raise cash quickly to settle outstanding positions, without causing a substantial move in prices. It will be important to follow closely how the market evolves in light of the potential risks and resilience issues identified in the recent TMPG white paper on clearing and settlement in the secondary market for U.S. Treasury securities.16 Before I conclude, let me discuss one other step the Board is planning to take to help us keep up with the changing nature of markets. The TRACE data are indispensable in the IAWG's ability to track and understand this market. However, FINRA's collections are limited only to its members. The Federal Reserve is close to finalizing an agreement with FINRA to act as our agent in expanding the collection of Treasury transactions to key banks that are also active in this market. In addition, in light of recent changes in the market, the Board has decided to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking to seek public comment on collecting agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and debt transactions as well. This collection will help round out the IAWG's view of these markets and ensure continuous coverage in circumstances where trading moves between the bank and the broker-dealer within a firm. It is important that reporting thresholds be appropriately tailored to avoid imposing undue burden on smaller firms, and we will be particularly attentive to public comments on this matter. I see important potential benefits of transparency under appropriate circumstances. The Treasury Department is currently considering these issues, and we would seek to harmonize our approach with any future decisions by the Treasury Department and the IAWG in making Treasury transactions data available to the public. Our expectation is also that Federal Reserve policy would be harmonized with FINRA's practices in making anonymized agency MBS and debt transactions publicly available, taking into account what we learn from the comment process. ConclusionIn sum, we recognize it is vitally important for the Federal Reserve and other agencies to keep up with the rapid changes we are seeing in the Treasury market. The Treasury market is a cornerstone of the global financial system: Treasury securities are used to finance the federal government, represent a store of value for investors and households alike, and serve as the primary reserve asset for the global financial system. The Treasury market is also vital to the Federal Reserve: It is central to the transmission of our monetary policy, provides key signals on market expectations for inflation and future interest rates, and is a key source of high-quality liquid assets for the banking system. Given the centrality of the Treasury market, it is all the more notable that access to data on Treasury market transactions on par with those available for futures, equity, and corporate bond markets is a very recent development. The recent collection of these data has provided crucial insights into the resilience and structure of the Treasury market. Recognizing that the market will continue to evolve, we are committed to doing our part to make sure the scope of our data and their availability evolve commensurately. 1. I am grateful to David Bowman, Dobrislav Dobrev, Peter Johansson, and Michael Puglia for assistance in preparing these remarks. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2015),Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014(PDF)(Washington: Treasury, Board of Governors, FRBNY, SEC, and CFTC, July).Return to text 3. These developments include the mergers and acquisitions between Virtu and KCG and between Teza and Quantlab. See CNBC (2017), "Trading Firm Virtu Financial to Buy KCG for about $1.4 Billion," CNBC, April 20, https://www.cnbc.com/2017/04/20/two-high-speed-trading-firms-merge-in-1-4-billion-deal.html; and Gregory Meyer (2017), "Teza Sells High-Speed Trading as Lucrative Business Sours,"Financial Times,March 21.Return to text 4. One example is the Go West Consortium. See Gregory Meyer, Nicole Bullock, and Joe Rennison (2018), "How High-Frequency Trading Hit a Speed Bump,"Financial Times,January 1.Return to text 5. See CMG Group (2018), "CME Group Completes Acquisition of NEX, Creating a Leading Global Markets Company across Futures, Cash and OTC," press release, November 2.Return to text 6. LiquidityEdge and OpenDoor, LLC, are two examples of trading platforms offering new models.Return to text 7. See Doug Brain, Michiel De Pooter, Dobrislav Dobrev, Michael Fleming, Peter Johansson, Frank Keane, Michael Puglia, Tony Rodrigues, and Or Shachar (2018). "Breaking Down TRACE Volumes Further," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 29, 2018, https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2299.Return to text 8. See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2015), "Conference Summary: The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market (October 20-21, 2015) (PDF)."Return to text 9. TRACE data do not currently identify PTF firms. We estimate the activity by assuming PTFs account for 92 percent of nondealer trading volume on the electronic and automated interdealer brokers, which is the share of nondealer activity accounted for by PTFs on electronic IDBs reported in theJoint Staff Reportfrom 2014. The Securities and Exchange Commission recently approved a rule change proposed by FINRA to require some reporters in TRACE to identify non-FINRA member activity. Once in effect, this change will enhance regulators' ability to identify trades with PTFs on IDBs and to more accurately identify the share of overall trading activity attributable to PTFs.Return to text 10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018),Supervision and Regulation Report(Washington: Board of Governors, November).Return to text 11. Note that these auctions differ from proposed high-frequency batch auctions in that they are held at much less frequent intervals, typically separated by hours and, in some cases, occurring only once a day or a week.Return to text 12. Flash events that have occurred in recent years include, but are not limited to, the first "flash crash" in U.S. equity markets on May 6, 2010; the Treasury flash rally of October 15, 2014, the flash event in U.S. equity markets on August 24, 2015; the pound flash crash on October 7, 2016; and the turbulence in U.S. equity and VIX markets on February 5, 2018.Return to text 13. See also Ernst Schaumburg and Ron Yang (2015), "Liquidity during Flash Events," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), August 18.Return to text 14. See Dobrislav Dobrev and Ernst Schaumburg (2015), "The Liquidity Mirage," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), October 9.Return to text 15. See Bank for International Settlements, Markets Committee (2018),Monitoring of Fast-Paced Electronic Markets(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: BIS, September).Return to text 16. See Treasury Market Practices Group (2018), "White Paper on Clearing and Settlement in the Secondary Market for U.S. Treasury Securities (PDF)," consultative white paper (New York: TMPG, July); and Treasury Market Practices Group (2018),Clearing and Settlement in the Secondary Market for U.S. Treasury Securities: Trade Flow Mapping(PDF), consultative report (New York: TMPG, July).Return to text Accessible Version
Chairman Jerome H. Powell At the Housing Assistance Council's 2018 Rural Housing Conference, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the kind introduction, and thank you to the Housing Assistance Council (HAC) for inviting me to be part of this discussion of rural housing. I understand that you will shortly be presenting awards to people who are working at the local and national levels and in both the public and private sectors and whose efforts have improved housing conditions for the rural poor. All of you who work in these roles are doing your country a great service by helping to advance economic opportunity in our communities. I want to thank the award recipients for the difference you make in the lives of people in rural communities. I am happy to report that our economy is currently performing very well overall, with strong job creation and gradually rising wages. The unemployment rate is 3.7 percent, the lowest since 1969. A strong job market has encouraged more people to participate in the labor market, another positive development. In fact, by many national-level measures, our labor market is very strong. As those at this conference are acutely aware, however, aggregate statistics can mask important variations between different demographic and income groups, as well as significant regional differences. For example, unemployment rates in some persistently poor rural counties remain much higher than the national figures. The annual average unemployment rate in 2017 exceeded 10 percent in 27 persistently poor rural counties, and the rate was 20 percent or more in 2 of those counties. Recent Fed research found that, since 2007, labor force participation rates for those in their prime working years in rural areas have increasingly lagged rates in urban areas. Labor force participation has been particularly low for those with only a high school diploma or less.1Research has also found that business formation and employment growth during the recovery have been concentrated in large urban areas.2Data and research findings like these remind us that, despite positive trends in national data, the benefits of the ongoing economic expansion are still not reaching some communities. Through the Fed's 12 Reserve Banks and their branches, we are able to get a clearer picture of conditions in individual communities across the nation. Each of the Reserve Banks has an active, well-staffed community development function--one of the great benefits of the Federal Reserve's structure. We get important and timely information on the state of local economic and financial conditions, including those affecting low- and moderate-income, as well as other underserved, communities. Our community development staff provide us with a more nuanced understanding of current economic and financial conditions. They also help people in low-income and underserved communities overcome the challenges they face. We support numerous initiatives in rural communities across the country, several of which I would like to highlight. The first initiative is the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's longtime commitment to the Mississippi and Arkansas Delta region. This region has struggled for decades with persistent intergenerational poverty and a lack of resources and capacity to address this challenge. Most recently, in 2016 the St. Louis Fed launched the Delta Communities Initiative, and since then it has held 26 regional forums with more than 500 participants. These forums help to build awareness of promising tools and strategies for community and economic development. A recent survey of participants suggests that these forums are making a real difference. A second example is the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas's commitment to advancing digital inclusion in low-income rural communities. Despite significant effort and advances made by public, private, and nonprofit organizations in recent years, nearly 30 percent of rural households continue to lack access to broadband internet service. Also, fewer than half of households earning less than $20,000 per year have such service.3In an increasingly digital economy, lack of access to high-speed internet and the knowledge of how to make the best use of it limits the ability of families and entire communities to reach their full potential. To address this problem, the Dallas Fed has explored the role of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) in addressing the digital divide, the potential for technology to bridge the urban-rural divide in access to health care, and the critical importance of preparing workers for the digital economy.4 Third and last, community development staff at the Federal Reserve Board and several Reserve Banks have conducted research to better understand housing affordability challenges affecting rural communities nationwide, recognizing the importance of sufficient affordable housing to a community's economic vitality. Researchers found that, as in many urban areas nationwide, a large portion of renters in rural communities struggle to afford their rent‑‑a finding that will not come as a surprise in this room. Fortunately, our staff also highlighted promising policy and practice solutions that have been implemented in some communities to try to address these challenges, including the establishment of dedicated funding for affordable housing and the elimination of exclusionary land use and zoning policies.5 While this type of research and community engagement work is a central component of our efforts to support rural areas, we also know that communities need resources and dedicated local partners to help implement many of the strategies involved. CRA has been an important tool for strengthening local community and economic development infrastructure since it was enacted in 1977. We also recognize that significant changes in the financial services industry since then have hindered the law's effectiveness, especially in rural communities, and that an update of the implementing regulations is appropriate. As my colleague Governor Brainard has noted, one of the principles guiding our CRA modernization work is that any redesign of CRA regulations should continue to encourage banks to seek opportunities in underserved areas, including rural communities. I understand that the HAC has done considerable research and stakeholder engagement to shed light on the barriers to the effective use of CRA in rural communities; all of that work will benefit our reform efforts. The Fed's ongoing series of roundtable discussions in communities across the country will also allow us to hear suggestions for improving CRA from local stakeholders, including many people from rural communities. These perspectives will inform our deliberations on this critical regulation, and we will make a summary of our discussions available to the public. In closing, while the economy is strong overall, we recognize that some communities have yet to feel the full benefits of the ongoing expansion. We are conducting research, collaborating with communities, and assessing financial regulations so that our nation's current prosperity will benefit small towns and cities alike. The work being done by tonight's award recipients and by each of you in this room is critical to making progress toward that goal. Thank you for being our partners in this work, and enjoy the conference. 1. Alison Weingarden (2017), "Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25).Return to text 2. See, for example, Economic Innovation Group (2016),The New Map of Economic Growth and Recovery(Washington: EIG, May).Return to text 3. Housing Assistance Council (2018), "Creating Connections: What Broadband Means for Rural America,"Rural Voices,vol. 22 (2), available athttp://www.ruralhome.org.Return to text 4. For example, see Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (2016),Closing the Digital Divide: A Framework for Meeting CRA Obligations(PDF)(Dallas: FRB Dallas, July, rev. December 2016); Jordana Barton (2018), "Telehealth along the Texas-Mexico Border,"Rural Health Quarterly, June; and Jordana Barton (2018). "Preparing Workers for the Expanding Digital Economy,"Investing in America's Workforce: Improving Outcomes for Workers and Employers, August, available athttps://www.dallasfed.org/cd/digital.Return to text 5. For example, see Ann Carpenter, Douglas White, and Mary Hirt (2018), "Rental Housing Affordability in the Southeast: Data from the Sixth District," Community and Economic Development Discussion Paper 2‑18 (Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, July); and Andrew Dumont (2018), "Rural Affordable Rental Housing: Quantifying Need, Reviewing Recent Federal Support, and Assessing the Use of Low Income Housing Tax Credits in Rural Areas (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-077. (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).Return to text