The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Tuesday invited public comment on a proposal modifying their resolution plan requirements for large banking firms. The proposal would keep existing resolution plan expectations in place for the largest firms, while reducing requirements for smaller firms that pose less risk. Resolution plans, also known as living wills, describe a firm's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the firm. Since the resolution planning requirements took effect in 2012, large firms have improved their resolution strategies and governance, refined their estimates of liquidity and capital needs in resolution, and simplified their legal structures. These changes have made the firms substantially more resilient. The proposal, which builds on a separate framework proposed by the banking agencies, establishes a graduated set of resolution planning requirements that depend on the level of risk a firm poses for the financial system. The proposal is consistent with the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act and would affect domestic and foreign banks with more than $100 billion in total consolidated assets. For the most systemically important firms, the proposal would adopt the current practice of requiring resolution plans to be submitted on a two-year cycle. The proposal would tailor the rule's requirements for firms that do not pose the same systemic risk as the largest institutions, requiring these plans to be submitted on a three-year cycle. Both groups of firms would alternate between submitting full plans and targeted plans. Foreign banks with the smallest or least complex U.S. operations would be required to submit reduced content plans, commensurate with their reduced operations. A targeted resolution plan would include core elements like capital and liquidity, material changes to the firm, as well as areas of interest identified by the agencies. Generally, reduced content plans would include only material changes since the prior plan submission. All plans would continue to include a publicly available section. For the smallest and least complex domestic firms that engage in traditional banking activities and present the least risk, the proposal would eliminate resolution planning requirements. However, if one of those firms engages in risky activity above a certain threshold, it would be required to submit a resolution plan. The attached charts show the proposed requirements and a list of firms in each category. The agencies are requesting comment by June 21. Federal RegisternoticeHTML Visuals (PDF) Open Board Meeting on April 8, 2019
The federal banking agencies on Tuesday proposed a rule to limit the interconnectedness of large banking organizations and reduce the impact from failure of the largest banking organizations. The proposal would complement other measures that the banking agencies have taken to limit interconnectedness among large banking organizations. Global systemically important bank holding companies, or GSIBs, are the largest and most complex banking organizations and are required to issue debt with certain features under the Board's "total loss-absorbing capacity," or TLAC, rule. That debt would be used to recapitalize the holding company during bankruptcy or resolution if it were to fail. To discourage GSIBs and "advanced approaches" banking organizations--generally, firms that have $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets or $10 billion or more in on-balance sheet foreign exposure--from purchasing large amounts of TLAC debt, the proposal would require such banking organizations to hold additional capital against substantial holdings of TLAC debt. This would reduce interconnectedness between large banking organizations and, if a GSIB were to fail, reduce the impact on the financial system from that failure. The proposal from the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency would also require the holding companies of GSIBs to report publicly their TLAC debt outstanding. Comments will be accepted for 60 days following publication in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The federal bank regulatory agencies on Thursday requested comment on a proposal to modify a capital requirement for U.S. banking organizations predominantly engaged in custodial activities, as required by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA). The EGRRCPA requires the agencies to permit certain firms--those predominantly engaged in custody, safekeeping, and asset servicing activities--to exclude qualifying deposits at central banks from their supplementary leverage ratio. The supplementary leverage ratio applies only to certain large or internationally active banking organizations. Based on data available at the time of the proposal, only The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation, Northern Trust Corporation, and State Street Corporation, together with their depository institution subsidiaries, would be considered predominantly engaged in custody, safekeeping, and asset servicing activities and therefore able to exclude deposits at central banks from their supplementary leverage ratio. Comments on the proposal from the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal RegisterNotice (PDF)
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the "Fed Family" Luncheon at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California Today I would like to share a few observations on innovation as it relates to the business of community banking. In particular, I will focus on opportunities for community banks to innovate through collaboration with fintech firms. I'll also discuss the role our regulatory structure plays in those relationships.1 Community banks, like just about every other industry, are learning to adapt to a new world of rapid innovation and shifting consumer expectations. Consider the personal loan market. TransUnion estimates that, about a decade ago, fintech lenders generated less than 1 percent of personal loans.2Today, fintech firms originate a larger share of personal loans than banks.3This is not all bad news for banks, though. And we should not simply assume that gains by fintech lenders are necessarily at the expense of banks. A large share of fintech lending is actually originated by bank partners working with fintech firms. Similarly, the funds that flow between a fintech lender and borrowers almost always travel across the payment services of a bank. So, while the changes in the market pose potential competitive threats to banks, the changes also raise potential new opportunities for banks. This is especially true for community banks, which are frequently the banks working most closely with fintech lenders. Competition or collaboration?Not too long ago commentators were looking at the impact of fintech on community banking as a zero-sum game. In fact, many wondered whether fintech firms would put community banks out of business.4Recent surveys show how much the discussion has evolved. Rather than fear fintech, more and more community bankers are trying to determine how to adjust their businesses to make the best use of new technologies. For example, in the 2018 Survey of Community Banks by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), small banks almost universally agreed that fintech firms are not currently their primary competitor.5These findings are consistent with data from the 2018 Small Business Lending Survey by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).6In contrast, almost half of large banks identified fintech firms as frequent competitors. The FDIC opined that this was likely because large banks, like fintech firms, rely heavily on data and automated technology when making loans. A much lower percentage of small banks--only about 10 percent--saw fintech firms as current competitors. As I'll discuss later, it's likely that the relationship-driven nature of community bank business models helps insulate these banks from fintech competitors. The most interesting possibilities emerged in survey responses about small banks workingtogetherwith fintech firms as partners. The community bank respondents to the CSBS survey included numerous anecdotes and observations about the important opportunities fintech offered community banks to diversify their products, extend their reach, and offer more efficient services for their customers.7 Indeed, fintech firms may complement the activities of community banks well. For example, while small businesses may value the relationships that local bankers offer, they don't like the lengthy process of filling out loan applications, waiting for credit decisions, and the time it takes small banks to make funds available.8Those are precisely the types of issues that data-driven, smartphone-based fintech firms are good at addressing.9 At the same time, community banks' particular advantages, mainly their strong relationships with their small business customers, would be difficult for smartphone-based fintech apps to replicate. Let me give you an example: During last year's community bank research conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,10a community bank based in Santa Barbara described the harrowing months around the end of 2017. As you know all too well, a massive wildfire, followed by a deadly series of mudslides, caused devastating damage and five emergency evacuations of Montecito, California.11Within 24 hours of the wildfires and mudslides, the community bank declared an emergency and began executing its disaster response strategy.12The bank used a wide range of communication channels, from Facebook to text messaging, to keep in touch with its employees and its customers. It created a disaster assistance package for personal and small business borrowers. The bank offered new lines of credit (including a 24-hour turnaround on small business lines). It made payment deferrals on already-existing loans and provided free safe deposit boxes. The bank even delivered more than 15,000 water bottles and offered more than 1,500 respirators for local residents at its branches. Small businesses value that level of commitment to local customers. And they recognize the benefits of working with local community banks that understand their regions and businesses. The relationship-based nature of community bank lending helps small businesses that often lack the detailed balance sheets or detailed income statements required by larger banks.13Even when small businesses do have the right paperwork, large banks are still less likely to engage in lending at small bank levels. That's because the transaction costs for underwriting a $100,000 loan are comparable to a $1 million loan. None of this is lost on small businesses, which, according to the Federal Reserve's Small Business Credit Survey, continue to express greater satisfaction with small banks compared to both big banks and fintech lenders.14 This is not to say that the community banks' advantages cannot be challenged by technology. Many fintech firms are currently looking to leverage their deep ties with other aspects of small businesses--their payment processing services or accounting software, for instance--to build data-driven lending products that are tied to the day-to-day operations of small businesses. Fintech lenders can provide easy-to-use online applications, rapid loan decisionmaking, and customer service that helps bring low cost, automated decisionmaking to the small loan segment that was previously left to community banks. Partnering with a fintech firm can offer a community bank the best of both worlds. The bank can take advantage of new technology and all the efficiencies that come with it asan extensionof the banks' relationship-banking model. In a sense, fintech is just the latest evolution of a long history of community banks leveraging technology to provide financial services. I'm thinking here of technologies, such as ATMs, mobile banking, and remote deposit capture.15For their part, community banks offer potential fintech partners a consumer-first approach to business and a number of advantages: deposit insurance and liquidity; a stable customer base; credibility in a local community; and settlement and compliance services.16I thought one response to the CSBS survey said it best. The banker wrote, "[T]he future of consumer banking seems to be as a participant in the ecosystem of lifestyle technological solutions rather than as a standalone banking relationship." The problem is, as the banker continued, "[I]t's hard to imagine what exactly that will look like and how it will change the banking business model."17 What can the Federal Reserve do to foster prudent community bank innovation?I believe that if a bank has not started thinking about how innovation may impact its business, it is very late to the game. This does not mean that every bank has to run out this afternoon and partner with a fintech firm--there may be all kinds of thoughtful reasons not to engage with them. What matters is that banks, particularly community banks, have gone through theprocessof thinking about the relevant issues.18 But there are many questions about how community banks are adjusting to the changing environment. For instance, about 40 percent of community banks say that they do not currently offer online loan applications and have no immediate plans to do so.19That 40 percent may represent bankers who have not gone through the process of thinking about the way innovation impacts their business. But it could just as easily include bankers who have looked at the issue carefully and concluded that online loan applications do not fit within their business model. Most importantly, though, it may indicate that some community banks may feel that they are simply not able to leverage new technology. Most small banks are dependent on partnerships with third parties to make use of new technologies.20I am concerned that some banks are not innovating because they feel they lack the ability to navigate the complex regulatory and compliance issues that may arise. Among other requirements, for instance, before a bank partners with a fintech firm, it first has to consider regulatory and supervisory expectations regarding third-party risk management. Written guidance may allow for risk-based or more tailored approaches, but a number of factors contribute to what the Treasury Department recently described as, "more stringent de facto regulation." In particular, Treasury raised concerns that banks that are worried about criticism from examiners might, "adopt a more uniformly stringent vendor oversight approach rather than trying to convince their examiners to permit a more tailored approach to vendor oversight."21And this may ultimately deter banks from trying to explore how they should be adapting their business strategies in light of technological change. Given these concerns, what is the Federal Reserve Board's role, as a bank supervisor, in helping community banks chart their way through changing times? Let me be clear. It is management's job, not an examiner's job, to set the bank's innovation strategy. However, I think supervisors need to recognize and be thoughtful about how we might affect the way banks consider innovation. In particular, I think it's important that we fulfill our responsibilities to ensure safety and soundness of banks and consumer protection, while also creating a regulatory environment that does not hinder the integration of responsible innovation into the strategic direction that a bank opts to pursue. Here at the Federal Reserve, I think it's vital that we look closely at our work to make sure we are not hindering prudent innovation between community banks and fintech firms. We need to think about how our guidance sets expectations for the way banks should engage third parties. We should explore more effective ways to interact with banks, including through new types of outreach and education. To begin with, I recognize the need to ensure that our outsourcing risk management guidance appropriately reflects the present-day business realities of the banks that we supervise. For instance, regulators' third-party risk management frameworks discuss particular types of contractual terms and, where appropriate, audit rights by a bank over its service providers. However, when a community bank is in negotiations with large vendors, such as cloud service companies and core service providers, they may not be in a position to make demands. As the largest vendors grow even larger, this will get even harder for small banks.22 Concerns about compliance can also make it difficult for a community bank to work with small partners. A small fintech firm may lack a traditional financial history, raising questions about how a bank can evaluate the fintech firm's status in the industry, corporate history, or financial condition. It certainly can be difficult for a small bank's staff to evaluate a wide range of potential technology vendors. I am heartened to hear that small banks are increasingly collaborating to vet third-parties. Services are also emerging to help deliver due diligence information to banks and monitor their third-party relationships. Of course, the ultimate responsibility should always lie with bank management, as each relationship involves particular services, for particular needs, for a particular risk profile. However, it seems sensible that a large amount of the vetting, contracting, and onboarding process could be streamlined for banks by collaboration or specialized third-party services. We are also looking to engage industry more frequently and openly so that we understand how they are weighing questions relating to innovation and how bank regulators may or may not impact those considerations. Along those lines, we continue to look for new ways for regulated institutions to interact with the Federal Reserve System outside of the examination process. In particular, supervised institutions, vendors, or consumer advocates are encouraged to contact their local Reserve Bank; talk with us about the issues they face; and, in some cases, ask clarifying questions about relevant legal frameworks and supervisory expectations. ConclusionAs regulators and banks adjust to this post-crisis age of innovation, it is important for us to understand the pain points for community banks. As a regulator, my priority will always be facilitating a banking system that is safe and sound and in which consumers are treated fairly. But regulators also have to ask: How can our approach to supervision be modernized so that it supports responsible innovation by our supervised institutions? The efforts I described today are hopefully just a start. I am looking forward to personally engaging with community bankers, vendors, and consumer advocates to hear their perspectives on the most productive ways for the Federal Reserve Board to help community banks thrive in this age of innovation. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. TransUnion, "FinTechs Taking Larger Share of Personal Loan Market While Increasing Portfolio Risk-Return Performance," press release, November 2, 2017.Return to text 3. TransUnion, "Fact versus Fiction: Fintech Lenders," (2017) (finding that fintech firms and banks originate 38 percent and 28 percent of personal loans, respectively). See also Kate Rooney, "Fintechs help boost US personal loan surge to a record $138 billion,"CNBC, February 24, 2019.Return to text 4. See, for example, Kate Rooney, "Small banks you've never heard of are quietly enabling the tech takeover of the financial industry,"CNBC, February 15, 2019.Return to text 5. The primary exception was survey responses regarding mortgage lending, where just under 5 percent of respondents identified fintech firms as a primary source of competition. See CSBS Community Bank Survey, "Community Banking in the 21stCentury (PDF)" (paper presented at the Sixth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, St. Louis, MO, October 3-4, 2018). See also Allen N. Berger, William Goulding, Tara Rice, "Do small businesses still prefer community banks?,"Journal of Banking & Finance44 (July 2014): 264-278 (finding that small banks may have less strong relationships with small businesses, potentially due to changes in lending technologies and deregulation of the banking industry).Return to text 6. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,FDIC Small Business Lending Survey (PDF)(Washington: FDIC, 2018).Return to text 7. One Missouri bank described how it uses new technologies (and partnerships) to be one of the first banks in its market to offer video banking services. See also CSBS Community Bank Survey in note 5.Return to text 8. See, for example, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, Kansas City, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, St. Louis, San Francisco,Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms(PDF)(Federal Reserve System, 2017).Return to text 9. For example, focus group participants were limited to small businesses with 1 to 20 employees, excluding owners, and at least $200,000 but less than $2 million in revenue. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Browsing to Borrow: "Mom & Pop" Small Business Perspectives on Online Lenders(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, June 2018).Return to text 10. The annual conference is jointly-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.Return to text 11. See Lou Whiteman, "How the 'Best Banks' handle the wrath of Mother Nature,"American Banker, September 4, 2018). See also Brooke Holland, "In Case of Emergency, Planning Pays Off for Montecito Bank & Trust After Fire and Debris Flows,"Noozhawk, July 29, 2018.Return to text 12. The bank had finalized its disaster relief strategy in 2016, anticipating potential roadway closures and shutdowns from the predicted El Niño season.Return to text 13. See, for example, Karen Gordon Mills and Brayden McCarthy, "The State of Small Business Lending: Credit Access during the Recovery and How Technology May Change the Game (PDF)," Harvard Business School Working Paper 15-004 (Cambridge: Harvard Business School, July 2014).Return to text 14. Results show net satisfaction scores for small banks as 73 percent, large banks as 49 percent, and online lenders as 35 percent. SeeSmall Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firmsin note 8.Return to text 15.See, for example, The Independent Community Bankers of America,Fintech Strategy Roadmap for Community Banks(PDF)(Washington: The Independent Community Bankers of America, March 2018).Return to text 16.Fintech Strategy Roadmap.Return to text 17. See CSBS Community Bank Survey in note 5.Return to text 18. The National Risk Committee at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) warns that, "[f]ailure to appropriately consider innovation and the responsible adoption of technology could pose strategic risk to some banks." See also Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,Semiannual Risk Perspective(PDF)(Washington: OCC, Fall 2018). The OCC has long raised concerns that the strategic risks are particularly acute for community banks as compared to large banks that have the resources to fund innovation labs or even purchase mature fintech firms. See, for example, Lalita Clozel, "OCC's Curry: Fintech a 'Strategic Risk' for Small Banks,"American Banker, November 18, 2016.Return to text 19. See CSBS Community Bank Survey in note 5.Return to text 20. More than two-thirds of respondents to the Conference of State Bank Supervisor's annual survey of community banks reported that they rarely or never rely on in-house technology for online loan applications and other digital products. See also CSBS Community Bank Survey in note 5.Return to text 21. U.S. Department of Treasury,A Financial System that Creates Economic Opportunities: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation(PDF)(Washington: Department of Treasury, July 2018). "Smaller, nonbank fintech firms and banks have raised concerns that the overall burden of the third-party supervisory regime stifles the ability of new firms to partner with banks. . . . [C]ommunity banks have expressed concern about their capacity to undertake the requisite due diligence and ongoing vendor management (especially with larger vendors)."Return to text 22. See, for example, Penny Crosman, "Fiserv-First Data: Why small banks fear big fintech,"American Banker, January 16, 2019.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Monday that it is accepting applications from individuals who wish to be considered for membership on the Community Advisory Council (CAC). The CAC was formed in 2015. It advises the Board on issues affecting consumers and communities and complements two of the Board's other advisory councils whose members represent depository institutions--the Federal Advisory Council and the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council. The CAC is made up of a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer and community development organizations and interests, including affordable housing, community and workforce development, small business, and asset and wealth building. CAC members meet semiannually with members of the Board of Governors in Washington to provide a range of perspectives on the economic circumstances and financial services needs of consumers and communities, with a particular focus on the concerns of low- and moderate-income consumers and communities. The Board expects to announce the appointment of CAC members in the fall of 2019. Applicants from previous years are encouraged to re-apply in 2019. Additional information about the selection process, including instructions for submitting an application, can be found in the attachedFederal RegisterNotice. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday published a final rule implementing policy changes to procedures governing the provision of intraday credit to U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banking organizations (FBOs). The changes are intended to refine the methods for determining the level of intraday credit that these branches and agencies can receive from the Federal Reserve Banks. Part II of the Board's Payment System Risk Policy (PSR policy) governs the provision of intraday credit (or daylight overdrafts) in accounts at the Reserve Banks. The PSR policy recognizes that the Federal Reserve has an important role in providing intraday balances and credit to foster the smooth functioning of the overall payment system and also seeks to control the risks assumed by the Reserve Banks in providing this intraday credit, which is made available to meet temporary needs at healthy depository institutions. Although the PSR policy's intraday credit provisions generally apply similarly to FBOs and U.S. institutions, certain procedures for determining the level of intraday credit that FBOs can receive from the Federal Reserve Banks differ. Where the procedures are different for FBOs, the PSR policy relies on an FBO's strength of support assessment (SOSA) ranking and its status as a financial holding company (FHC) to determine the level of intraday credit that U.S. branches and agencies of the FBO can receive from the Federal Reserve Banks. The Board has announced that the SOSA ranking will be eliminated; additionally, the Board believes that an FBO's status as an FHC should not affect the FBO's access to intraday credit. With this rulemaking, the Board is removing references to SOSA and an FBO's FHC status while adopting alternative methods for determining FBOs' eligibility for positive net debit cap, the size of the net debit cap, and its eligibility to request a streamlined procedure to obtain maximum daylight overdraft capacity. The Board believes that FBOs' resulting net debit caps will be better tailored to FBOs' use of intraday credit and will not constrain FBOs' U.S. operations. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North CarolinaCease and Desist Order dated January 25, 2017 (PDF)Terminated April 17, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced it has fined Standard Chartered plc and Standard Chartered Bank, of London, England, $164 million for the firm's unsafe and unsound practices relating to inadequate sanctions controls and failure to disclose sanctions risks to the Federal Reserve. The Board is also requiring the firm to improve its U.S. law compliance program. Additionally, the firm is required to strengthen management oversight and perform annual risk-management assessments for high-risk operations. Standard Chartered is restricted from re-employing any individuals involved in the violations. The Board's action is being taken in conjunction with actions by the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control, the New York County District Attorney's Office, the New York State Department of Financial Services, and the U.K.'s Financial Conduct Authority. The penalties issued by all of the agencies total $1.1 billion. The Board previously fined the firm in 2012 for unrelated violations that occurred prior to the period covered by this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday invited public comment on a proposal that would simplify and increase the transparency of the Board's rules for determining control of a banking organization. If a company has control over a banking organization, the company generally becomes subject to the Board's rules and regulations. Over time, the Board has issued public and private interpretations on the topic of control, but banking organizations and their investors often remain uncertain about whether a proposed investment is controlling. The proposal would set forth a comprehensive regulatory framework for control determinations and request comment on the framework. "Providing all stakeholders with clearer rules of the road for control determinations will responsibly reduce regulatory burden," Chair Jerome H. Powell said. "As a result, it will be easier for banks, particularly community banks, to raise capital to support lending and investment." In particular, the proposal lays out several factors and thresholds that the Board will use to determine if a company has control over a bank. The key factors include the company's total voting and non-voting equity investment in the bank; director, officer, and employee overlaps between the company and the bank; and the scope of business relationships between the company and the bank. The proposal clearly describes what combination of those factors would and would not trigger control. As a result, the proposal would reduce complexity and burden for banking organizations and their investors, and provide clarity so that a wide range of stakeholders can better understand the control rules. "The Board's control framework has developed over time through a Delphic and hermetic process that has generally not benefited from public comment," Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles said. "This proposal would place substantially all of the Board's control positions into a comprehensive public regulatory proposal and allow public comment on those positions to improve their content and consistency." The attached chart shows how different combinations of the factors would or would not result in control. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML Chart (PDF) Opening Statement by Chair Jerome H. Powell Opening Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Open Board Meeting on April 23, 2019
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday invited public comment on a regulatory framework that would more closely match the rules for foreign banks with the risks they pose to the U.S. financial system. The changes would maintain the most stringent requirements for firms with the most risk, while reducing compliance requirements for firms with less risk. Under the proposed framework, foreign banks with $100 billion or more in U.S. assets would be sorted into categories of increasingly stringent requirements based on several factors. The factors, which reflect banks' complexity and risk to the financial system, include asset size, cross-jurisdictional activity, reliance on short-term wholesale funding, nonbank assets, and off-balance sheet exposure. "This proposal maintains the substantial resilience built up across the U.S. financial system over the past decade, while at the same time making appropriate adjustments for firms that present less risk," Chair Jerome H. Powell said. The framework is substantially the same as the framework proposed last year by the Board for large domestic banks, with some adjustments reflecting structural differences in foreign banks' U.S. operations. The proposal also builds on the Board's existing tailoring of its rules. "The proposal seeks to increase the efficiency of the firms without compromising the strong resiliency of the financial sector," Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles said. While the framework is substantively the same for both domestic and foreign banks, the resulting impact may be different. For example, currently, foreign banks operating in the United States tend to rely on less stable short-term wholesale funding and can be complex, which present heightened risks. If a bank is engaged in these higher-risk activities, the framework would result in more stringent regulations. The Board estimates that the framework would, at this time, increase required liquid assets by 0.5 to 4 percent and decrease required capital by roughly 0.5 percent for foreign banks with $100 billion or more in U.S. assets. The proposal also requests comment on whether the Board should apply new liquidity requirements to the branches of foreign banks. The branches of foreign banks are currently subject to internal liquidity stress tests, but are not subject to standardized liquidity requirements. The proposal asks for comment on whether such standardized liquidity requirements should be imposed and on several different approaches for doing so. The proposals were jointly developed with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Charts are provided that show the proposed requirements for each category, as well as a list of firms projected to be included in each category. Comments will be accepted through June 21, 2019. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice 1HTML Federal Registernotice 2 (PDF) Visuals (PDF) Opening Statement by Chair Jerome H. Powell Opening Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Statement by Governor Lael Brainard Open Board Meeting on April 8, 2019
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Princeton Capital Holdings LLC, Princeton Capital LLC, and Princap Holdings One LLC, all of Ewing, New JerseyWritten Agreement dated April 4, 2019 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation, Tokyo, JapanWritten agreement regarding anti-money laundering compliance dated April 23, 2019 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday published transcripts of more than 50 interviews with former policymakers and former senior staff that chronicle nearly half a century of Federal Reserve history. The interviews, including with former chairs Paul A. Volcker, Alan Greenspan, and Janet L. Yellen, provide personal recollections of important economic, monetary policy, and regulatory developments. They also provide impressions of life and culture at the Federal Reserve Board. The interviews are available on the history section of the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced it has fined UniCredit, S.p.A., a foreign bank operating in the United States and headquartered in Italy, and two of its subsidiaries $158 million for the firm's unsafe and unsound practices related to inadequate sanctions controls and supervision of its subsidiary banks. The Board is also requiring the firm to improve its sanctions compliance program, including the adoption of procedures to address the specific vulnerabilities identified by the Board. The Board's action is being taken in conjunction with actions by the Department of Justice, the Office of the U.S. Attorney for the District of Columbia, the Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control, the New York County District Attorney's Office, and the New York Department of Financial Services. The penalties to be paid by UniCredit to all of the agencies total approximately $1.3 billion. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Washington, D.C. Thank you to the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) for this opportunity to share my perspective and some of my goals as a Federal Reserve Board governor on issues of interest to you and many in your states.1 I emphasize that word "perspective" because the view from Washington can be very different from how things look in your states and communities. No one knows that better than I do, of course, because not so long ago, I was sitting where you are, enjoying the dinner provided by CSBS and hearing the perspective from Washington. I'm still enjoying the dinner tonight, but find I am now, so to speak, also on the menu. And in this position, as part of the Federal Reserve but also still deeply rooted in my experience as a community banker and state regulator, I'll offer my thoughts on forging a closer relationship and strengthening communication between the Board of Governors and state banking commissioners. First, to establish some context, let me say a few words about the Fed's role and perspective on supervising community banks. The lion's share of community banks are those with total assets of $500 million or less, with the Fed defining the sector as those with up to $10 billion in assets. The Federal Reserve directly supervises 731 state-chartered community banks, which is only a small share of the number of state-chartered banks overseen by CSBS members. The fact that this is only a small share of the total might sound to some people like the Federal Reserve has only a small role in community banking. But it's important to remember that the Fed is the primary federal supervisor responsible for all bank and thrift holding companies, a total of 3,912. This includes the vast majority of all community banking organizations. The Fed also influences the supervision of all community and regional banks by developing both safety and soundness and consumer rules to implement laws passed by Congress, applicable to insured depositories and their holding companies. Typically this is done in collaboration with other federal agencies and after seeking the public's input. I mention Congress and these other agencies to emphasize that the Fed shares responsibility for writing and implementing federal regulations for community banks. Now, let me describe my role. In addition to my broader responsibilities in supervision and regulation, I am Chair of the Board's Smaller Regional and Community Banking subcommittee, which oversees our work in this area. I am also the Chair of the Board's committee tasked with oversight of our rulemaking and supervision on consumer issues. I also participate in carrying out the Federal Reserve's other responsibilities, such as conducting monetary policy and overseeing the payment system. But it's fair to say that my background in community banking was an important reason I was chosen and confirmed by Congress as the first person to fulfill a new requirement that at least one governor have primary experience working in or supervising community banks. My background and commitment to community banking is also some important context for what I have to say about the Fed's interests in improving communication with the members of CSBS. I mentioned a moment ago that the perspective in Washington, and from the Board, can be different from the view from your position as banking commissioners, and that is certainly true. But one thing I have learned, since joining the Board in November, is that my fellow governors, along with the staff at the Board, share your view, as I do, about the vital importance of community banking and the essential role community banks play in our financial system. Community banks are frequently the economic engines supporting and driving the economies of many communities, especially in rural areas. In these communities, they are the primary providers of financial services for individuals and small businesses, and a source of financial advice and civic leadership. They play an indispensable role in areas not served by larger institutions and in other communities of all different sizes, from urban to rural, serving a range of customers, including some that are sometimes not as high a priority for larger banks. I think it is important to note, and too often overlooked, that the vast majority of community banks managed their risks well in the years leading up to and during the financial crisis and were not the source of the excessive risk taking that caused the crisis. For this reason among others, the Federal Reserve has been engaged in an active effort to tailor regulations, including those issued in the wake of the financial crisis, to appropriately reflect the potential risk that an institution might pose to financial stability. I am pleased to see some evidence we are making progress. Last year's CSBS survey found that community banks reported a decrease in regulatory costs in 2017.2This was the first reduction in burden reported since the survey began in 2014. The decline was attributed to the implementation of changes stemming from the recent review by the banking agencies under the EGRPRA, the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. There has been progress in tailoring regulations that affect community banks, and I believe more progress lies ahead as we implement the changes that Congress included in S. 2155 and explore additional opportunities to reduce burden while maintaining the resiliency and strength of smaller banks.3 Before I go further, let me give a brief assessment of how community banks are faring. This might seem like an issue that is primarily of interest to community bankers and regulators, but I don't look at it that way at all. One of my most important responsibilities now is voting on the monetary policy decisions of the Federal Open Market Committee, and that requires me to closely and constantly monitor the health of the U.S. economy. And when community banks are the source for more than half of all lending to small businesses, which together account for two-thirds of private sector job creation, then the health of community banking has a big influence on the health of the U.S. economy.4 Since the financial crisis, the health of the community-banking sector has improved significantly. Over those years and today, the large majority of community banks have maintained sound levels of capital. Although the number of community banks in the United States continues to fall due to consolidation, overall the sector continues to post strong earnings, which, in turn, contribute to maintaining healthy capital positions. One measure of this strong financial position is that no community banks failed in 2018. The shared responsibility we have as financial supervisors to ensure the ongoing viability of community banks requires cooperation and coordination. We must continue to ensure that the institutions we supervise are proactively managing their risks to remain strong. It's our job to identify emerging risks to community banks and to ensure bankers are identifying and managing their risks appropriately. We want to ensure that loans are underwritten prudently and that bankers are actively managing the concentrations of credit risk in their portfolios. We welcome the strong lending growth that many community banks are experiencing, which is fueling job creation and sustaining our economic expansion, which in July will become the longest in U.S. history. But strong lending growth must be supported by prudent, well-managed funding plans in order to manage the risk that strains on liquidity may arise more quickly than is sometimes anticipated. Now, let me turn back to my main theme today, which is fostering better communication between CSBS and state banking commissioners and the Board of Governors. Improved communication is a top priority for me for several reasons. First, it is very much my approach to government service, and leadership in particular, to do a lot of listening. A wise person once said that the most effective leaders do more listening than talking. When I became Kansas' State Bank Commissioner, I started a twice-yearly series of roundtables with the chief executives of banks across the state. It was an excellent way for me to better understand the issues that were impacting bankers in a way that was less formal than when banks comment on rules and less fraught than the supervisory process. Sure, it took time away from the office, from consultation with the legislature, and the deadlines all of us have faced. In my case, considering the size of Kansas, it was also time away from home and family. However, I don't have to tell those of you who have also found a lot of merit in such tours that it is an enormous advantage to find out what is on the minds of those in the field. The second, very straightforward reason to foster better communication with all of you is that the nature of financial regulation and supervision in the United States argues strongly for better coordination. To a much greater extent than in other nations, in the United States financial oversight is divided between the federal government and subnational authorities--the states. At the federal level, responsibility is further divided between different agencies, such as the Fed, the FDIC, the Office of Comptroller of the Currency, and the National Credit Union Administration. This system evolved over time, and as things stand, there are some advantages to this specialization. But this division of labor may, at times, inhibit information sharing, and as a general principle, better communication can help overcome this challenge. More specifically, better communication and information sharing between state banking commissioners and the Federal Reserve can further improve the early identification and resolution of emerging issues at community banks. Harnessing and sharing these sometimes divergent views can serve to strengthen a financial regulatory system that shares responsibility among many state and federal agencies. Better communication and information sharing will benefit both you and the Federal Reserve, but my motivation is that the Fed has much to gain here. Because states are responsible for chartering and co-supervising the large majority of community banks, they can provide a broader perspective into local community banking issues and trends. Let me pause here for a moment and say that improving communication doesn't necessarily mean that the Federal Reserve and the CSBS members will always agree. We won't, and perhaps we shouldn't. A diversity of views can be a strength. A robust discussion requires a thorough analysis of differing views, which leads to a more informed understanding of issues. This healthy give and take is the fourth reason for better communication: It leads to better outcomes. I will cite one example that I know is on the minds of many of you--the rulemaking process the agencies are currently engaged in on the community bank leverage ratio (CBLR). Here is an excellent example of where it makes good sense to consult closely. I know you have a lot of knowledge and expertise to bring to bear on this issue, which helps explain why Congress has required the agencies to consult with the states. As you know, the Fed and the other agencies are now gathering and evaluating comments on the CBLR and getting feedback on this interagency proposal. So, now is a good time to re-engage. I am committed to re-engaging with you on the interagency proposal and ways we might be able to improve it. I am eager to hear your thoughts. I have one more reason for better communication, but first I will give you an idea of what I have in mind for that consultation. The formal means by which CSBS and others comment on a rulemaking is important, but I think we would also all benefit from more informal, and more frequent contact. If you have an issue, if you have something to say, just pick up the phone. It is also my intention to be on the road a lot, visiting Federal Reserve Districts and talking to bankers, consumers, and community groups. When I come to your state, I hope to see you, and I promise to make time to talk. My final reason for better communication brings me back to a point I made at the outset: the United States needs a strong community-banking sector. We need strong community banks because they help support strong communities. Strong communities are the building blocks of a strong nation. They provide safety, education and economic opportunities, and help define the values we hold dear. Community banks are vital to the success of communities. They help us save and plan for a better future. The credit they extend helps preserve farming as a way of life for American families, and provides the means for small businesses to start and to thrive, which is so important to the health of communities. This is not an abstract notion for me. As a community banker, I have seen how access to credit and support from a financial institution with deep roots in a community can make a direct and immediate difference in people's lives. I continued to feel that way when I did the job you do, as a state banking commissioner, helping ensure that families and communities have access to financial services that are so important to their success. I enjoyed being a community banker, and I hope you know I've enjoyed working closely with all of you as a banking commissioner, and I now look forward to building a stronger partnership between all of you and the Federal Reserve Board. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. I hope to see you soon in your states, and I wish you a productive and enjoyable visit to Washington. 1. My views are my own and do not represent the view of the Board of Governors or its other members.Return to text 2. Federal Reserve System, Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.,2018 Community Banking in the 21st Century (PDF)(Research and Policy Conference, October 3-4, 2018).Return to text 3. Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018)Return to text 4. U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy,Frequently Asked Questions About Small Business (PDF)(August 2018).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from February 25 through March 20, 2019. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on March 19-20, 2019. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 19-20, 2019:HTML|PDF
Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles At the Financial Stability Board Roundtable on Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks, Washington, D.C. I am pleased that we have this opportunity to meet with many of the institutions active in helping to achieve a transition from LIBOR to the risk-free rates identified by working groups in each of our jurisdictions. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has coordinated the international effort to reform interest rate benchmarks at the direction of the G-20. This is an important effort across the globe, but nowhere is it of more importance than in the jurisdictions relying on LIBOR. Let's review the reasons that we are here. By the time of the financial crisis, much of the global financial system had come to rely on LIBOR. And yet LIBOR was a very poorly structured rate; contributing banks were asked to submit quotes without any requirement of evidence of transactions or other facts to back them up, which made them susceptible to manipulation. Thanks to subsequent reforms, contributors now provide this type of evidence where possible, but LIBOR is based on an underlying market with so few transactions that there is relatively little direct evidence they can provide. Many submitting banks are uncomfortable with this situation, and some sought to stop their participation. As a result, the official sector has had to step in to support LIBOR by securing a voluntary agreement with the remaining banks to continue submitting through 2021. At the same time, the official sector has convened national working groups to help develop alternative risk-free rates and navigate a very complicated transition. Many people have used reference rates with little thought. The experience with LIBOR should teach us that this has to change and that we cannot risk making this kind of mistake again. Banks should conduct at least as much due diligence on the reference rates that they use as they conduct on the creditworthiness of their borrowers. The national working groups convened by many of the FSB member authorities have performed that type of diligence with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR, and the risk-free rates identified in other jurisdictions. That effort has been a clear and positive example of public-private sector cooperation. These alternative risk-free rates have been created or substantially reformed to ensure that robust, transaction-based rates that accurately represent well-defined underlying markets and are consistent with internationally-recognized standards are available. I want to thank the many institutions here today, and the many more that have played equally constructive roles, for their efforts in this process. This month marks the one-year anniversary of SOFR and is close to the one-year anniversary of the other new risk-free rates. Over that year, we have seen the establishment of new futures markets, cleared swap markets, and debt markets based on these new rates. SOFR futures, which did not exist a year ago, have seen more than $7 trillion in cumulative notional volumes. This has been a crucial development for market liquidity and is helping to spur the growth of SOFR swaps and other derivative markets. And SOFR is being used in cash products, with $81 billion in SOFR-linked debt issued over the past year. New markets do not arise overnight--in normal circumstances they can often take decades to develop. What has been accomplished over the past year is remarkable. At the same time, we have only a little over two and a half years until the point at which LIBOR could end, and the transition needs to continue to accelerate. The private sector needs to take on this responsibility, and we expect you to do so. The Federal Reserve's supervisory teams are including the transition away from LIBOR in their monitoring discussions with large firms. The Federal Reserve will expect to see an appropriate level of preparedness at the banks it supervises. As the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) continues to make progress on industry-led approaches to the transition, the transition paths away from LIBOR will become clearer for banks of all sizes. While we expect you to take on this responsibility, we in the public sector must also recognize our need to help. The FSB has supported this transition globally, and, in the United States, the Financial Stability Oversight Council has supported the ARRC's work. It is important that we continue to do so, and I want to thank you all today for the thoughts you have shared with us on this transition and what is needed to make it succeed.
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the "Fed Listens: Distributional Consequences of the Cycle and Monetary Policy" Conference hosted by the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota I am pleased to attend thisFed Listensevent on the distributional consequences of the business cycle and monetary policy. The Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is a natural venue for discussing this topic in the context of the broad review of our monetary policy framework that we are undertaking this year.1In our review, we are examining the policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) uses to pursue the Fed's dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. I will speak this evening about the motivation for and scope of our review. We are bringing open minds to it and are seeking perspectives from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, such as the panel of researchers we heard from this afternoon and the community leaders we will hear from tomorrow. To us, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage broadly with the public in this review as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability.2 Motivation for the ReviewThe Federal Reserve has been charged by the Congress with a dual mandate to achieve maximum employment and price stability, and this review will take this mandate as given. Moreover, the review will take as given that a 2 percent rate of inflation in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) is the operational goal most consistent with our price stability mandate. While we believe that our existing framework for conducting monetary policy has served the public well, the purpose of this review is to evaluate and assess ways in which our existing framework might be improved so that we can best achieve our dual mandate objectives on a sustained basis. That said, based on the experience of other central banks that have undertaken similar reviews, our review is more likely to produce evolution, not a revolution, in the way that we conduct monetary policy. With the U.S. economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review. The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective. We want to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years. In addition, the Federal Reserve used new policy tools and enhanced its communication practices in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession, and the review will evaluate these changes. Furthermore, the U.S. and foreign economies have evolved significantly since the experience that informed much of the pre-crisis approach. Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States and abroad.3Moreover, this global decline in r* is widely expected to persist for years. The decline in neutral policy rates likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, changes in risk-taking behavior, and a slowdown in technology growth. These factors' contributions are highly uncertain, but, irrespective of their precise role, the policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important. All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns. That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support household spending, business investment, and employment, and keep inflation from falling too low.4 Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource slack. That is, the short-run Phillips curve appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5A flatter Phillips curve is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword. It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns‑‑as was the case during and after the Great Recession--because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.6However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations. Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7 Finally, the strengthening of the labor market in recent years has highlighted the challenges of assessing the proximity of the labor market to the full employment leg of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. The unemployment rate, which stood at 3.8 percent in March, has been interpreted by many observers as suggesting that the labor market is currently operating beyond full employment. However, the level of the unemployment rate that is consistent with full employment is not directly observable and thus must be estimated. The range of plausible estimates likely extends at least as low as the current level of the unemployment rate. For example, in the February Blue Chip economic outlook survey, the average estimate of the natural rate of unemployment for the bottom 10 respondents was 3.9 percent, as compared with 4.7 percent for the highest 10 respondents.8 The decline in the unemployment rate in recent years has been accompanied by an increase in labor force participation, with especially pronounced gains for individuals in their prime working years.9These increases in participation have provided employers with a significant source of additional labor input and may be one factor restraining inflationary pressures. As with the unemployment rate, whether participation will continue to increase in a tight labor market remains uncertain. The strong job gains of recent years also has delivered benefits to groups that have historically been disadvantaged in the labor market. For example, African Americans and Hispanics have experienced persistently higher unemployment rates than whites for many decades.10However, those unemployment rate gaps have narrowed as the labor market has strengthened, and there is some indication of an extra benefit to these groups as the unemployment rate moves into very low territory.11Likewise, although unemployment rates for less-educated workers are persistently higher than they are for their more-educated counterparts, such gaps appear to narrow as the labor market strengthens.12And wage increases in the past couple of years have been strongest for less-educated workers and for those at the lower end of the wage distribution.13 Scope of the ReviewOur existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.14First adopted in January 2012, the statement has been reaffirmed at the start of each subsequent year, including earlier this year with unanimous support from all 17 FOMC participants. The statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level. In doing so, the FOMC recognizes that these assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. According to the Federal Reserve Act, the employment objective is on an equal footing with the inflation objective. As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy framework known in the research literature as "flexible inflation targeting."15However, the Fed's mandate is much more explicit about the role of employment than those of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedent over the other. We believe this transparency about the balanced approach the FOMC takes has served us well over the past decade when high unemployment called for extraordinary policies that entailed some risk of inflation. The review of our current framework will be wide ranging, and we will not prejudge where it will take us, but events of the past decade highlight three broad questions. Three QuestionsThe first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?" Under our current approach as well as that of many central banks around the world, the persistent shortfalls of inflation from 2 percent that many advanced economies have experienced over most of the past decade are treated as "bygones." This means that policy today is not adjusted to offset past inflation shortfalls with future overshoots of the inflation target (nor do persistent overshoots of inflation trigger policies that aim to undershoot the inflation target). Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots, but the effective lower bound on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more likely. Persistent inflation shortfallscarry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become poorly anchored or become anchored below the stated inflation goal.16 In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated "makeup" strategies under which policymakers seek to undo, in part or in whole, past inflation deviations from target. Such strategies include targeting average inflation over a multiyear period and price-level targeting, in which policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path.17These strategies could be implemented either permanently or as a temporary response to extraordinary circumstances. For example, the central bank could commit, at the time when the policy rate reaches the ELB, to maintain the policy rate at this level until inflation over the ELB period has, on average, run at the target rate.18Other makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case.19In many models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average performance on both legs of the dual mandate and thereby, viewed over time, provide no conflict between the dual-mandate goals.20 The benefits of the makeup strategies rest heavily on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes--for example, that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent. As is well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at that time will not warrant doing so. Because of this time inconsistency, the public would have to see a makeup strategy as a credible commitment for it to be successful. That important real-world consideration is often neglected in the academic literature, in which central bank "commitment devices" are simply assumed to exist and be instantly credible on decree. Thus, one of the most challenging questions is whether central banks could, in practice, attain the benefits of makeup strategies that are possible in models. The next question the review will consider is, "Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? And, if so, how?" The FOMC's primary means of changing the stance of monetary policy is by adjusting its target range for the federal funds rate. In the fall of 2008, the FOMC cut that target to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions. Because the U.S. economy required additional policy accommodation after the ELB was reached, the FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis: balance sheet policies and forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.21 The FOMC altered the size and composition of the Fed's balance sheet through a sequence of three large-scale securities purchase programs, via a maturity extension program, and by adjusting the reinvestment of principal payments on maturing securities. With regard to forward guidance, the FOMC initially made "calendar based" statements, and, later on, it issued "outcome based" guidance. Overall, the empirical evidence suggests that these added tools helped stem the crisis and support economic recovery by strengthening the labor market and lifting inflation back toward 2 percent. That said, estimates of the effects of these unconventional policies range widely.22 In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, we will examine additional tools to ease policy when the ELB is binding. During the crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve considered but ultimately found some of the tools deployed by foreign central banks wanting relative to the alternatives it did pursue. But the review will reassess our earlier findings in light of more recent experience in other countries. The third question the review will consider is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?" Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting. Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication practices to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions, as well as to foster democratic accountability. These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.23 As part of the review, we will assess the Committee's current and past communications and additional forms of communication that could be helpful. For example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability. Activities and Timeline for the ReviewThe review will have several components.24The Board and the Reserve Banks are currently conducting town hall-styleFed Listensevents, in which we are hearing from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development advocates, and academics. The conference here at the Minneapolis Fed is one of these events, as was the "Community Listening Session" hosted by the Dallas Fed in February. Several moreFed Listensevents will follow in May. In addition, we are holding a System research conference on June 4-5, 2019, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with speakers and panelists from outside the Fed. The program includes overviews by academic experts of themes that are central to the review: the FOMC's monetary policy since the financial crisis, assessments of the maximum sustainable level of employment, alternative policy frameworks and strategies to achieve the dual mandate, policy tools, global considerations, financial stability considerations, and central bank communications. Two sessions will feature panels of community leaders who will share their perspectives on the labor market and the effects of interest rates on their constituencies. We expect to release summaries of theFed Listensevents and to livestream the Chicago conference. Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the FOMC will conduct its own assessment of its monetary policy framework, beginning around the middle of the year. We will share our conclusions with the public in the first half 2020. Concluding ThoughtsThe economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges. So it makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate finding. What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7-8. Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 54 (April), pp. 728-52. Bank for International Settlements (2017).87th Annual Report (PDF). Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June. Bauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2014). "The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (September), pp. 233-89. Baumeister, Christiane, and Luca Benati (2013). "Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread Compression at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 9 (June), pp. 165-212. Berg, Claes, and Lars Jonung (1999). "Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 1931-1937,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 43 (June), pp. 525‑51. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14. -------- (2017). "Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy,"Ben Bernanke's Blog,October 12. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/5/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018a).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, February. -------- (2018b).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, July. -------- (2019).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, February. Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006). "Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 88 (August), pp. 445-62. Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010). "How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 369-422. Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (2018). "The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF)," Occasional Paper Series 217. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, December. Bullard, James (2018). "The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF)," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19. Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017). "Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012). "Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 1-80. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Jonas D.M. Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi (2017). "Forward Guidance and Macroeconomic Outcomes since the Financial Crisis," in Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016,vol. 31. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 283-357. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF),report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. Chen, Han, Vasco Cúrdia, and Andrea Ferrero (2012). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F289-315. Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019). "Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Clarida, Richard H. (2012). "What Has--and Has Not--Been Learned about Monetary Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment? A Review of the 2000s,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 123-40. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147-80. Clinton, Kevin, Charles Freedman, Michel Juillard, Ondra Kamenik, Douglas Laxton, and Hou Wang (2015). "Inflation-Forecast Targeting: Applying the Principle of Transparency (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/132. Washington: International Monetary Fund, June. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David López‐Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F415-46. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large‐Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 108 (May), pp. 425-48. Economic Policy Institute (2019).State of Working America Data Library. Washington: EPI, March. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 139-235. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. English, William B., David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (May), pp. 22-70. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018). "Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds.,Handbook of Economic Forecasting,vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2-56. Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018). "Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13-14. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian P. Sack (2011). "Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? (PDF)"FRBNY Economic Policy Review,vol. 17 (May), pp. 41-59. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 3-46. Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018). "From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Hills, Timothy S., Taisuke Nakata, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016). "The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108, Supplement 1 (May), pp. S59-75. Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011). "The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 7 (September), pp. 113-61. Joyce, Michael, David Miles, Andrew Scott, and Dimitri Vayanos (2012). "Quantitative Easing and Unconventional Monetary Policy--An Introduction,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F271-88. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317-96. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014). "Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Nakov, Anton (2008). "Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 4 (June), pp. 73-127. Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005). "Average Inflation Targeting,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (October), pp. 837-63. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017). "Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF)"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 13 (September), pp. 1-42. Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936-66. Roberts, John M. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193-230. Romer, David (2010). "A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 42 (August), pp. 951-57. Ruge-Murcia, Francisco (2014). "Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price Level? (PDF)"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (June), pp. 301-26. Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013). "The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping? (PDF)" inWorld Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 79-95. Swanson, Eric T. (2017). "Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper Series 23311. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April (revised August 2018). -------- (2018). "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Weingarden, Alison (2017). "Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25. Woodford, Michael (2012). "Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. Yellen, Janet (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. -------- (2017). "The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19. 1. Additional information aboutFed Listens,including background information on the initiative and a listing of events around the country, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm.Return to text 2. Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework. They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.Return to text 3. For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).Return to text 4. For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).Return to text 5. For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).Return to text 6. One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010). As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions. Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.Return to text 7. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation. Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s. These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.Return to text 8. The average estimate from the Blue Chip respondents was 4.3 percent. The box "How Tight Is the Labor Market?" in the Board's February 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains a discussion of some indicators that can be used to assess labor market tightness; see Board of Governors (2018a, pp. 8-9).Return to text 9. The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp. 8-10).Return to text 10. See Cajner and others (2017) for a careful examination of how labor market differentials by race and ethnicity have evolved over time.Return to text 11. See Aaronson and others (2019) for evidence on the relative behavior of unemployment rates by race and ethnicity in a strong labor market. The authors find similar patterns for labor force participation rates and for employment-to-population ratios.Return to text 12. Disparities in labor market outcomes are also evident between urban and rural areas of the United States. However, these gaps have not narrowed as the labor market has strengthened. The box "Employment Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas" in the Board's February 2019Monetary Policy Reportexamines these disparities in more detail; see Board of Governors (2019, pp. 10-12). See also Weingarden (2017).Return to text 13. Wage gains for workers with different wage levels and with different levels of education can be calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Economic Policy Institute (2019) provides convenient tabulations of these data.Return to text 14. The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf.Return to text 15. For a discussion of this terminology and references, see English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) and Clinton and others (2015).Return to text 16. These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB. For related discussions, see Reifschneider and Williams (2000); Adam and Billi (2007); Nakov (2008); and Hills, Nakata, and Schmidt (2016).Return to text 17. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion. Nessén and Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting. There is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations. Central banks that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon--typically a couple years ahead or over the "medium run"--without regard to past inflation deviations. One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of "2-3 per cent, on average, over the medium term" and thus might embed some notion of history dependence. However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation goal. The only known historical example of price-level targeting occurred in Sweden from 1931 to 1933 when the country abandoned the gold standard and attempted instead to maintain its price level. The temporary adoption of price-level targeting is credited with helping Sweden avoid deflation, an outcome that contrasted with that in countries that stayed on the gold standard. See Berg and Jonung (1999).Return to text 18. See Bernanke (2017) for a discussion of such a strategy. See Hebden and López-Salido (2018) for a quantitative assessment of that and other strategies. See also Kiley and Roberts (2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns.Return to text 19. See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy rate lower than otherwise. The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the Board's July 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp. 37-41).Return to text 20. See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S. economy.Return to text 21. As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017). In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase households and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery. These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.Return to text 22. On the transmission channels of balance sheet policies, see D'Amico and others (2012), Joyce and others (2012), Clarida (2012), Woodford (2012), and Bauer and Rudebusch (2014). On the financial market effects of balance sheet policies, see Gagnon and others (2011), Joyce and others (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), D'Amico and King (2013), and Swanson (2017). For discussions of the macroeconomic effects of these policy actions, see Chen, Cúrdia, and Ferrero (2012); Baumeister and Benati (2013); Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Chung and others (2019), and the references therein. For related assessments of forward guidance, see Campbell and others (2012); Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Campbell and others (2017); and Swanson (2017).Return to text 23. Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannualMonetary Policy Report.With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon. Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members. For a discussion and data, see Bernanke (2007) and Romer (2010).Return to text 24. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles At the 2019 European Bank Executive Committee Forum "The Future of Banking: The Human Factor," Brussels, Belgium Thank you for the opportunity to join you. I am grateful for the chance to speak with such a diverse and distinguished group of academics, industry leaders, and colleagues in regulation and central banking. Conversations like these always remind me that, while we all approach our roles in the financial sector differently, we share a deeper commitment to a common goal: a safe, stable, and resilient financial system, capable of supporting strong and sustainable economic growth. A decade ago, that common goal became an imperative. The financial regulatory community worked frantically to repair the vulnerabilities that the global financial crisis exposed and to address a set of financial risks that failed to respect national borders. The financial system we have today bears the imprint of our response a decade ago. Basel III is now final. Derivatives markets are now safer and better regulated. Levels of capital and liquidity at the largest banks are now higher, and with reforms to recovery and resolution, the risks and potential costs of a catastrophic failure of a major institution are lower. These are profound accomplishments of international cooperation, which returned the global financial system from the brink of collapse to stability and health. But health does not make cooperation or vigilance any less necessary. On the contrary, as the G20 leaders said in creating the Financial Stability Board (FSB), "a sense of normalcy should not lead to complacency."1 The FSB exists to help sustain the common efforts made in the throes of the crisis--to identify and address systemic vulnerabilities, to develop stronger regulatory and supervisory policies, and to create a more resilient global financial system. It is a platform, and a place for its 24 members and 73 representatives to coordinate their work; to identify and address issues that span financial products, intermediaries, and markets; and to avoid the pre-crisis regulatory fragmentation that left financial stability risks unaddressed. The relevance of this platform, to its members and to a changing financial system, is critical to preserving our last 10 years of hard-earned gains. Today, I want to briefly outline three tenets that I believe are essential to preserving the relevance and vitality of the FSB: engagement, vigilance, and analysis. These principles, which I discussed more fully in remarks last week, underlie the most successful elements of the post-crisis reforms.2They should remain the foundation of the FSB's work, as we turn from drafting new standards to implementing them and devote more time and attention to the emerging vulnerabilities. EngagementRegulatory cooperation has long been essential to financial stability--not only because it fosters consistency in global rules, but also because it fosters trust. When authorities develop new policy together, when they identify common standards and implement them in their home countries, and when they plan and debate the nature of emerging risks, they also develop a common understanding of each other's work and a common approach to addressing new problems. However, trust among regulators means little on its own. It must come with the trust of the constituencies regulators serve, and the trust of those whom our decisions affect. The FSB is a conduit for this trust, as it is accountable to the G20 and to the nations and people the G20 leaders represent. We have an obligation to make the most of that conduit, by engaging in genuine, substantive dialogue with a wide range of stakeholders, to a greater and more effective degree than in the past. We should invite reflection on the design and impact of our efforts, solicit input on risks to financial stability, and better communicate our mission and activities to the public, without the veneer of technical jargon. The FSB can begin this work at home, by strengthening the role of the regional groups that are already part of the organization. In 2011, the FSB established six consultative groups representing large regions of the globe. The intent was to expand our outreach beyond the membership of the G20 and to better reflect the FSB's global mission and impact. Today, the groups meet once or twice a year and help the FSB obtain broader input into its policy development agenda. They can, and should, have the opportunity to do more--not only to promote implementation of international policy initiatives but also to give a clear view of financial stability developments in their respective regions. A study of the groups' operations is now underway, which will shed light on how to upgrade their effectiveness as an outreach and feedback mechanism. We can also engage more effectively outside the FSB--with businesses, public institutions, market participants, and scholars--and give the public the means and the opportunity to provide meaningful feedback on our work. Some steps are already underway. We established a new expectation that all FSB policy recommendations will be open for at least 60 days of public comment, instead of the shorter periods used in the past. We began a recent effort around the differences in regulatory environments and market conditions across jurisdictions--known as "market fragmentation"--by convening key stakeholders and academics for a full-day workshop, which I hope will be the rule for future projects, not the exception. Earlier this year, we released publicly the FSB work program for the first time.3 This broad engagement is essential to understanding new developments that are relevant to financial stability. Take, for example, the "fintech" trends I discussed in remarks last week, to which the FSB is dedicating significant attention. Claims about fintech run the gamut from the utopian to the apocalyptic--yet the mantle of fintech covers a wide range of new business models, products, and trends. Their contours and their impact also vary across national boundaries, from mobile wallets in Kenya, to online mortgages in the United States, to money market funds founded by technology companies in China. Understanding one of these new uses of technology is not the same as understanding all of them. Identifying the risks and opportunities they pose requires context, information, and insight that can only come from a variety of stakeholders with experience developing, using, and monitoring them. I will continue to seek ways to invite and encourage engagement during my chairmanship, and to give the public a clearer and fuller view of FSB's decisionmaking process. Few efforts are closer to the heart of our collective work or to the accountability and trust that the FSB helps foster. VigilanceTrust and accountability are also prerequisites for the FSB to pursue its mission. The first prong of our mandate, now a decade old, is to "assess vulnerabilities affecting the global financial system, and identify and review . . . the regulatory, supervisory, and related actions needed to address them . . . ."4The FSB's primary role, and its principal contribution to international financial regulation, is to look forward--to see past the issues and practices of the day, and identify new vulnerabilities, long before they lead to widespread economic distress. The FSB's Standing Committee on Assessment of Vulnerabilities (under the leadership of FSB Vice Chair Klaas Knot of De Nederlandsche Bank, here today) is an important forum and catalyst for this work. In the months ahead, the committee will develop a new framework for the identification and assessment of financial vulnerabilities. Their efforts will rely on transparent engagement with a wide range of stakeholders--including banks and nonbank financial institutions, the academic community, financial regulators, national authorities, and standard-setting bodies. This kind of broad outreach is essential. The causes of financial crises rarely announce themselves ahead of time, and only a wide range of views can give us the perspective and understanding to address them in advance. The right model for this work is not a small team of detectives--it is a search party. The FSB's efforts on nonbank financial intermediation, which I discussed last week, reflect a similar approach. Nonbank financing has grown since the financial crisis, and it has been a source of systemic risk, often involving high leverage, maturity and liquidity mismatches, opaque structures, and concentrated holdings of risky assets. Nonbank financing can also lead to lower lending standards, bidding up the price of risky assets and sending an encouraging signal to credit underwriters. These channels played a role in the recent global financial crisis, and more recently, new forms of interconnectedness between nonbank financial firms and the banking system have emerged. In some scenarios, both domestically and internationally, such ties could amplify risks. These developments raise important issues. Is the growth of nonbank financing altering existing market structures? Are there new vulnerabilities in the financial system? How will nonbank financing develop, and how should it do so? The FSB is taking a variety of complementary approaches to answering these questions. First, we produce an annual report that outlines the developments in nonbank financing, detailing global trends and potential risks and providing reliable information to foster public discussion. Second, the FSB develops policies to promote the resilience of these firms (without impeding the growth of sustainable nonbank financing models), and we work closely with other multinational organizations to monitor implementation. Finally, and going forward, we must begin analyzing the effectiveness of the policies on nonbank financing that have been implemented. AnalysisThe same spirit of self-reflection should guide the FSB's efforts in other policy areas. Stakeholders trust the FSB to undertake thoughtful, detailed work on emerging risks to financial stability. Yet identifying those risks before a crisis means dealing in uncertainty, and making policy on evolving issues, where no one can claim complete expertise. To maintain that trust, we must be willing to make improvements when the evidence justifies it--to undertake rigorous analysis, before and after issuing new standards, and to follow that analysis where it leads. Many post-crisis policies, including those aimed at the implicit subsidy for "too-big-to-fail" institutions, have been in place long enough to allow for evaluation. We can now begin to ask fundamental, critical questions: What have the effects of these reforms been, whether intended or unintended, salutary or adverse? Have we successfully reduced or eliminated the problem? Has there been a tradeoff, in the form of new, unintended risks or costs? As I have described elsewhere, the FSB is launching a global study with multinational policymakers to start answering these important questions as part of its broader effort to evaluate the effects of post-crisis reforms. We intend to bring analytical rigor to these questions, and we recognize that the academic community has undertaken much work in this area. As a result, we will draw extensively on academic advisors during all phases of the work we are undertaking. I also encourage other experts in this field to look closely to the consultative document that will be coming from the study next year. We welcome the input as we undertake the study of this signature issue from the crisis. The task of this project, like the task of the FSB itself, is to foster insight on the road ahead. The work of the FSB reflects the fact that, in a global financial system, we cannot see and address emerging problems alone. Working as allies and colleagues, we have bound up most of the wounds from the last financial crisis. To avoid reopening them--and returning to a fragmented international regime--we will have to recommit to collaboration, embrace insight where it emerges, and follow evidence where it leads. With broad engagement, rigorous vigilance, and committed analysis, the risks ahead of us can be less dangerous than the ones we left behind. 1.Leaders' Statement (PDF), The Pittsburgh Summit (G20), September 24–25, 2009.Return to text 2. Randal K. Quarles, "The Financial Stability Board in 2019" (speech at the Joint Conference of the European Central Bank and the Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Frankfurt, Germany, March 28, 2019).Return to text 3. Seehttp://www.fsb.org/2019/02/fsb-work-programme-for-2019/.Return to text 4. "Financial Stability Board Charter (PDF)," April 2, 2009.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the Washington Policy Summit sponsored by Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the opportunity to participate in the Institute of International Finance's Washington Policy Summit. Before we begin our conversation, I want to share a few thoughts about the outlook for the economy and monetary policy.1 Current Economic Situation and OutlookThe U.S. economy is in a good place and operating close to both of the Federal Reserve's dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose about 3 percent last year, and in July, just a few months from now, the current economic expansion almost certainly will become the longest on record. The unemployment rate is near the lowest level recorded in 50 years, and average monthly job gains have continued to outpace the increases needed over the longer run to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force. Average hourly earnings are showing a welcome increase consistent with a healthy labor market, yet inflation remains near our 2 percent objective. All that said, the incoming data have revealed signs that U.S. economic growth is slowing somewhat from 2018's robust pace. Prospects for foreign economic growth have been marked down, and important international risks, such as Brexit, remain. U.S. inflation as measured by the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, which excludes volatile food and energy prices and is a better gauge of underlying inflation pressures, has been muted. And some indicators of longer-term inflation expectations remain at the low end of a range that I consider consistent with our price-stability mandate. The considerations I just mentioned have led most private-sector forecasters to project that growth will continue in 2019 but at a somewhat slower pace than in 2018. At the Federal Reserve, in our most recent Summary of Economic Projections, the median participant on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) projected that in 2019, GDP growth of 2 percent will be the modal, or most likely, outcome; that core PCE inflation will rise to 2 percent; and that the unemployment rate will fall a bit further, to 3.7 percent, by the end of the year. Again, these are modal outcomes, and, of course, my FOMC colleagues and I should and do factor in risks on either side of these projections in our policy deliberations. Monetary PolicyGiven this outlook for the U.S. economy, we decided at our March meeting that the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate.2The federal funds rate is now in the broad range of estimates of neutral--the rate that tends neither to stimulate nor to restrain the economy. Our baseline economic projections see economic growth for the year as a whole running somewhat above the Committee's median estimate of its longer-run trend and core PCE inflation remaining near our 2 percent objective. For these reasons, we have indicated we can be patient as we assess what adjustments, if any, will be appropriate to the stance of monetary policy. At our March meeting, the Committee also released revised Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, and it announced that the FOMC intends to slow the runoff of our securities starting in May and to cease the runoff entirely in September.3This decision is the culmination of discussions that we had over the previous four meetings about our operating framework and reflects our desire to converge to a balance sheet that is no larger than it needs to be to conduct monetary policy efficiently and effectively. In September, reserve balances likely will remain above the minimum level, including a buffer, consistent with this goal. In that case, we anticipate we will likely hold the size of our balance sheet at the level reached in September for a time thereafter and let the gradual increase in other (nonreserve) liabilities, such as currency, slowly shrink the level of reserves. Importantly, with this decision on the size of our balance sheet now taken, we can turn our attention in future meetings to discussing and deciding on the maturity composition of our System Open Market Account portfolio. As you may know, last November the Federal Reserve announced that in 2019 we are undertaking a System review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices. Information about this review can be found on the Federal Reserve Board's website.4In this review, we will listen to a broad range of stakeholders at public events held around the country, and we will draw on their insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability in the most robust fashion possible. Taking these viewpoints on board, the FOMC will begin its own discussions this summer on how we might refine our framework, and we will provide a public assessment after the review is complete. Thank you, and I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, March 20.Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, March 20.Return to text 4. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text