Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Financial Crimes Enforcement Network Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Conference of State Bank Supervisors WASHINGTON—Four federal agencies in conjunction with the state bank regulators today issued a statement clarifying the legal status of hemp growth and production and the relevant requirements under the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) for banks providing services to hemp-related businesses. The statement emphasizes that banks are no longer required to file suspicious activity reports (SAR) for customers solely because they are engaged in the growth or cultivation of hemp in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. For hemp-related customers, banks are expected to follow standard SAR procedures, and file a SAR if indicia of suspicious activity warrants. This statement provides banks with background information on the legal status of hemp, the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) interim final rule on the production of hemp, and the BSA considerations when providing banking services to hemp-related businesses. This statement also indicates that the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) will issue additional guidance after further reviewing and evaluating the USDA interim final rule. The statement was issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FinCEN, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. Banks can contact the USDA, state departments of agriculture, and tribal governments with further questions regarding the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (2018 Farm Bill) and its implementing regulations.
Five federal agencies today announced they will reopen and extend until January 23, 2020, the comment period on aproposalto change swap margin rules to facilitate the implementation of prudent risk management strategies at certain banks and swap entities. The agencies extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments, which were originally due by December 9, 2019. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that they will extend until February 28, 2020, the deadline on the request for information on their use of the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System, also known as the CAMELS rating system. The agencies extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments, which were originally due by December 30, 2019. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Reserve Board and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation announced Tuesday that they did not find any "deficiencies," which are weaknesses that could result in additional prudential requirements if not corrected, in the resolution plans of the largest and most complex domestic banks. However, plans from six of the eight banks had "shortcomings," which are weaknesses that raise questions about the feasibility of a firm's plan, but are not as severe as a deficiency. Plans to address the shortcomings are due to the agencies by March 31, 2020. Resolution plans, commonly known as living wills, describe a bank's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure. In the plans of Bank of America, Bank of New York Mellon, Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, State Street, and Wells Fargo, the agencies found shortcomings related to the ability of the firms to reliably produce, in stressed conditions, data needed to execute their resolution strategy. Examples include measures of capital and liquidity at relevant subsidiaries. The agencies did not find shortcomings in the plans from Goldman Sachs and J.P. Morgan Chase. The firms will receive feedback letters, which will be publicly available on theBoard's website. For the six firms whose plans have shortcomings, the letter details the specific weaknesses and the actions required. Overall, the letters note that each firm made significant progress in enhancing its resolvability and developing resolution-related capabilities but all firms will need to continue to make progress in certain areas. To that end, the letters confirm the agencies expect to focus on testing the resolution capabilities of the firms when reviewing their next plans. Resolving a large bank would be challenging and unprecedented, and the agencies expect the firms to remain vigilant as markets change and as firms' activities, structures, and risk profiles change. The agencies also announced on Tuesday that Bank of America, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and Wells Fargo had successfully addressed prior shortcomings identified by the agencies in their December 2017 resolution plan review. Bank of America Corporation (PDF)The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation (PDF)Citigroup Inc. (PDF)The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. (PDF)*JPMorgan Chase & Co. (PDF)Morgan Stanley (PDF)State Street Corporation (PDF)Wells Fargo & Company (PDF) *Note: The 2019 feedback letter for Goldman Sachs was replaced on February 3, 2020. The previous letter incorrectly included language that has since been removed referencing a project that was not underway at the firm.
WASHINGTON—The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examination procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small institution asset-size thresholds are not subject to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks and savings associations unless they choose to be evaluated as a large institution. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 1.62 percent increase in the CPI-W for the period ending in November 2019, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2020. The agencies will publish the final rule in theFederal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (https://www.ffiec.gov/cra). Federal RegisternoticeHTML
WASHINGTON—The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examination procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small institution asset-size thresholds are not subject to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks and savings associations unless they choose to be evaluated as a large institution. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 1.62 percent increase in the CPI-W for the period ending in November 2019, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2020. The agencies will publish the final rule in theFederal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (https://www.ffiec.gov/cra). Federal RegisternoticeHTML
WASHINGTON—The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank, and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the CRA rules. Financial institutions are evaluated under different CRA examination procedures based upon their asset-size classification. Those meeting the small and intermediate small institution asset-size thresholds are not subject to the reporting requirements applicable to large banks and savings associations unless they choose to be evaluated as a large institution. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 1.62 percent increase in the CPI-W for the period ending in November 2019, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2020. The agencies will publish the final rule in theFederal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (https://www.ffiec.gov/cra). Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Five Federal financial regulatory agencies today issued a joint statement on the use of alternative data in underwriting by banks, credit unions, and non-bank financial firms. The statement from the Federal Reserve Board (Federal Reserve), the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) notes the benefits that using alternative data may provide to consumers, such as expanding access to credit and enabling consumers to obtain additional products and more favorable pricing and terms. The statement explains that a well-designed compliance management program provides for a thorough analysis of relevant consumer protection laws and regulations to ensure firms understand the opportunities, risks, and compliance requirements before using alternative data. Alternative data includes information not typically found in consumers' credit reports or customarily provided by consumers when applying for credit. Alternative data include cash flow data derived from consumers' bank account records. The agencies recognize that use of alternative data in a manner consistent with applicable consumer protection laws may improve the speed and accuracy of credit decisions and may help firms evaluate the creditworthiness of consumers who currently may not obtain credit in the mainstream credit system.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday approved modifications to the Federal Reserve Banks' National Settlement Service (NSS) and Fedwire®Funds Service to support enhancements to the same-day automated clearinghouse (ACH) service. The Board also approved changes intended to reduce the risk that the modified service closings and cutoffs would increase the frequency of delays to the reopening of the Fedwire Funds Service. Finally, the Board approved corresponding changes to the Federal Reserve Policy on Payment System Risk (PSR policy) related to a new posting time for transactions and an increased daylight overdraft fee. On September 13, 2018, Nacha, the rules and standards body for the ACH network, announced that its voting members had approved amendments to the Nacha Operating Rules & Guidelines to establish a third and later same-day ACH processing and settlement window with a settlement deadline of 4:45 p.m. ET and settlement at 6:00 p.m. ET. A third same-day ACH window aligns with the Federal Reserve's ongoing objective to support improved speed and efficiency of the payment system in the United States as well as public interest in greater availability of payment services. In particular, the later same-day ACH window would allow more institutions to use same-day ACH services during a greater portion of their business day and may promote greater adoption of same-day ACH and availability of the service to originators and end-users. The amended Nacha rules changes require modifications to the Federal Reserve Banks' payment service closings and cutoffs so that the private-sector ACH operator, The Clearing House Payments Company L.L.C., can settle same-day ACH transactions later in the day via the National Settlement Service. On May 16, 2019, the Board published aFederal Registernotice seeking public comment on these modifications to the Federal Reserve Bank's payment services. After analyzing the comments received, the Board has approved the following modifications and enhancements to be implemented in March 2021, which would accommodate Nacha's current effective date of March 19, 2021 for implementing the later same-day ACH window: A copy of the Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the December 10-11 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the December 10-11 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size threshold in Regulation I that determines the dividend rate paid to banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System. The updated total consolidated asset threshold is $10.715 billion through December 31, 2020. Member banks hold stock in the Federal Reserve Banks and earn dividends. However, holding this stock does not carry with it the control and financial interest given to holders of common stock in for-profit organizations. The stock may not be sold or pledged as collateral for loans. Section 7(a)(1) of the Federal Reserve Act provides that member banks with total consolidated assets above the asset-size threshold shall receive a dividend on their paid-in Federal Reserve Bank capital stock equal to the lesser of 6 percent or the most recent 10-year Treasury auction rate prior to the dividend payment. Other member banks receive a 6 percent dividend. The Federal Reserve Act requires the Board to adjust the asset-size threshold annually to reflect the change in the Gross Domestic Product Price Index, published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The attached notice will be published shortly in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by First Citizens BancShares, Inc., Raleigh, North Carolina, to acquire Entegra Financial Corp. ("Entegra") and thereby indirectly acquire Entegra's state nonmember bank subsidiary, Entegra Bank, both of Franklin, North Carolina. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Friday that it will extend until January 22, 2020, the comment period for its proposal to establish risk-based capital requirements for certain insurance companies supervised by the Board. The Board extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Originally, comments were due by December 23, 2019. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it will hold a series of "fintech innovation office hours" across the country to meet with banks and companies engaged in emerging financial technologies, popularly known as fintech. The sessions will serve as a resource for banks and fintech firms to meet one-on-one with Federal Reserve staff members with relevant expertise to discuss fintech developments and ask questions. They may be particularly helpful to community banks and their potential fintech partners. Sessions will be co-hosted with Reserve Banks, with the first session at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta on February 26. Firms interested in participating can sign uphere. Also on Tuesday, the Board launched anew sectionof its website specifically focused on fintech innovation. It will serve as a central hub of information for stakeholders interested in learning about and engaging with the Board on innovation-related matters. The section features the latest Federal Reserve Consumer Compliance Supervision Bulletin, which summarizes supervisory observations regarding fintech and practical steps institutions can consider when engaging in fintech activity. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Consumer Compliance Supervision Bulletin
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Bank of America, Charlotte, North CarolinaCease and Desist Order, dated May 20, 2015 (PDF)Terminated November 22, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: JPMorgan Chase & Co., New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order, dated January 14, 2013Terminated December 5, 2019 Spirit BankCorp, Inc., Bristow, OklahomaWritten Agreement, dated August 2, 2012Terminated December 5, 2019 U.S. Bancorp, Minneapolis, Minnesota and USB Americas Holdings Company, Minneapolis, MinnesotaCease and Desist Order, dated February 14, 2018Terminated December 5, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the appointment of Beth Anne Wilson as director of the Division of International Finance, effective February 1. Wilson, currently a deputy director of the division, will succeed Steven B. Kamin, who will serve as a senior adviser to the division before retiring at the end of April. As director, Wilson will oversee the division's work monitoring and forecasting the global economy, analyzing key international issues such as movements in global financial and commodity markets, and supporting the Federal Reserve's engagement with foreign central banks and international organizations such as the Group of Seven, Group of Twenty, and Bank for International Settlements. She will also be responsible for briefing the Federal Open Market Committee on global economic and financial developments. "Beth Anne is exceptionally qualified to lead the division's important work monitoring and forecasting the global economy. Her decades of experience, keen insight, and broad expertise will be invaluable for the Board and Federal Open Market Committee," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell. Wilson started at the Board in 1995 as an economist in the Division of Research and Statistics. She joined the Division of International Finance in 1998 as an economist, monitoring emerging market economies, and has held other positions of increasing responsibility overseeing a wide range of the division's work. She also served as a senior economist at the Council of Economic Advisers and as a visiting professor at Georgetown University. She was presented with the Board's Special Achievement Award in 2010 for her work leading the Board's monitoring of the euro-area crisis. Wilson received her B.A. in economics and history from the University of California at Berkeley in 1989 and her Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1995. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Société Générale S.A., Paris, France, and Société Générale, New York Branch, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement (PDF)dated December 17, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday launched a new Twitter account aimed at increasing access to the research done by the more than 400 economists and other research staff at the Board. The new account—@FedResearch—will highlight research published in the Board's working papers and notes series, other staff articles, and conferences. Staff members at the Board conduct research on a wide variety of topics in economics and finance. The Board'sFinance and Economics Discussion Seriesand itsInternational Finance Discussion Papers—along with theFEDS Notes series—offer a venue for Board staff to publish their work to stimulate discussion. The papers and notes reflect the views of the individual authors and do not communicate policy positions of the Board or the Federal Reserve System. The Board's@FederalReserve Twitter accountwill continue to provide official news and information about the Board. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. @FedResearch Twitter account
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Although household spending has been rising at a strong pace, business fixed investment and exports remain weak. On a 12‑month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1‑1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. The Committee judges that the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including global developments and muted inflation pressures, as it assesses the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, Vice Chair; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Richard H. Clarida; Charles L. Evans; Esther L. George; Randal K. Quarles; and Eric S. Rosengren. Implementation Note issued December 11, 2019
The growth of payments using debit and credit cards and the automated clearinghouse (ACH) system continued to accelerate from 2015 to 2018, while check payments continued their long-run decline, according to U.S. noncash payments data collected by the Federal Reserve. The 2019 Federal Reserve Payments Study shows that the growth rate of core noncash payments, defined for the report as debit card, credit card, ACH, and check payments, was 6.7 percent per year between 2015 and 2018. During the prior three-year survey period, core noncash payments grew at a rate of 5.1 percent per year. These core noncash payment types have retained their ability to be used in traditional ways even while they increasingly function as the means of settlement for innovative types of alternative payment methods and services, such as smartphone and internet-based services. Total card payments (both credit and debit), which represented 7.3 percent of core noncash payments by value and 75.3 percent by number in 2018, grew at a rate of 8.9 percent per year between 2015 and 2018—up from the 6.8 percent yearly rate of increase from 2012 to 2015. Debit cards, including both prepaid and non-prepaid, were used almost twice as often as credit cards in 2018, but the value of credit card payments exceeded the value of debit card payments by almost 30 percent. For general-purpose (network-branded) cards overall, the value of remote payments in 2018 nearly equaled in-person payments, driven in part by growing e-commerce card payments and the use of cards for recurring bill payments. More than half of in-person general-purpose card payments were chip authenticated in 2018, compared to 2.0 percent in 2015. The number of ACH credit and debit transfers grew by 6.0 percent per year between 2015 and 2018, exceeding the 4.9 percent per-year growth rate recorded for 2012 to 2015. Payments made by checks fell 7.2 percent per year from 2015 to 2018, a faster rate of decline than the 2.8 percent yearly rate seen over the prior three years but in line with declines posted from 2003 to 2012. The number of check payments declined to 14.5 billion in 2018—falling for the first time below the number of ACH debit transfers. The rate of decline for ATM cash withdrawals slowed compared with the previous three years, falling 0.9 percent per year from 2015 to 2018. The decline in the number, combined with an increase in value, resulted in average ATM cash withdrawals of $156 in 2018, compared to $146 in 2015. The Federal Reserve Payments Study is a collaborative effort of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to track and document developments in the U.S. payments system through the collection of quantitative survey data. Reports for 2000 through 2018 and the annual supplements for 2016 and 2017 are available at:www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/fr-payments-study.htm Federal Reserve Payments Study
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday releasedUncertain Terms: What Small Business Borrowers Find When Browsing Online Lender Websites, a report that examines the information that prospective small business borrowers encounter when researching and comparing credit products offered by online lenders. Nonbank online lenders are becoming more mainstream alternative providers of financing to small businesses. In 2018, nearly one-third of small business owners seeking credit reported having applied at a nonbank online lender. The industry's growing reach has the potential to expand access to credit for small firms, but also raises concerns about how product costs and features are disclosed. The report's analysis of a sampling of online content finds significant variation in the amount of upfront information provided, especially on costs. On some sites, descriptions feature little or no information about the actual products or about rates, fees, and repayment terms. Lenders that offer term loans are likely to show costs as an annual rate, while others convey costs using terminology that may be unfamiliar to prospective borrowers. Details on interest rates, if shown, are most often found in footnotes, fine print, or frequently asked questions. The report's findings build on prior work, including two rounds of focus groups with small business owners who reported challenges with the lack of standardization in product descriptions and with understanding product terms and costs. In addition, the report finds that a number of websites require prospective borrowers to furnish information about themselves and their businesses in order to obtain details about product costs and terms. Lenders' policies permit any data provided by the small business owner to be used by the lender and other third parties to contact business owners, often leading to bothersome sales calls. Moreover, online lenders make frequent use of trackers to monitor visitors on their websites. Even when visitors do not share identifying information with the lender, embedded trackers may collect data on how they navigate the website as well as other sites visited. The report is available at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/what-small-business-borrowers-find-when-browsing-online-lender-websites.pdf. For additional information on small business and entrepreneurship visit:https://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/small-business-and-entrepreneurship.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Uncertain Terms: What Small Business Borrowers Find When Browsing Online Lender Websites
I am deeply saddened by the passing of Paul Volcker. He believed there was no higher calling than public service. His life exemplified the highest ideals–integrity, courage, and a commitment to do what was best for all Americans. His contributions to the nation left a lasting legacy. My colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve mourn this loss and send our condolences to his family. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on December 5, 2019. Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member McHenry, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear today, alongside my colleagues from the regulatory community. We join you on the cusp of a significant and shared milestone: the full and faithful implementation of Congress's efforts to improve financial regulation, in the form of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA).1Today, I will briefly review the steps we have taken toward this milestone; share information on the state of the banking system, from the report that accompanies my testimony; and discuss the continuing need to ensure our regulatory framework is both coherent and effective.2 Roughly 18 months ago, Congress passed legislation to consolidate a decade of work on financial reform, and to better tailor financial regulation and supervision to the risks of the institutions being regulated. The EGRRCPA was a specific, targeted response to the conditions facing today's banking organizations and their customers. It was also rooted, however, in long-standing congressional practice: of reviewing the work done in the immediate aftermath of a crisis; of addressing any gaps; and of ensuring that public and private resources go toward their best, most efficient use. This approach informed the Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935, on issues from shareholder liability to deposit insurance.3It informed the bills passed after the savings-and-loan crisis, requiring "prompt corrective action" at struggling firms and reducing the examination burden at strong ones.4And it continues to inform our efforts now, from the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act to today.5 The Board's latestSupervision and Regulation Report, which we published last week, confirms the current health of the banking system. The banking system is substantially better prepared to manage unexpected shocks today than it was before the financial crisis. Now, when the waters are relatively calm, is the right time to step back and examine the efficiency and effectiveness of our protection against future storms. With the EGRRCPA, Congress made a significant down payment on that task. In less than 18 months after the act's passage, we implemented all of its major provisions. Earlier this year, we completed a cornerstone of the legislation to tailor our rules for regional banks, which was entirely consistent with a principle at the heart of our existing work: firms that pose greater risks should meet higher standards and receive more scrutiny. Our previous framework relied heavily on a firm's total assets as a proxy for these risks and for the costs the financial system would incur if a firm failed. This simple asset proxy was clear and critical, rough and ready, but neither risk-sensitive nor complete. Our new rules employ a broader set of indicators, like short-term wholesale funding and off-balance-sheet exposures, to assess the need for greater supervisory scrutiny.6They maintain the most stringent requirements and strictest oversight for the largest, most complex organizations—the collapse of which would do the most harm. We and our interagency colleagues also have worked on a range of measures addressed to smaller banks, with particular attention to better capturing and reflecting the characteristics of the community bank business model. These include elements of last year's legislation, and other steps we have taken in the same spirit, intended to help community banking organizations survive and thrive: Our goal, through this period of intense regulatory activity, has been to faithfully implement Congress's instructions. However, those instructions also speak to a broader need, and one central to our ongoing work: to ensure our regulatory regime is not only simple, efficient, and transparent, but also coherent and effective.13 Financial regulation, like any area of policy, is a product of history. Each component dates from a particular time and place, and it was designed, debated, and enacted to address a particular set of needs. No rule can be truly evergreen; gaps and areas for improvement will always reveal themselves over time. Our responsibility—among the most challenging and essential we have—is to address those gaps without creating new ones; to understand fully the interaction among regulations; to reduce complexity where possible, before it becomes its own source of risk; and to ensure ourentirerulebook supports the safety, stability, and strength of the financial system. Looking ahead, my colleagues and I are paying particular attention to coherence in our capital regime. We are reviewing public input into proposed changes to the stress capital buffer, which would simplify our regime by integrating our stress-test and point-in-time capital requirements and maintain our current strong levels of capital.14As we move forward, we also understand the need to thoughtfully finalize implementation of Basel III, in a way that preserves aggregate capital and liquidity levels at large banking organizations, avoids additional burden at smaller ones, and upholds our standards for transparency and due process. We also understand the need to ensure a smooth transition away from LIBOR, and other legacy benchmark rates, so institutions can manage risks comprehensively and effectively.15And we understand the need for clear, consistent supervisory communication on these and other matters, which invites dialogue, reflects and reinforces our regulations and laws, and gives banks necessary transparency into supervisory views on safety and soundness.16 We also understand the need to thoughtfully address new financial products and technologies. Innovation has the potential to improve access to financial services, lower costs, and support the competitive health of the banking sector. Its promise, however, inevitably comes with risk—and as the financial crisis showed, risks that lie outside the banking system can have consequences within it. Our approach to innovation should be both open and careful, engaging thoughtfully with both the public and private sectors, to understand the benefits and costs that such fundamental changes can bring. Finally, we understand the need for coherence across borders. Over the last decade, working with supervisors around the world, we have built a common understanding of the crisis, its causes, and its consequences. Now, as the full set of post-crisis reforms comes into effect, we should renew our focus on assessing their implementation and their overall impact. The financial system is truly global, and the structures and incentives that govern it are critical to its stability and resilience.17The regulatory community has started significant work to examine those structures and incentives as a whole, from their effect on "too-big-to-fail" subsidies to their impact on market fragmentation.18We are participating actively in that work, as a way to ensure the global financial system supports, rather than inhibits, American growth. I appreciate the chance to discuss this work with you, and I look forward to answering your questions. Thank you. 1. EGRRCPA, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Supervision and Regulation Report (PDF)," November 26, 2019.Return to text 3. See Gary Richardson, Alejandro Komai, and Michael Gou, "Banking Act of 1935," Federal Reserve History (website), Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, November 22, 2013.Return to text 4. See Noelle Richards, "Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991," Federal Reserve History (website), Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, November 22, 2013.Return to text 5. Dodd-Frank Act, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010).Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Finalizes Rules That Tailor Its Regulations for Domestic and Foreign Banks to More Closely Match Their Risk Profiles," news release, October 10, 2019.Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Issue Final Rule to Exempt Residential Real Estate Transactions of $400,000 or Less from Appraisal Requirements," news release, September 27, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Securities and Exchange Commission, "Agencies Finalize Changes to Simplify Volcker Rule," news release, October 8, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Finalizes Rules That Tailor Its Regulations for Domestic and Foreign Banks to More Closely Match Their Risk Profiles," news release, October 10, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Proposal That Would Modify Company-Run Stress Testing Requirements to Conform with Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act," news release, January 8, 2019; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Issues Statement Describing How, Consistent with Recently Enacted EGRRCPA, the Board Will No Longer Subject Primarily Smaller, Less Complex Banking Organizations to Certain Board Regulations," news release, July 6, 2018.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Propose Rule Regarding the Treatment of High Volatility Commercial Real Estate," news release, September 18, 2018; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies and FinCEN Improve Transparency of Risk-Focused BSA/AML Supervision," news release, July 22, 2019.Return to text 9. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Issues Interim Final Rule Expanding the Applicability of the Board's Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement," news release, August 28, 2018.Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Issue Final Rules Expanding Examination Cycles for Qualifying Small Banks and U.S. Branches and Agencies of Foreign Banks," news release, December 21, 2018.Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Issue Final Rule to Update Management Interlock Rules," news release, October 2, 2019.Return to text 12. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies Issue Final Rule to Simplify Capital Calculation for Community Banks," news release, October 29, 2019.Return to text 13. Randal K. Quarles, "Early Observations on Improving the Effectiveness of Post-Crisis Regulation" (speech at the American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., January 19, 2018).Return to text 14. Randal K. Quarles, "Refining the Stress Capital Buffer" (speech at the Program on International Financial Systems Conference, Frankfurt, Germany, September 5, 2019); and Randal K. Quarles, "Stress Testing: A Decade of Continuity and Change" (speech at the "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review" research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, July 9, 2019).Return to text 15. Randal K. Quarles, "The Next Stage in the LIBOR Transition" (speech at the Alternative Reference Rates Committee Roundtable, cohosted by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee and the New York University Stern School of Business and Its Salomon Center for the Study of Financial Institutions, New York, June 3, 2019).Return to text 16. Randal K. Quarles, "Law and Macroeconomics: The Global Evolution of Macroprudential Regulation" (speech at the "Law and Macroeconomics" conference at Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C., September 27, 2019).Return to text 17. Randal K. Quarles, "Government of Union: Achieving Certainty in Cross-Border Finance" (speech at the Financial Stability Board Workshop on Pre-Positioning, Ring-Fencing, and Market Fragmentation, Philadelphia, September 26, 2019).Return to text 18. Randal K. Quarles, "The Financial Stability Board at 10 Years—Looking Back and Looking Ahead" (speech at the European Banking Federation's European Banking Summit, Brussels, Belgium, October 3, 2019); see also, Financial Stability Board, "FSB Launches Evaluation of Too-Big-to-Fail Reforms and Invites Feedback from Stakeholders," news release, May 23, 2019; and Financial Stability Board, "FSB Publishes Report on Market Fragmentation," news release, June 4, 2019.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on December 5, 2019. Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member McHenry, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear today, alongside my colleagues from the regulatory community. We join you on the cusp of a significant and shared milestone: the full and faithful implementation of Congress's efforts to improve financial regulation, in the form of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA).1Today, I will briefly review the steps we have taken toward this milestone; share information on the state of the banking system, from the report that accompanies my testimony; and discuss the continuing need to ensure our regulatory framework is both coherent and effective.2 Roughly 18 months ago, Congress passed legislation to consolidate a decade of work on financial reform, and to better tailor financial regulation and supervision to the risks of the institutions being regulated. The EGRRCPA was a specific, targeted response to the conditions facing today's banking organizations and their customers. It was also rooted, however, in long-standing congressional practice: of reviewing the work done in the immediate aftermath of a crisis; of addressing any gaps; and of ensuring that public and private resources go toward their best, most efficient use. This approach informed the Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935, on issues from shareholder liability to deposit insurance.3It informed the bills passed after the savings-and-loan crisis, requiring "prompt corrective action" at struggling firms and reducing the examination burden at strong ones.4And it continues to inform our efforts now, from the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act to today.5 The Board's latestSupervision and Regulation Report, which we published last week, confirms the current health of the banking system. The banking system is substantially better prepared to manage unexpected shocks today than it was before the financial crisis. Now, when the waters are relatively calm, is the right time to step back and examine the efficiency and effectiveness of our protection against future storms. With the EGRRCPA, Congress made a significant down payment on that task. In less than 18 months after the act's passage, we implemented all of its major provisions. Earlier this year, we completed a cornerstone of the legislation to tailor our rules for regional banks, which was entirely consistent with a principle at the heart of our existing work: firms that pose greater risks should meet higher standards and receive more scrutiny. Our previous framework relied heavily on a firm's total assets as a proxy for these risks and for the costs the financial system would incur if a firm failed. This simple asset proxy was clear and critical, rough and ready, but neither risk-sensitive nor complete. Our new rules employ a broader set of indicators, like short-term wholesale funding and off-balance-sheet exposures, to assess the need for greater supervisory scrutiny.6They maintain the most stringent requirements and strictest oversight for the largest, most complex organizations—the collapse of which would do the most harm. We and our interagency colleagues also have worked on a range of measures addressed to smaller banks, with particular attention to better capturing and reflecting the characteristics of the community bank business model. These include elements of last year's legislation, and other steps we have taken in the same spirit, intended to help community banking organizations survive and thrive: Our goal, through this period of intense regulatory activity, has been to faithfully implement Congress's instructions. However, those instructions also speak to a broader need, and one central to our ongoing work: to ensure our regulatory regime is not only simple, efficient, and transparent, but also coherent and effective.13 Financial regulation, like any area of policy, is a product of history. Each component dates from a particular time and place, and it was designed, debated, and enacted to address a particular set of needs. No rule can be truly evergreen; gaps and areas for improvement will always reveal themselves over time. Our responsibility—among the most challenging and essential we have—is to address those gaps without creating new ones; to understand fully the interaction among regulations; to reduce complexity where possible, before it becomes its own source of risk; and to ensure ourentirerulebook supports the safety, stability, and strength of the financial system. Looking ahead, my colleagues and I are paying particular attention to coherence in our capital regime. We are reviewing public input into proposed changes to the stress capital buffer, which would simplify our regime by integrating our stress-test and point-in-time capital requirements and maintain our current strong levels of capital.14As we move forward, we also understand the need to thoughtfully finalize implementation of Basel III, in a way that preserves aggregate capital and liquidity levels at large banking organizations, avoids additional burden at smaller ones, and upholds our standards for transparency and due process. We also understand the need to ensure a smooth transition away from LIBOR, and other legacy benchmark rates, so institutions can manage risks comprehensively and effectively.15And we understand the need for clear, consistent supervisory communication on these and other matters, which invites dialogue, reflects and reinforces our regulations and laws, and gives banks necessary transparency into supervisory views on safety and soundness.16 We also understand the need to thoughtfully address new financial products and technologies. Innovation has the potential to improve access to financial services, lower costs, and support the competitive health of the banking sector. Its promise, however, inevitably comes with risk—and as the financial crisis showed, risks that lie outside the banking system can have consequences within it. Our approach to innovation should be both open and careful, engaging thoughtfully with both the public and private sectors, to understand the benefits and costs that such fundamental changes can bring. Finally, we understand the need for coherence across borders. Over the last decade, working with supervisors around the world, we have built a common understanding of the crisis, its causes, and its consequences. Now, as the full set of post-crisis reforms comes into effect, we should renew our focus on assessing their implementation and their overall impact. The financial system is truly global, and the structures and incentives that govern it are critical to its stability and resilience.17The regulatory community has started significant work to examine those structures and incentives as a whole, from their effect on "too-big-to-fail" subsidies to their impact on market fragmentation.18We are participating actively in that work, as a way to ensure the global financial system supports, rather than inhibits, American growth. I appreciate the chance to discuss this work with you, and I look forward to answering your questions. Thank you. 1. EGRRCPA, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Supervision and Regulation Report (PDF)," November 26, 2019.Return to text 3. See Gary Richardson, Alejandro Komai, and Michael Gou, "Banking Act of 1935," Federal Reserve History (website), Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, November 22, 2013.Return to text 4. See Noelle Richards, "Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991," Federal Reserve History (website), Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, November 22, 2013.Return to text 5. Dodd-Frank Act, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010).Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Finalizes Rules That Tailor Its Regulations for Domestic and Foreign Banks to More Closely Match Their Risk Profiles," news release, October 10, 2019.Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Issue Final Rule to Exempt Residential Real Estate Transactions of $400,000 or Less from Appraisal Requirements," news release, September 27, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Securities and Exchange Commission, "Agencies Finalize Changes to Simplify Volcker Rule," news release, October 8, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Finalizes Rules That Tailor Its Regulations for Domestic and Foreign Banks to More Closely Match Their Risk Profiles," news release, October 10, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Proposal That Would Modify Company-Run Stress Testing Requirements to Conform with Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act," news release, January 8, 2019; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Issues Statement Describing How, Consistent with Recently Enacted EGRRCPA, the Board Will No Longer Subject Primarily Smaller, Less Complex Banking Organizations to Certain Board Regulations," news release, July 6, 2018.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Propose Rule Regarding the Treatment of High Volatility Commercial Real Estate," news release, September 18, 2018; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies and FinCEN Improve Transparency of Risk-Focused BSA/AML Supervision," news release, July 22, 2019.Return to text 9. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Issues Interim Final Rule Expanding the Applicability of the Board's Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement," news release, August 28, 2018.Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Issue Final Rules Expanding Examination Cycles for Qualifying Small Banks and U.S. Branches and Agencies of Foreign Banks," news release, December 21, 2018.Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Issue Final Rule to Update Management Interlock Rules," news release, October 2, 2019.Return to text 12. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies Issue Final Rule to Simplify Capital Calculation for Community Banks," news release, October 29, 2019.Return to text 13. Randal K. Quarles, "Early Observations on Improving the Effectiveness of Post-Crisis Regulation" (speech at the American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., January 19, 2018).Return to text 14. Randal K. Quarles, "Refining the Stress Capital Buffer" (speech at the Program on International Financial Systems Conference, Frankfurt, Germany, September 5, 2019); and Randal K. Quarles, "Stress Testing: A Decade of Continuity and Change" (speech at the "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review" research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, July 9, 2019).Return to text 15. Randal K. Quarles, "The Next Stage in the LIBOR Transition" (speech at the Alternative Reference Rates Committee Roundtable, cohosted by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee and the New York University Stern School of Business and Its Salomon Center for the Study of Financial Institutions, New York, June 3, 2019).Return to text 16. Randal K. Quarles, "Law and Macroeconomics: The Global Evolution of Macroprudential Regulation" (speech at the "Law and Macroeconomics" conference at Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C., September 27, 2019).Return to text 17. Randal K. Quarles, "Government of Union: Achieving Certainty in Cross-Border Finance" (speech at the Financial Stability Board Workshop on Pre-Positioning, Ring-Fencing, and Market Fragmentation, Philadelphia, September 26, 2019).Return to text 18. Randal K. Quarles, "The Financial Stability Board at 10 Years—Looking Back and Looking Ahead" (speech at the European Banking Federation's European Banking Summit, Brussels, Belgium, October 3, 2019); see also, Financial Stability Board, "FSB Launches Evaluation of Too-Big-to-Fail Reforms and Invites Feedback from Stakeholders," news release, May 23, 2019; and Financial Stability Board, "FSB Publishes Report on Market Fragmentation," news release, June 4, 2019.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on December 5, 2019. Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member McHenry, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear today, alongside my colleagues from the regulatory community. We join you on the cusp of a significant and shared milestone: the full and faithful implementation of Congress's efforts to improve financial regulation, in the form of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA).1Today, I will briefly review the steps we have taken toward this milestone; share information on the state of the banking system, from the report that accompanies my testimony; and discuss the continuing need to ensure our regulatory framework is both coherent and effective.2 Roughly 18 months ago, Congress passed legislation to consolidate a decade of work on financial reform, and to better tailor financial regulation and supervision to the risks of the institutions being regulated. The EGRRCPA was a specific, targeted response to the conditions facing today's banking organizations and their customers. It was also rooted, however, in long-standing congressional practice: of reviewing the work done in the immediate aftermath of a crisis; of addressing any gaps; and of ensuring that public and private resources go toward their best, most efficient use. This approach informed the Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935, on issues from shareholder liability to deposit insurance.3It informed the bills passed after the savings-and-loan crisis, requiring "prompt corrective action" at struggling firms and reducing the examination burden at strong ones.4And it continues to inform our efforts now, from the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act to today.5 The Board's latestSupervision and Regulation Report, which we published last week, confirms the current health of the banking system. The banking system is substantially better prepared to manage unexpected shocks today than it was before the financial crisis. Now, when the waters are relatively calm, is the right time to step back and examine the efficiency and effectiveness of our protection against future storms. With the EGRRCPA, Congress made a significant down payment on that task. In less than 18 months after the act's passage, we implemented all of its major provisions. Earlier this year, we completed a cornerstone of the legislation to tailor our rules for regional banks, which was entirely consistent with a principle at the heart of our existing work: firms that pose greater risks should meet higher standards and receive more scrutiny. Our previous framework relied heavily on a firm's total assets as a proxy for these risks and for the costs the financial system would incur if a firm failed. This simple asset proxy was clear and critical, rough and ready, but neither risk-sensitive nor complete. Our new rules employ a broader set of indicators, like short-term wholesale funding and off-balance-sheet exposures, to assess the need for greater supervisory scrutiny.6They maintain the most stringent requirements and strictest oversight for the largest, most complex organizations—the collapse of which would do the most harm. We and our interagency colleagues also have worked on a range of measures addressed to smaller banks, with particular attention to better capturing and reflecting the characteristics of the community bank business model. These include elements of last year's legislation, and other steps we have taken in the same spirit, intended to help community banking organizations survive and thrive: Our goal, through this period of intense regulatory activity, has been to faithfully implement Congress's instructions. However, those instructions also speak to a broader need, and one central to our ongoing work: to ensure our regulatory regime is not only simple, efficient, and transparent, but also coherent and effective.13 Financial regulation, like any area of policy, is a product of history. Each component dates from a particular time and place, and it was designed, debated, and enacted to address a particular set of needs. No rule can be truly evergreen; gaps and areas for improvement will always reveal themselves over time. Our responsibility—among the most challenging and essential we have—is to address those gaps without creating new ones; to understand fully the interaction among regulations; to reduce complexity where possible, before it becomes its own source of risk; and to ensure ourentirerulebook supports the safety, stability, and strength of the financial system. Looking ahead, my colleagues and I are paying particular attention to coherence in our capital regime. We are reviewing public input into proposed changes to the stress capital buffer, which would simplify our regime by integrating our stress-test and point-in-time capital requirements and maintain our current strong levels of capital.14As we move forward, we also understand the need to thoughtfully finalize implementation of Basel III, in a way that preserves aggregate capital and liquidity levels at large banking organizations, avoids additional burden at smaller ones, and upholds our standards for transparency and due process. We also understand the need to ensure a smooth transition away from LIBOR, and other legacy benchmark rates, so institutions can manage risks comprehensively and effectively.15And we understand the need for clear, consistent supervisory communication on these and other matters, which invites dialogue, reflects and reinforces our regulations and laws, and gives banks necessary transparency into supervisory views on safety and soundness.16 We also understand the need to thoughtfully address new financial products and technologies. Innovation has the potential to improve access to financial services, lower costs, and support the competitive health of the banking sector. Its promise, however, inevitably comes with risk—and as the financial crisis showed, risks that lie outside the banking system can have consequences within it. Our approach to innovation should be both open and careful, engaging thoughtfully with both the public and private sectors, to understand the benefits and costs that such fundamental changes can bring. Finally, we understand the need for coherence across borders. Over the last decade, working with supervisors around the world, we have built a common understanding of the crisis, its causes, and its consequences. Now, as the full set of post-crisis reforms comes into effect, we should renew our focus on assessing their implementation and their overall impact. The financial system is truly global, and the structures and incentives that govern it are critical to its stability and resilience.17The regulatory community has started significant work to examine those structures and incentives as a whole, from their effect on "too-big-to-fail" subsidies to their impact on market fragmentation.18We are participating actively in that work, as a way to ensure the global financial system supports, rather than inhibits, American growth. I appreciate the chance to discuss this work with you, and I look forward to answering your questions. Thank you. 1. EGRRCPA, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Supervision and Regulation Report (PDF)," November 26, 2019.Return to text 3. See Gary Richardson, Alejandro Komai, and Michael Gou, "Banking Act of 1935," Federal Reserve History (website), Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, November 22, 2013.Return to text 4. See Noelle Richards, "Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991," Federal Reserve History (website), Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, November 22, 2013.Return to text 5. Dodd-Frank Act, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010).Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Finalizes Rules That Tailor Its Regulations for Domestic and Foreign Banks to More Closely Match Their Risk Profiles," news release, October 10, 2019.Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Issue Final Rule to Exempt Residential Real Estate Transactions of $400,000 or Less from Appraisal Requirements," news release, September 27, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Securities and Exchange Commission, "Agencies Finalize Changes to Simplify Volcker Rule," news release, October 8, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Finalizes Rules That Tailor Its Regulations for Domestic and Foreign Banks to More Closely Match Their Risk Profiles," news release, October 10, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Proposal That Would Modify Company-Run Stress Testing Requirements to Conform with Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act," news release, January 8, 2019; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Issues Statement Describing How, Consistent with Recently Enacted EGRRCPA, the Board Will No Longer Subject Primarily Smaller, Less Complex Banking Organizations to Certain Board Regulations," news release, July 6, 2018.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Propose Rule Regarding the Treatment of High Volatility Commercial Real Estate," news release, September 18, 2018; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies and FinCEN Improve Transparency of Risk-Focused BSA/AML Supervision," news release, July 22, 2019.Return to text 9. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Issues Interim Final Rule Expanding the Applicability of the Board's Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement," news release, August 28, 2018.Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Issue Final Rules Expanding Examination Cycles for Qualifying Small Banks and U.S. Branches and Agencies of Foreign Banks," news release, December 21, 2018.Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Issue Final Rule to Update Management Interlock Rules," news release, October 2, 2019.Return to text 12. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies Issue Final Rule to Simplify Capital Calculation for Community Banks," news release, October 29, 2019.Return to text 13. Randal K. Quarles, "Early Observations on Improving the Effectiveness of Post-Crisis Regulation" (speech at the American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., January 19, 2018).Return to text 14. Randal K. Quarles, "Refining the Stress Capital Buffer" (speech at the Program on International Financial Systems Conference, Frankfurt, Germany, September 5, 2019); and Randal K. Quarles, "Stress Testing: A Decade of Continuity and Change" (speech at the "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review" research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, July 9, 2019).Return to text 15. Randal K. Quarles, "The Next Stage in the LIBOR Transition" (speech at the Alternative Reference Rates Committee Roundtable, cohosted by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee and the New York University Stern School of Business and Its Salomon Center for the Study of Financial Institutions, New York, June 3, 2019).Return to text 16. Randal K. Quarles, "Law and Macroeconomics: The Global Evolution of Macroprudential Regulation" (speech at the "Law and Macroeconomics" conference at Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C., September 27, 2019).Return to text 17. Randal K. Quarles, "Government of Union: Achieving Certainty in Cross-Border Finance" (speech at the Financial Stability Board Workshop on Pre-Positioning, Ring-Fencing, and Market Fragmentation, Philadelphia, September 26, 2019).Return to text 18. Randal K. Quarles, "The Financial Stability Board at 10 Years—Looking Back and Looking Ahead" (speech at the European Banking Federation's European Banking Summit, Brussels, Belgium, October 3, 2019); see also, Financial Stability Board, "FSB Launches Evaluation of Too-Big-to-Fail Reforms and Invites Feedback from Stakeholders," news release, May 23, 2019; and Financial Stability Board, "FSB Publishes Report on Market Fragmentation," news release, June 4, 2019.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard On the Monetary Policy, Technology, and Globalisation Panel at "Monetary Policy: The Challenges Ahead," an ECB Colloquium Held in Honour of Benoît Coeuré, Frankfurt, Germany I am honored to be here today to celebrate Benoît Coeuré's tenure at the European Central Bank (ECB). I have been working with Benoît now for a decade—starting at our respective Treasuries where we both were drafted as financial firefighters, migrating to our respective central banks to help with stabilization, recovery, and normalization, and most recently preparing for the challenges that lie ahead. Over the course of that decade, I have developed deep admiration for Benoît's keen insights and outstanding judgment.1 Equally important, Benoît always has a plan. Generally, it is the right plan addressed to the right problem, and he executes it with exceptional efficacy and strong support. That is a rare and invaluable combination in public service. Indeed, Benoît's tenure at the ECB coincided with an incredible turnaround inunemploymentand output growth. Both the euro area and the global economy have benefited greatly from Benoît Coeuré's outstanding public service. Moreover, Benoît's research interests are forward-looking and extend well beyond the macro economy. When Benoît was appointed chair of the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI), the global standard setter for payment issues, he doubled itsoutput*, resulting in 75 reports.2He turned its focus to distributed ledger, stablecoins, and central bank digital currencies long before many other central bankers realized these issues would be transforming their worlds. Indeed, thenumber of Google searches for "central bank digital currencies"increased sharply over the course of Benoît's tenure as chair of the CPMI. Digital Currencies, Money, and PaymentsI was asked to provide some brief thoughts about digital developments in the world of monetary policy and central banking. At the start of Benoît's ECB term,bitcoin's market capitalizationwas small, and only a handful of cryptocurrencies existed. In the eight years since then, bitcoin's market capitalization has grown rapidly and now exceeds 100 billion euros, and thousands of cryptocurrencies have been created.3 The potential of "global stablecoins" to scale rapidly is evident from the increasingly fast rates oftechnology adoptionand the growth of large networks. Adoption rates for new technologies have accelerated over time. In 1921, 35 percent of U.S. households had telephone service, and it took 40 more years for telephone lines to reach 80 percent of homes. In contrast, the internet achieved the same level of adoption in only 13 years. More recently, smartphones and social media have achieved the same level of U.S. household adoption in less than a decade.4 Rapid adoption is also evident in the payments landscape, where network externalities figure prominently. Between the first quarter of 2014 and the first quarter of 2019, transactions through Venmo grew over 66 times to $21 billion (18.5 billion euros).5Systems in other countries have also scaled rapidly. In China, mobile payments grew over 35 times during the same period to $8.2 trillion (7.2 trillion euros).6India's Unified Payments Interface (UPI) has grown even faster: between the fourth quarter of 2016 and the first quarter of 2019, thetransaction valuegrew nearly 400 times to $49.7 billion (43.8 billion euros).7 Digital currency payments projects from big technology firms that have network advantages have the potential to scale even more rapidly. Because the utility of any medium of exchange increases with the size of the network using it, the power of a stablecoin payment system depends on the breadth of its adoption. With nearly one-third of the global population asactive userson Facebook, the Libra stablecoin project stands out for the speed with which its network could reach global scale in payments. Stablecoin networks at global scale are leading us to revisit questions over what form money can take, who or what can issue it, and how payments can be recorded and settled. While central bank money and commercial bank money are the foundations of the modern financial system, nonbank private "money" or assets also facilitate transactions among a network of users. In some cases, such nonbank private assets may have value only within the network, while in other cases, the issuer may promise convertibility to a sovereign currency, such that this becomes a liability of the issuing entity. Stablecoins aspire to achieve the functions of traditional money without relying on confidence in an issuer—such as a central bank—to stand behind the "money." For some potential stablecoins, a close assessment suggests users may have no rights with respect to the underlying assets or any issuer. We have already seen the growth of massive payments networks on existing digital platforms, such as Alibaba and WeChat. So far, these networks operate within a jurisdiction based on the sovereign currency as the unit of account, and balances are transferable in and out of bank or credit card accounts. We have also seen the issuance of stablecoins on a smaller scale, such as Gemini or Paxos. What would set Facebook's Libra apart, if it were to proceed, is the combination of an active-user network representing more than a third of the global population with the issuance of a private digital currency opaquely tied to a basket of sovereign currencies.8 Libra, like any stablecoin project with global scale and scope, must address a core set of legal and regulatory challenges. A significant concern regarding Facebook's Libra project is the potential for a payment system to be adopted globally in a short time period and to establish itself as a potentially new unit of account. Unlike social media platforms or ridesharing applications, payment systems cannot be designed as they develop, due to the nexus with consumers' financial security. This is why in many jurisdictions, including the European Union, there is a regime to oversee retail payment systems. Without requisite safeguards, stablecoin networks at global scale may put consumers at risk. Cryptocurrencies already pose a number of risks to the financial system, and these could be magnified by a widely accepted stablecoin for general use. Estimated losses from fraud and thefts associated with cryptocurrencies are rising at a staggering pace—from $1.7 billion (1.4 billion euros) in 2018 to over $4.4 billion (3.9 billion euros) in 2019, based on one industry estimate.9The hacking of exchanges represents a significant source of the theft, followed by the targeting of individual users through scams using QR codes, malware, and ransomware. These estimates reflect only known fraud and thefts; it is likely that not all losses are reported and some amount of cryptocurrencies is lost or forgotten. In most cases, customers bear the losses. By contrast, over many decades, consumers in the United States and euro area have come to expect strong safeguards on their bank accounts and the associated payments. Statutory and regulatory protections on bank accounts in the United States mean that consumers can reasonably expect their deposits to be insured up to a limit; many fraudulent transactions to be the liability of the bank; transfers to be available within specified periods; and clear, standardized disclosures about account fees and interest payments. Not only is it not clear whether comparable protections will be in place with Libra, or what recourse consumers will have, but it is not even clear how much price risk consumers will face since they do not appear to have rights to the stablecoin's underlying assets. Anti-money laundering (AML), counterterrorist financing (CTF), and know-your-customer (KYC) requirements are significant concerns. In one industry report, researchers found that roughly two-thirds of the 120 most popular cryptocurrency exchanges have weak AML, CTF, and KYC practices.10Only a third of the most popular exchanges require ID verification and proof of address to make a deposit or withdrawal. This is troubling, since a number of studies conclude that cryptocurrencies support a significant amount of illicit activity. One study estimated that more than a quarter of bitcoin users and roughly half of bitcoin transactions, for example, are associated with illegal activity.11 There are also questions related to the implications of a widely used stablecoin for financial stability. If not managed effectively, liquidity, credit, market, or operational risks, alone or in combination, could trigger a loss of confidence and run-like behavior. This could be exacerbated by the lack of clarity about the management of reserves and the rights and responsibilities of various market participants in the network. The risks and spillovers could be amplified by potential ambiguity surrounding the ability of official authorities to provide oversight, backstop liquidity, and collaborate across borders. The precise risks would depend on the design of the cryptocurrency as well as the scale of adoption. The effect of a stablecoin on financial stability, for example, would be driven in part by how the stablecoin is tied to an asset (if at all) and the features of the asset itself. A stablecoin tied one-to-one to an individual currency would have different implications than one tied to a basket of currencies. A stablecoin that is built on a permissioned network would have different risk implications than a permissionless network, which may be more vulnerable to money laundering and terrorist financing risks. A stablecoin used solely by commercial banks would have a different risk profile than one for consumer use. Similarly, there are potential implications for monetary policy. For smaller economies, there may be material effects on monetary policy from private sector digital currencies as well as foreign central bank digital currencies. In many respects, these effects may be similar to dollarization aside from the fast pace and wide scope of adoption. The Work AheadThe emergence of cryptocurrencies—and particularly stablecoins—has raised important questions for central banks and other authorities, including on the appropriate regulatory framework. In the United States, the regulatory framework for cryptocurrencies is not straightforward. Our current framework is based largely on whether a cryptocurrency is deemed to be a security or has associated derivative financial products and whether the participating institutions have a supervisory agency overseeing their activities. Unlike many other jurisdictions, regulators do not have plenary authority over retail payments in the United States. Moreover, the regulatory challenges are likely to be inherently cross-border in nature. Because stablecoins and other cryptocurrencies are unlikely to be bound by physical borders, regulatory actions in one jurisdiction are unlikely to be fully effective without coordinated action elsewhere. The prospect of global stablecoin payment systems has intensified the interest in central bank digital currencies. Central bank digital currency typically refers to a new type of central bank liability that could be held directly by households and businesses without the involvement of a commercial bank intermediary.12Proponents argue that central bank digital currencies would be a safer alternative to privately issued stablecoins because they would be a direct liability of the central bank. A more relevant question may be whether some intermediate solutions may be able to offer the safety and benefits of real-time digital payments based on sovereign currencies without necessitating radical transformation of the financial system. In the United States, there are important advantages associated with current arrangements. Physical cash in circulation for the U.S. dollar continues to rise due to robust demand, and the dollar plays an important role as a reserve currency globally. Moreover, we have a robust and diverse banking system that provides important services along with a widely available and expanding variety of digital payment options that build on the existing institutional framework with its important safeguards. Circumstances where the central bank issues digital currency directly to consumer accounts for general-purpose use would raise profound legal, policy, and operational questions. That said, it is important to study whether we can do more to provide safer, less expensive, faster, or otherwise more efficient payments. Some jurisdictions are likely to move in this direction faster than others, based on the particular attributes of their payments and currency systems. At the Federal Reserve, we look forward to collaborating with other jurisdictions as we continue to analyze the potential benefits and costs of central bank digital currencies. Most immediately, the Federal Reserve is actively working to introduce a faster payment system for the United States, to improve the speed and lower the cost of consumer payments. In many countries, consumers are already able to make real-time payments at low cost. This summer, the Federal Reserve announced the first new payment service in more than 40 years—the FedNow Service—to provide a platform for consumers and businesses to send and receive payments immediately and securely 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. As the public and private sectors work to reduce payment frictions, one of the most important use cases is for cross-border payments, such as remittances. Current cross-border payments solutions are often slow, cumbersome, and opaque. Authorities in many jurisdictions, including the United States, recognize the importance of cooperating across borders with each other and the private sector to address these cross-border frictions.13 Technology will continue driving rapid change in the way we make payments and the concept of "money." As central bankers, we recognize the power of technology and innovation to transform the financial system and reduce frictions and delays, and the importance of preserving consumer protections, data privacy and security, financial stability, and monetary policy transmission and guarding against illicit activity and cyber risks. Given the stakes, any global payments network should be expected to meet a high threshold of legal and regulatory safeguards before launching operations. The work ahead is not easy—the policy issues are complex, the coordination challenges are significant, and there are likely to be few simple fixes. Because the road ahead is complicated and challenging, I am especially pleased that Benoît will continue to help us navigate these issues as the new Head of the Bank for International Settlements' Innovation Hub. 1. I am grateful to Paul Wong, David Mills, Theresa Dinh, and Lacy Douglas of the Federal Reserve Board for assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Seehttps://www.bis.org/cpmi.Return to text 3. See https://www.blockchain.com and https://www.coinmarketcap.com.Return to text 4. Hannah Ritchie and Max Roser (2019), "Technology Adoption," published online at OurWorldInData.org, retrieved fromhttps://ourworldindata.org/technology-adoption[Online Resource].Return to text 5. "Venmo's Monetization Will Be Worth Watching," Business Insider, January 31, 2017, www.businessinsider.com/venmos-monetization-will-be-worth-watching-2017-1.Return to text 6. See http://www.iresearchchina.com/. Roughly 90 percent of mobile payments in China from 2014-19 were through Alipay and Tenpay.Return to text 7. Seehttps://www.npci.org.in/product-statistics/upi-product-statistics.Return to text 8. Active-user network includes people who were using at least one of the company's core products (i.e., Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, or WhatsApp).Return to text 9. Ciphertrace (2019b),Cryptocurrency Anti-Money Laundering Report, 2019 Q3, November, https://ciphertrace.com/q3-2019-cryptocurrency-anti-money-laundering-report/ and Ciphertrace (2019a),Cryptocurrency Anti-Money Laundering Report, 2018 Q4, January 2019, https://ciphertrace.com/cryptocurrency-anti-money-laundering-report-q4-2018/.Return to text 10. Ciphertrace (2019b).Return to text 11. Sean Foley, Jonathan R Karlsen, and Tālis J Putniņš (2019), "Sex, Drugs, and Bitcoin: How Much Illegal Activity Is Financed Through Cryptocurrencies?,"The Review of Financial Studies, volume 32(5), (May), pp. 1798–1853,https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhz015.Return to text 12. The Federal Reserve and other central banks currently provide money digitally in the form of central bank deposits in traditional reserve or settlement accounts.Return to text 13. Similarly, the introduction of a central bank digital currency in one country could affect other jurisdictions.Return to text *On December 18, 2019, Figure 3 was revised to remove an incorrect legend. The dark blue bars represent publications before Benoît Coeuré's term as CPMI Chairman. The light blue bars represent publications during Benoît Coeuré's term as CPMI Chairman from 2013 to 2019. Note: On January 31, 2020, the following numbers were revised to reflect updated currency conversions: Transactions through Venmo was changed from 23.9 billion euros to 18.5 billion euros. Mobile payments in China was changed from 9.3 trillion euros to 7.2 trillion euros. India's Unified Payments Interface transaction value was changed from $500 million (600 million euros) to $49.7 billion (43.8 billion euros). In Figure 8, the United Payments Interface numbers were revised. Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard On the Monetary Policy, Technology, and Globalisation Panel at "Monetary Policy: The Challenges Ahead," an ECB Colloquium Held in Honour of Benoît Coeuré, Frankfurt, Germany I am honored to be here today to celebrate Benoît Coeuré's tenure at the European Central Bank (ECB). I have been working with Benoît now for a decade—starting at our respective Treasuries where we both were drafted as financial firefighters, migrating to our respective central banks to help with stabilization, recovery, and normalization, and most recently preparing for the challenges that lie ahead. Over the course of that decade, I have developed deep admiration for Benoît's keen insights and outstanding judgment.1 Equally important, Benoît always has a plan. Generally, it is the right plan addressed to the right problem, and he executes it with exceptional efficacy and strong support. That is a rare and invaluable combination in public service. Indeed, Benoît's tenure at the ECB coincided with an incredible turnaround inunemploymentand output growth. Both the euro area and the global economy have benefited greatly from Benoît Coeuré's outstanding public service. Moreover, Benoît's research interests are forward-looking and extend well beyond the macro economy. When Benoît was appointed chair of the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI), the global standard setter for payment issues, he doubled itsoutput*, resulting in 75 reports.2He turned its focus to distributed ledger, stablecoins, and central bank digital currencies long before many other central bankers realized these issues would be transforming their worlds. Indeed, thenumber of Google searches for "central bank digital currencies"increased sharply over the course of Benoît's tenure as chair of the CPMI. Digital Currencies, Money, and PaymentsI was asked to provide some brief thoughts about digital developments in the world of monetary policy and central banking. At the start of Benoît's ECB term,bitcoin's market capitalizationwas small, and only a handful of cryptocurrencies existed. In the eight years since then, bitcoin's market capitalization has grown rapidly and now exceeds 100 billion euros, and thousands of cryptocurrencies have been created.3 The potential of "global stablecoins" to scale rapidly is evident from the increasingly fast rates oftechnology adoptionand the growth of large networks. Adoption rates for new technologies have accelerated over time. In 1921, 35 percent of U.S. households had telephone service, and it took 40 more years for telephone lines to reach 80 percent of homes. In contrast, the internet achieved the same level of adoption in only 13 years. More recently, smartphones and social media have achieved the same level of U.S. household adoption in less than a decade.4 Rapid adoption is also evident in the payments landscape, where network externalities figure prominently. Between the first quarter of 2014 and the first quarter of 2019, transactions through Venmo grew over 66 times to $21 billion (18.5 billion euros).5Systems in other countries have also scaled rapidly. In China, mobile payments grew over 35 times during the same period to $8.2 trillion (7.2 trillion euros).6India's Unified Payments Interface (UPI) has grown even faster: between the fourth quarter of 2016 and the first quarter of 2019, thetransaction valuegrew nearly 400 times to $49.7 billion (43.8 billion euros).7 Digital currency payments projects from big technology firms that have network advantages have the potential to scale even more rapidly. Because the utility of any medium of exchange increases with the size of the network using it, the power of a stablecoin payment system depends on the breadth of its adoption. With nearly one-third of the global population asactive userson Facebook, the Libra stablecoin project stands out for the speed with which its network could reach global scale in payments. Stablecoin networks at global scale are leading us to revisit questions over what form money can take, who or what can issue it, and how payments can be recorded and settled. While central bank money and commercial bank money are the foundations of the modern financial system, nonbank private "money" or assets also facilitate transactions among a network of users. In some cases, such nonbank private assets may have value only within the network, while in other cases, the issuer may promise convertibility to a sovereign currency, such that this becomes a liability of the issuing entity. Stablecoins aspire to achieve the functions of traditional money without relying on confidence in an issuer—such as a central bank—to stand behind the "money." For some potential stablecoins, a close assessment suggests users may have no rights with respect to the underlying assets or any issuer. We have already seen the growth of massive payments networks on existing digital platforms, such as Alibaba and WeChat. So far, these networks operate within a jurisdiction based on the sovereign currency as the unit of account, and balances are transferable in and out of bank or credit card accounts. We have also seen the issuance of stablecoins on a smaller scale, such as Gemini or Paxos. What would set Facebook's Libra apart, if it were to proceed, is the combination of an active-user network representing more than a third of the global population with the issuance of a private digital currency opaquely tied to a basket of sovereign currencies.8 Libra, like any stablecoin project with global scale and scope, must address a core set of legal and regulatory challenges. A significant concern regarding Facebook's Libra project is the potential for a payment system to be adopted globally in a short time period and to establish itself as a potentially new unit of account. Unlike social media platforms or ridesharing applications, payment systems cannot be designed as they develop, due to the nexus with consumers' financial security. This is why in many jurisdictions, including the European Union, there is a regime to oversee retail payment systems. Without requisite safeguards, stablecoin networks at global scale may put consumers at risk. Cryptocurrencies already pose a number of risks to the financial system, and these could be magnified by a widely accepted stablecoin for general use. Estimated losses from fraud and thefts associated with cryptocurrencies are rising at a staggering pace—from $1.7 billion (1.4 billion euros) in 2018 to over $4.4 billion (3.9 billion euros) in 2019, based on one industry estimate.9The hacking of exchanges represents a significant source of the theft, followed by the targeting of individual users through scams using QR codes, malware, and ransomware. These estimates reflect only known fraud and thefts; it is likely that not all losses are reported and some amount of cryptocurrencies is lost or forgotten. In most cases, customers bear the losses. By contrast, over many decades, consumers in the United States and euro area have come to expect strong safeguards on their bank accounts and the associated payments. Statutory and regulatory protections on bank accounts in the United States mean that consumers can reasonably expect their deposits to be insured up to a limit; many fraudulent transactions to be the liability of the bank; transfers to be available within specified periods; and clear, standardized disclosures about account fees and interest payments. Not only is it not clear whether comparable protections will be in place with Libra, or what recourse consumers will have, but it is not even clear how much price risk consumers will face since they do not appear to have rights to the stablecoin's underlying assets. Anti-money laundering (AML), counterterrorist financing (CTF), and know-your-customer (KYC) requirements are significant concerns. In one industry report, researchers found that roughly two-thirds of the 120 most popular cryptocurrency exchanges have weak AML, CTF, and KYC practices.10Only a third of the most popular exchanges require ID verification and proof of address to make a deposit or withdrawal. This is troubling, since a number of studies conclude that cryptocurrencies support a significant amount of illicit activity. One study estimated that more than a quarter of bitcoin users and roughly half of bitcoin transactions, for example, are associated with illegal activity.11 There are also questions related to the implications of a widely used stablecoin for financial stability. If not managed effectively, liquidity, credit, market, or operational risks, alone or in combination, could trigger a loss of confidence and run-like behavior. This could be exacerbated by the lack of clarity about the management of reserves and the rights and responsibilities of various market participants in the network. The risks and spillovers could be amplified by potential ambiguity surrounding the ability of official authorities to provide oversight, backstop liquidity, and collaborate across borders. The precise risks would depend on the design of the cryptocurrency as well as the scale of adoption. The effect of a stablecoin on financial stability, for example, would be driven in part by how the stablecoin is tied to an asset (if at all) and the features of the asset itself. A stablecoin tied one-to-one to an individual currency would have different implications than one tied to a basket of currencies. A stablecoin that is built on a permissioned network would have different risk implications than a permissionless network, which may be more vulnerable to money laundering and terrorist financing risks. A stablecoin used solely by commercial banks would have a different risk profile than one for consumer use. Similarly, there are potential implications for monetary policy. For smaller economies, there may be material effects on monetary policy from private sector digital currencies as well as foreign central bank digital currencies. In many respects, these effects may be similar to dollarization aside from the fast pace and wide scope of adoption. The Work AheadThe emergence of cryptocurrencies—and particularly stablecoins—has raised important questions for central banks and other authorities, including on the appropriate regulatory framework. In the United States, the regulatory framework for cryptocurrencies is not straightforward. Our current framework is based largely on whether a cryptocurrency is deemed to be a security or has associated derivative financial products and whether the participating institutions have a supervisory agency overseeing their activities. Unlike many other jurisdictions, regulators do not have plenary authority over retail payments in the United States. Moreover, the regulatory challenges are likely to be inherently cross-border in nature. Because stablecoins and other cryptocurrencies are unlikely to be bound by physical borders, regulatory actions in one jurisdiction are unlikely to be fully effective without coordinated action elsewhere. The prospect of global stablecoin payment systems has intensified the interest in central bank digital currencies. Central bank digital currency typically refers to a new type of central bank liability that could be held directly by households and businesses without the involvement of a commercial bank intermediary.12Proponents argue that central bank digital currencies would be a safer alternative to privately issued stablecoins because they would be a direct liability of the central bank. A more relevant question may be whether some intermediate solutions may be able to offer the safety and benefits of real-time digital payments based on sovereign currencies without necessitating radical transformation of the financial system. In the United States, there are important advantages associated with current arrangements. Physical cash in circulation for the U.S. dollar continues to rise due to robust demand, and the dollar plays an important role as a reserve currency globally. Moreover, we have a robust and diverse banking system that provides important services along with a widely available and expanding variety of digital payment options that build on the existing institutional framework with its important safeguards. Circumstances where the central bank issues digital currency directly to consumer accounts for general-purpose use would raise profound legal, policy, and operational questions. That said, it is important to study whether we can do more to provide safer, less expensive, faster, or otherwise more efficient payments. Some jurisdictions are likely to move in this direction faster than others, based on the particular attributes of their payments and currency systems. At the Federal Reserve, we look forward to collaborating with other jurisdictions as we continue to analyze the potential benefits and costs of central bank digital currencies. Most immediately, the Federal Reserve is actively working to introduce a faster payment system for the United States, to improve the speed and lower the cost of consumer payments. In many countries, consumers are already able to make real-time payments at low cost. This summer, the Federal Reserve announced the first new payment service in more than 40 years—the FedNow Service—to provide a platform for consumers and businesses to send and receive payments immediately and securely 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. As the public and private sectors work to reduce payment frictions, one of the most important use cases is for cross-border payments, such as remittances. Current cross-border payments solutions are often slow, cumbersome, and opaque. Authorities in many jurisdictions, including the United States, recognize the importance of cooperating across borders with each other and the private sector to address these cross-border frictions.13 Technology will continue driving rapid change in the way we make payments and the concept of "money." As central bankers, we recognize the power of technology and innovation to transform the financial system and reduce frictions and delays, and the importance of preserving consumer protections, data privacy and security, financial stability, and monetary policy transmission and guarding against illicit activity and cyber risks. Given the stakes, any global payments network should be expected to meet a high threshold of legal and regulatory safeguards before launching operations. The work ahead is not easy—the policy issues are complex, the coordination challenges are significant, and there are likely to be few simple fixes. Because the road ahead is complicated and challenging, I am especially pleased that Benoît will continue to help us navigate these issues as the new Head of the Bank for International Settlements' Innovation Hub. 1. I am grateful to Paul Wong, David Mills, Theresa Dinh, and Lacy Douglas of the Federal Reserve Board for assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Seehttps://www.bis.org/cpmi.Return to text 3. See https://www.blockchain.com and https://www.coinmarketcap.com.Return to text 4. Hannah Ritchie and Max Roser (2019), "Technology Adoption," published online at OurWorldInData.org, retrieved fromhttps://ourworldindata.org/technology-adoption[Online Resource].Return to text 5. "Venmo's Monetization Will Be Worth Watching," Business Insider, January 31, 2017, www.businessinsider.com/venmos-monetization-will-be-worth-watching-2017-1.Return to text 6. See http://www.iresearchchina.com/. Roughly 90 percent of mobile payments in China from 2014-19 were through Alipay and Tenpay.Return to text 7. Seehttps://www.npci.org.in/product-statistics/upi-product-statistics.Return to text 8. Active-user network includes people who were using at least one of the company's core products (i.e., Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, or WhatsApp).Return to text 9. Ciphertrace (2019b),Cryptocurrency Anti-Money Laundering Report, 2019 Q3, November, https://ciphertrace.com/q3-2019-cryptocurrency-anti-money-laundering-report/ and Ciphertrace (2019a),Cryptocurrency Anti-Money Laundering Report, 2018 Q4, January 2019, https://ciphertrace.com/cryptocurrency-anti-money-laundering-report-q4-2018/.Return to text 10. Ciphertrace (2019b).Return to text 11. Sean Foley, Jonathan R Karlsen, and Tālis J Putniņš (2019), "Sex, Drugs, and Bitcoin: How Much Illegal Activity Is Financed Through Cryptocurrencies?,"The Review of Financial Studies, volume 32(5), (May), pp. 1798–1853,https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhz015.Return to text 12. The Federal Reserve and other central banks currently provide money digitally in the form of central bank deposits in traditional reserve or settlement accounts.Return to text 13. Similarly, the introduction of a central bank digital currency in one country could affect other jurisdictions.Return to text *On December 18, 2019, Figure 3 was revised to remove an incorrect legend. The dark blue bars represent publications before Benoît Coeuré's term as CPMI Chairman. The light blue bars represent publications during Benoît Coeuré's term as CPMI Chairman from 2013 to 2019. Note: On January 31, 2020, the following numbers were revised to reflect updated currency conversions: Transactions through Venmo was changed from 23.9 billion euros to 18.5 billion euros. Mobile payments in China was changed from 9.3 trillion euros to 7.2 trillion euros. India's Unified Payments Interface transaction value was changed from $500 million (600 million euros) to $49.7 billion (43.8 billion euros). In Figure 8, the United Payments Interface numbers were revised. Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard On the Monetary Policy, Technology, and Globalisation Panel at "Monetary Policy: The Challenges Ahead," an ECB Colloquium Held in Honour of Benoît Coeuré, Frankfurt, Germany I am honored to be here today to celebrate Benoît Coeuré's tenure at the European Central Bank (ECB). I have been working with Benoît now for a decade—starting at our respective Treasuries where we both were drafted as financial firefighters, migrating to our respective central banks to help with stabilization, recovery, and normalization, and most recently preparing for the challenges that lie ahead. Over the course of that decade, I have developed deep admiration for Benoît's keen insights and outstanding judgment.1 Equally important, Benoît always has a plan. Generally, it is the right plan addressed to the right problem, and he executes it with exceptional efficacy and strong support. That is a rare and invaluable combination in public service. Indeed, Benoît's tenure at the ECB coincided with an incredible turnaround inunemploymentand output growth. Both the euro area and the global economy have benefited greatly from Benoît Coeuré's outstanding public service. Moreover, Benoît's research interests are forward-looking and extend well beyond the macro economy. When Benoît was appointed chair of the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI), the global standard setter for payment issues, he doubled itsoutput*, resulting in 75 reports.2He turned its focus to distributed ledger, stablecoins, and central bank digital currencies long before many other central bankers realized these issues would be transforming their worlds. Indeed, thenumber of Google searches for "central bank digital currencies"increased sharply over the course of Benoît's tenure as chair of the CPMI. Digital Currencies, Money, and PaymentsI was asked to provide some brief thoughts about digital developments in the world of monetary policy and central banking. At the start of Benoît's ECB term,bitcoin's market capitalizationwas small, and only a handful of cryptocurrencies existed. In the eight years since then, bitcoin's market capitalization has grown rapidly and now exceeds 100 billion euros, and thousands of cryptocurrencies have been created.3 The potential of "global stablecoins" to scale rapidly is evident from the increasingly fast rates oftechnology adoptionand the growth of large networks. Adoption rates for new technologies have accelerated over time. In 1921, 35 percent of U.S. households had telephone service, and it took 40 more years for telephone lines to reach 80 percent of homes. In contrast, the internet achieved the same level of adoption in only 13 years. More recently, smartphones and social media have achieved the same level of U.S. household adoption in less than a decade.4 Rapid adoption is also evident in the payments landscape, where network externalities figure prominently. Between the first quarter of 2014 and the first quarter of 2019, transactions through Venmo grew over 66 times to $21 billion (18.5 billion euros).5Systems in other countries have also scaled rapidly. In China, mobile payments grew over 35 times during the same period to $8.2 trillion (7.2 trillion euros).6India's Unified Payments Interface (UPI) has grown even faster: between the fourth quarter of 2016 and the first quarter of 2019, thetransaction valuegrew nearly 400 times to $49.7 billion (43.8 billion euros).7 Digital currency payments projects from big technology firms that have network advantages have the potential to scale even more rapidly. Because the utility of any medium of exchange increases with the size of the network using it, the power of a stablecoin payment system depends on the breadth of its adoption. With nearly one-third of the global population asactive userson Facebook, the Libra stablecoin project stands out for the speed with which its network could reach global scale in payments. Stablecoin networks at global scale are leading us to revisit questions over what form money can take, who or what can issue it, and how payments can be recorded and settled. While central bank money and commercial bank money are the foundations of the modern financial system, nonbank private "money" or assets also facilitate transactions among a network of users. In some cases, such nonbank private assets may have value only within the network, while in other cases, the issuer may promise convertibility to a sovereign currency, such that this becomes a liability of the issuing entity. Stablecoins aspire to achieve the functions of traditional money without relying on confidence in an issuer—such as a central bank—to stand behind the "money." For some potential stablecoins, a close assessment suggests users may have no rights with respect to the underlying assets or any issuer. We have already seen the growth of massive payments networks on existing digital platforms, such as Alibaba and WeChat. So far, these networks operate within a jurisdiction based on the sovereign currency as the unit of account, and balances are transferable in and out of bank or credit card accounts. We have also seen the issuance of stablecoins on a smaller scale, such as Gemini or Paxos. What would set Facebook's Libra apart, if it were to proceed, is the combination of an active-user network representing more than a third of the global population with the issuance of a private digital currency opaquely tied to a basket of sovereign currencies.8 Libra, like any stablecoin project with global scale and scope, must address a core set of legal and regulatory challenges. A significant concern regarding Facebook's Libra project is the potential for a payment system to be adopted globally in a short time period and to establish itself as a potentially new unit of account. Unlike social media platforms or ridesharing applications, payment systems cannot be designed as they develop, due to the nexus with consumers' financial security. This is why in many jurisdictions, including the European Union, there is a regime to oversee retail payment systems. Without requisite safeguards, stablecoin networks at global scale may put consumers at risk. Cryptocurrencies already pose a number of risks to the financial system, and these could be magnified by a widely accepted stablecoin for general use. Estimated losses from fraud and thefts associated with cryptocurrencies are rising at a staggering pace—from $1.7 billion (1.4 billion euros) in 2018 to over $4.4 billion (3.9 billion euros) in 2019, based on one industry estimate.9The hacking of exchanges represents a significant source of the theft, followed by the targeting of individual users through scams using QR codes, malware, and ransomware. These estimates reflect only known fraud and thefts; it is likely that not all losses are reported and some amount of cryptocurrencies is lost or forgotten. In most cases, customers bear the losses. By contrast, over many decades, consumers in the United States and euro area have come to expect strong safeguards on their bank accounts and the associated payments. Statutory and regulatory protections on bank accounts in the United States mean that consumers can reasonably expect their deposits to be insured up to a limit; many fraudulent transactions to be the liability of the bank; transfers to be available within specified periods; and clear, standardized disclosures about account fees and interest payments. Not only is it not clear whether comparable protections will be in place with Libra, or what recourse consumers will have, but it is not even clear how much price risk consumers will face since they do not appear to have rights to the stablecoin's underlying assets. Anti-money laundering (AML), counterterrorist financing (CTF), and know-your-customer (KYC) requirements are significant concerns. In one industry report, researchers found that roughly two-thirds of the 120 most popular cryptocurrency exchanges have weak AML, CTF, and KYC practices.10Only a third of the most popular exchanges require ID verification and proof of address to make a deposit or withdrawal. This is troubling, since a number of studies conclude that cryptocurrencies support a significant amount of illicit activity. One study estimated that more than a quarter of bitcoin users and roughly half of bitcoin transactions, for example, are associated with illegal activity.11 There are also questions related to the implications of a widely used stablecoin for financial stability. If not managed effectively, liquidity, credit, market, or operational risks, alone or in combination, could trigger a loss of confidence and run-like behavior. This could be exacerbated by the lack of clarity about the management of reserves and the rights and responsibilities of various market participants in the network. The risks and spillovers could be amplified by potential ambiguity surrounding the ability of official authorities to provide oversight, backstop liquidity, and collaborate across borders. The precise risks would depend on the design of the cryptocurrency as well as the scale of adoption. The effect of a stablecoin on financial stability, for example, would be driven in part by how the stablecoin is tied to an asset (if at all) and the features of the asset itself. A stablecoin tied one-to-one to an individual currency would have different implications than one tied to a basket of currencies. A stablecoin that is built on a permissioned network would have different risk implications than a permissionless network, which may be more vulnerable to money laundering and terrorist financing risks. A stablecoin used solely by commercial banks would have a different risk profile than one for consumer use. Similarly, there are potential implications for monetary policy. For smaller economies, there may be material effects on monetary policy from private sector digital currencies as well as foreign central bank digital currencies. In many respects, these effects may be similar to dollarization aside from the fast pace and wide scope of adoption. The Work AheadThe emergence of cryptocurrencies—and particularly stablecoins—has raised important questions for central banks and other authorities, including on the appropriate regulatory framework. In the United States, the regulatory framework for cryptocurrencies is not straightforward. Our current framework is based largely on whether a cryptocurrency is deemed to be a security or has associated derivative financial products and whether the participating institutions have a supervisory agency overseeing their activities. Unlike many other jurisdictions, regulators do not have plenary authority over retail payments in the United States. Moreover, the regulatory challenges are likely to be inherently cross-border in nature. Because stablecoins and other cryptocurrencies are unlikely to be bound by physical borders, regulatory actions in one jurisdiction are unlikely to be fully effective without coordinated action elsewhere. The prospect of global stablecoin payment systems has intensified the interest in central bank digital currencies. Central bank digital currency typically refers to a new type of central bank liability that could be held directly by households and businesses without the involvement of a commercial bank intermediary.12Proponents argue that central bank digital currencies would be a safer alternative to privately issued stablecoins because they would be a direct liability of the central bank. A more relevant question may be whether some intermediate solutions may be able to offer the safety and benefits of real-time digital payments based on sovereign currencies without necessitating radical transformation of the financial system. In the United States, there are important advantages associated with current arrangements. Physical cash in circulation for the U.S. dollar continues to rise due to robust demand, and the dollar plays an important role as a reserve currency globally. Moreover, we have a robust and diverse banking system that provides important services along with a widely available and expanding variety of digital payment options that build on the existing institutional framework with its important safeguards. Circumstances where the central bank issues digital currency directly to consumer accounts for general-purpose use would raise profound legal, policy, and operational questions. That said, it is important to study whether we can do more to provide safer, less expensive, faster, or otherwise more efficient payments. Some jurisdictions are likely to move in this direction faster than others, based on the particular attributes of their payments and currency systems. At the Federal Reserve, we look forward to collaborating with other jurisdictions as we continue to analyze the potential benefits and costs of central bank digital currencies. Most immediately, the Federal Reserve is actively working to introduce a faster payment system for the United States, to improve the speed and lower the cost of consumer payments. In many countries, consumers are already able to make real-time payments at low cost. This summer, the Federal Reserve announced the first new payment service in more than 40 years—the FedNow Service—to provide a platform for consumers and businesses to send and receive payments immediately and securely 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. As the public and private sectors work to reduce payment frictions, one of the most important use cases is for cross-border payments, such as remittances. Current cross-border payments solutions are often slow, cumbersome, and opaque. Authorities in many jurisdictions, including the United States, recognize the importance of cooperating across borders with each other and the private sector to address these cross-border frictions.13 Technology will continue driving rapid change in the way we make payments and the concept of "money." As central bankers, we recognize the power of technology and innovation to transform the financial system and reduce frictions and delays, and the importance of preserving consumer protections, data privacy and security, financial stability, and monetary policy transmission and guarding against illicit activity and cyber risks. Given the stakes, any global payments network should be expected to meet a high threshold of legal and regulatory safeguards before launching operations. The work ahead is not easy—the policy issues are complex, the coordination challenges are significant, and there are likely to be few simple fixes. Because the road ahead is complicated and challenging, I am especially pleased that Benoît will continue to help us navigate these issues as the new Head of the Bank for International Settlements' Innovation Hub. 1. I am grateful to Paul Wong, David Mills, Theresa Dinh, and Lacy Douglas of the Federal Reserve Board for assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Seehttps://www.bis.org/cpmi.Return to text 3. See https://www.blockchain.com and https://www.coinmarketcap.com.Return to text 4. Hannah Ritchie and Max Roser (2019), "Technology Adoption," published online at OurWorldInData.org, retrieved fromhttps://ourworldindata.org/technology-adoption[Online Resource].Return to text 5. "Venmo's Monetization Will Be Worth Watching," Business Insider, January 31, 2017, www.businessinsider.com/venmos-monetization-will-be-worth-watching-2017-1.Return to text 6. See http://www.iresearchchina.com/. Roughly 90 percent of mobile payments in China from 2014-19 were through Alipay and Tenpay.Return to text 7. Seehttps://www.npci.org.in/product-statistics/upi-product-statistics.Return to text 8. Active-user network includes people who were using at least one of the company's core products (i.e., Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, or WhatsApp).Return to text 9. Ciphertrace (2019b),Cryptocurrency Anti-Money Laundering Report, 2019 Q3, November, https://ciphertrace.com/q3-2019-cryptocurrency-anti-money-laundering-report/ and Ciphertrace (2019a),Cryptocurrency Anti-Money Laundering Report, 2018 Q4, January 2019, https://ciphertrace.com/cryptocurrency-anti-money-laundering-report-q4-2018/.Return to text 10. Ciphertrace (2019b).Return to text 11. Sean Foley, Jonathan R Karlsen, and Tālis J Putniņš (2019), "Sex, Drugs, and Bitcoin: How Much Illegal Activity Is Financed Through Cryptocurrencies?,"The Review of Financial Studies, volume 32(5), (May), pp. 1798–1853,https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhz015.Return to text 12. The Federal Reserve and other central banks currently provide money digitally in the form of central bank deposits in traditional reserve or settlement accounts.Return to text 13. Similarly, the introduction of a central bank digital currency in one country could affect other jurisdictions.Return to text *On December 18, 2019, Figure 3 was revised to remove an incorrect legend. The dark blue bars represent publications before Benoît Coeuré's term as CPMI Chairman. The light blue bars represent publications during Benoît Coeuré's term as CPMI Chairman from 2013 to 2019. Note: On January 31, 2020, the following numbers were revised to reflect updated currency conversions: Transactions through Venmo was changed from 23.9 billion euros to 18.5 billion euros. Mobile payments in China was changed from 9.3 trillion euros to 7.2 trillion euros. India's Unified Payments Interface transaction value was changed from $500 million (600 million euros) to $49.7 billion (43.8 billion euros). In Figure 8, the United Payments Interface numbers were revised. Accessible Version