Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationFederal Housing Finance AgencyOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency Five federal agencies today acted to ensure that qualifying swaps may be transferred from a United Kingdom (UK) entity to an affiliate in the European Union (EU) or the United States without triggering new margin requirements. The action is in response to the possibility of a non-negotiated withdrawal of the UK from the EU. This action applies to legacy swaps that were entered into before applicable regulatory margin requirements took effect and is generally consistent with similar relief contemplated by international jurisdictions. The interim final rule adopted today would ensure that any legacy swap currently exempt from the agencies' rule on margin for non-cleared swaps would not become subject to the rule if such swap is amended solely for the purpose of transferring it to an affiliate as a result of a non-negotiated UK withdrawal from the EU. Although the interim final rule is effective immediately, the agencies are accepting comments on the rule for 30 days after publication in the Federal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) on Thursday announced that they will jointly hold two public meetings on the proposed merger of BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, with SunTrust Banks, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia. As part of the proposal, BB&T would merge SunTrust Bank with and into its subsidiary state non-member bank, Branch Banking and Trust Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina. The purpose of the meetings is to collect information relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including a review of the insured depository institutions' performance under the Community Reinvestment Act. The agencies also will consider and collect information on other factors relevant to making a decision on the application, including the effects of the proposal on the stability of the U.S. banking or financial system, the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies, and competition in the relevant markets. The first public meeting will be held: The second public meeting will be held: All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting in Charlotte should submit a written request no later than 5:00 p.m. EDT on Monday, April 15, 2019. A request to testify at the Charlotte public meeting may be sent by mail to: Matthew Martin, Vice President, Research Department, Microeconomics and Research Communications, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 530 East Trade Street, Charlotte, North Carolina, 28202; by online form at: theCharlotte Public Meeting Request Form; by e-mail to:[email protected]; or by facsimile: 704-358-2300. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting in Atlanta should submit a written request no later than 5:00 p.m. EDT on Tuesday, April 23, 2019. A request to testify at the Atlanta public meeting may be sent by mail to: Karen Leone de Nie, Vice President Community and Economic Development, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 1000 Peachtree Street N.E., Atlanta, Georgia, 30309; by online form at:Atlanta Public Meeting Request Form; by e-mail to:[email protected]; or by facsimile to: 404-498-8956. The request to testify should include the following information: A schedule of participants will be prepared, although to ensure an opportunity for all to speak, the amount of time for each speaker may be limited. Persons who do not register in advance to testify may be permitted to speak at the public meetings if time permits. Individuals interested only in attending the meetings, but not testifying, need not submit a written request. All individuals who attend either public meeting must present a valid, government-issued photo identification. Further information on the applications, including how to testify, review comments received and the transcripts of the meetings, will be made available on theBoard's websiteand theFDIC's website. The Board and FDIC have also extended the public comment period for both applications until Friday, May 3, 2019. Interested parties also are invited to submit written comments on the applications to the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, P.O. Box 27622, Richmond, VA 23261, and to the FDIC's Atlanta Regional Office, 10 10th Street, NW, Suite 800, Atlanta, GA 30309-3849. Comments can also be sent electronically to[email protected]and to[email protected]. Federal Registernotice:PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Friday announced that they completed their evaluation of the 2017 resolution plans for 14 domestic banking organizations and issued their expectations for the firms' next resolution plan submissions, which are due on or before December 31, 2019. Resolution plans, required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills, must describe a firm's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the firm. The 14 firms evaluated were: Ally Financial Inc., American Express Company, BB&T Corporation, Capital One Financial Corporation, Discover Financial Services, Fifth Third Bancorp, Huntington Bancshares Incorporated, KeyCorp, M&T Bank Corporation, Northern Trust Corporation, Regions Financial Corporation, SunTrust Banks, Inc., The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., and U.S. Bancorp. The agencies did not identify any deficiencies or shortcomings in the 2017 resolution plans, which are weaknesses that the firms are required to address. The agencies previously identified three shortcomings in Northern Trust's 2015 resolution plan, and decided that Northern Trust's 2017 resolution plan satisfactorily addressed these three shortcomings. The Board is releasing the feedback letter for each firm. These letters note that the agencies intend to issue for notice and comment proposed revisions to the resolution plan rule, including changes to implement the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The letters also outline the expectations under the current rule requirements and explain that, in most cases, the agencies generally expect each firm's 2019 submission to include only material changes from its previous plan and updated financial statements. Ally Financial Inc. (PDF)American Express Company (PDF)BB&T Corporation (PDF)Capital One Financial Corporation (PDF)Discover Financial Services (PDF)Fifth Third Bancorp (PDF)Huntington Bancshares Incorporated (PDF)Keycorp (PDF)M&T Bank Corporation (PDF)Northern Trust Corporation (PDF)The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc. (PDF)Regions Financial Corporation (PDF)SunTrust Banks, Inc. (PDF)U.S. Bancorp (PDF)
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Ag Lenders Conference, sponsored by The Independent Community Bankers Association of New Mexico, Deming, New Mexico Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here today to discuss the important role agriculture plays in our economy, a role that is supported by many community banks. I would like to thank the Independent Community Bankers Association and their New Mexico state association for inviting me to participate in the conversation we will have today. In addition to the bankers and state leaders here, agricultural bankers and other leaders in the industry are listening in from around the country, and I look forward to hearing their views in a few moments. During our time together, I would like to offer some observations on the current state of the farm economy. And because I see community bankers as playing a vital role in this sector, I'll explain why I believe the community banking model is well-suited to supporting agricultural businesses. Finally, I will highlight the Federal Reserve's approach to supervising agricultural banks. As many of you know, before joining the Federal Reserve, I worked at a community bank that primarily served ranchers and farmers and the businesses that support them. More recently, as Kansas state bank commissioner, I supervised many banks whose business and customers were closely connected to the land and the people who work it. I now have the honor of being the first governor to fill the role designated for someone with community banking experience on the Federal Reserve Board, a position that was created by statute in 2015.1I plan to fulfill this unique responsibility by traveling widely and listening closely to community bankers, consumers, farmers, ranchers, and dairy farmers--all of the stakeholders with an interest in our work. My goal is to bring back the knowledge I gain from discussions and visits like the one we are having today and use it to improve our work. In doing so, I am confident our work will be more effective and efficient. And in the process, I hope to help you better understand the role of the Federal Reserve and what we are trying to accomplish. The Federal Reserve's monetary policy mandate is twofold: to promote maximum employment and stable prices. To do that, we continuously monitor the health of the U.S. economy in general, and because of its sizable share of overall activity, the agricultural sector in particular. U.S. agriculture and its related industries support about 22 million jobs in the United States and produce close to 10 percent of our exports.2A healthy farm economy also supports many rural and regional economies. We track commodity prices, ag credit, and exports as factors that influence our outlook on inflation and economic growth. As bank supervisors, we work to ensure safe and sound banking practices. We also monitor trends in asset quality and risk-management practices at agricultural banks as part of our ongoing assessment of the level and direction of risk at these financial institutions and within the agricultural economy. Earlier this week, I had the privilege of welcoming farm sector leaders to the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, where we hosted the 2019 National Agricultural Credit Conference. For nearly 80 years, this conference has brought together leaders in this sector to discuss important issues related to farm credit. Attendees at this year's conference recognized that, while the outlook for the farm economy in 2019 may be similar to a year ago, there are ongoing concerns that increasing stress on producers could lead to repayment difficulties. Farm incomes are expected to remain relatively low this year after declining sharply from the 2013 peak. The price of major agricultural commodities has also remained low in early 2019. For example, today, the price of corn is about 40 percent lower than it was from 2010 to 2013. Dairy producing states like New Mexico are well aware that average milk prices were about 15 percent lower in 2018 than from 2010 to 2013, and well below the highs of 2014. As noted in recent Federal Reserve System Beige Books, higher tariffs on soybeans and other U.S. exports and continued uncertainty over trade policy represent headwinds for American producers. Here in New Mexico, agricultural production rose 5 percent to $3.4 billion in 2017, with strong gains in milk production and livestock. Coming from a ranching family, I'm well aware of the challenges facing livestock producers. New Mexico is also the nation's second largest producer of pecans, producing a record 92 million pounds worth $220 million in 2017. I'm also looking forward to touring a farm later today to learn more about a crop we don't grow a lot of in Kansas--chili peppers. The demand for chili peppers and pecans grown in New Mexico is a good example of the kinds of regional variations we see in agriculture and many other industries. While it is important to understand regional trends, I would like to focus this morning on some overarching themes that have emerged in recent years. Recently, a great deal of attention understandably has been paid to an increase in the number of U.S. farm bankruptcies. While this is, of course, an important indicator to watch, it's equally important to note that the rise over the past few years has been fairly modest. Specifically, Chapter 12 filings increased from 360 in 2014 to about 500 in 2018. The Federal Reserve tracks these developments closely because of their potential implications for both the economy and banking supervision. The challenging outlook has prompted some to wonder if the industry is about to relive the hard times of the 1980s farm crisis. But here, I think, the historical contrast is somewhat reassuring. In the 1970s, farm income in the United States had advanced rapidly as exports surged. The broad increase in farm income led to a significant rise in capital investments in the years that followed. But exports began to soften and fell sharply after the suspension of trade with the then-Soviet Union. Farm incomes dropped, profits declined rapidly, and liquidity in the U.S. farm sector dried up. Other factors turned the sharp downturn into a crisis. High interest rates in the early 1980s, in response to the Great Inflation, contributed to the stress.3Despite the reductions in profits and liquidity, capital spending remained elevated in the early 1980s, and was financed with higher levels of debt made possible by rising land values. With debt burdens rising and incomes falling, many farm operations were forced to sell their land, causing the value of farmland to decline rapidly. The result was a sharp increase in farm bankruptcies and a number of bank failures. What about now? There are some similarities. Farm incomes rose rapidly from 2000 before reaching their peak in 2013 at $123 billion.4During that time, spurred by rising demand in China and a boom in biofuels, farmers invested heavily in new equipment and technology to meet this rising demand. And, in a troubling echo of the 1980s, farm incomes have now been cut roughly in half. That said, there are some important differences between the 1980s and today. With current inflation low and stable, interest rates are substantially lower than in the 1980s, and overall leverage has been less pronounced. And in contrast to the 1980s, farmland values have declined only modestly in recent years. The combination of relatively low interest rates and modest debt levels has resulted in more-manageable debt service requirements for many agricultural borrowers.5 Some farm operations have faced significant financial stress, and it is important to recognize that there are still risks. Farmland prices are quite high, and working capital continues to decline. However, returns at banks with a concentration in agriculture have generally remained healthy, as most producers have continued to make loan payments despite weakening revenue streams. Let me shift focus now to the role of banks, particularly community banks, in the U.S. farm economy. Community banks foster strong long-term relationships with farmers, ranchers, and others involved in the local business of agriculture. Often, these relationships are cultivated through community bankers' service on local civic and business organizations or by participation with local farmers and their families in activities to support the local community and economy. Agricultural community banks and agricultural borrowers share a common goal of serving and strengthening their local communities. They are also responsible for providing jobs that maintain the viability of these rural communities. Frequently, community bankers' ties to local agricultural businesses include running family farms, ranches, orchards, and dairies. In other instances, members of the boards of directors that help to oversee community banks are heavily involved in the business of agriculture. These close connections to local agricultural businesses provide community banks with a unique and important perspective in helping to meet local agricultural credit needs. Additionally, community banks can be more agile than their larger competitors, as they employ lenders with a deep understanding of local products and conditions and are able to offer customized funding options in response to changing lending conditions. This agility ultimately allows for better informed lending decisions and provides agricultural borrowers with the means to fund their operations and sustain their communities. As bank supervisors, we pay close attention to the performance of all banks, including agricultural banks. Before we start our conversation today, I would like to discuss how the Federal Reserve approaches bank supervision with a focus on agriculture lending and the challenges our farmers and the community banks that support these operations are facing. Overview of Agricultural BanksThere are approximately 1,400 "agricultural banks" in the United States, all of which play a vital role in providing rural producers with access to credit.6Agricultural banks hold approximately 50 percent of all agricultural loans outstanding at U.S. commercial banks. As I noted earlier, farm income has declined by approximately 50 percent since 2013, yet agricultural loans have steadily increased. Additionally, agricultural banks have more challenging funding structures given the seasonal funding needs of their agricultural customers and the difficulty of attracting deposits at rural institutions. This combination of a cyclical deposit base, lower inflows of deposits into rural community banks, and growing loan demand from agricultural borrowers has resulted in a greater dependence on borrowed funds to support the recent growth in agricultural lending. Approximately one-third of all agricultural banks are highly concentrated agricultural banks, and the number of these banks has declined slightly over the past several years--from 479 in December 2016 to 449 in September 2018. Although there are some unique risks and challenges for highly concentrated agricultural banks and their supervisors, these banks also generally remain in sound financial condition. And capital levels and liquidity metrics at most ag banks are generally in line with other banks that do not share these concentrations. While concentrated agricultural banks are currently operating with adequate capital ratios, regulators continue to closely monitor capital levels and to encourage prudent capital planning and concentration risk management, given the potential for unforeseen challenges and emerging risks associated with agricultural lending. With respect to liquidity, as previously noted, rapid asset growth can strain a bank's liquidity position if its funding sources turn out to be unstable. As supervisors, we work with bankers to understand their liquidity planning process, their challenges around attracting deposits, and the risks associated with potentially relying too heavily on noncore sources of funding. We have observed the increasing pressure on community banks to compete for deposits; however, we still see many community banks overcoming this challenge and effectively competing for deposits in their communities. Another key component of all community bank examinations is a focus on asset quality. Financial indicators for agriculture banks remain at manageable levels as highlighted by the nonperforming agricultural loans to total loans ratio of 1.36 percent as of September 2018. In addition to the traditional focus on the financial factors related to agricultural lending, the Federal Reserve has provided examiners with helpful insights into the appropriate treatment of agricultural carryover debt. We understand that bankers need to work constructively with borrowers when problems arise. And this is particularly true for highly concentrated agricultural banks, where maintaining enhanced agricultural credit risk-management practices to facilitate prudent underwriting, early detection of problems, and well-thought-out restructuring plans for agricultural borrowers are imperative to limiting losses and maintaining a sound banking institution. In 2011, the Federal Reserve also issued guidance to the industry on key risk factors in agricultural lending and supervisory expectations for a financial institution's risk-management practices.7This guidance applies in all economic environments, but it is especially important in periods of economic stress, because it reminds bankers that the identification of a troubled borrower does not prohibit a banker from working with the borrower. Many banks engaged in agricultural lending are located in communities where farming is the primary economic driver, and simply pushing every borrower with challenges out of the bank does not benefit the long-term interests of the bank or the community it serves. The Federal Reserve recognizes the benefits when lenders work prudently with troubled borrowers in a way that serves the long-term interests of all stakeholders. I would like to conclude by recognizing how fortunate we are to have so many highly skilled and experienced farmers and operators, and agricultural lenders who support them. Modern agriculture is a sophisticated and complex business that requires skilled forecasting of supply and demand, rigorous financial and operational management, and sharp technical expertise. Our farmers and operators are pushing forward the frontiers of agriculture. The integration of robotics, data analytics, geolocation, and advanced sensors holds the promise of a new, more efficient and productive era of "precision agriculture." A close working relationship between farmers and agricultural lenders is essential to the economic growth of agricultural borrowers and the continued success of many rural communities. The outlook for U.S. agriculture is challenging, though agricultural banks remain relatively stable. As such, it is important for the Federal Reserve to continue to tailor effective supervision and regulation to ensure the safety and soundness of agricultural banks, while also making sure that undue burden does not constrain the capacity of these institutions to continue supporting the agricultural communities that they serve. 1.Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2015(Pub. L. 114-1, 129 Stat. 3).Return to text 2. See U.S Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service athttps://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/ag-and-food-statistics-charting-the-essentials/ag-and-food-sectors-and-the-economy/.Return to text 3. Jerome H. Powell, "Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy" (speech atChanging Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24, 2018).Return to text 4. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, "Highlights from the March 2019 Farm Income Forecast."Return to text 5.Cortney CowleyandTy Kreitman, "Farmland Values Stable, but Risks to Outlook Remain," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, February 14, 2019.Return to text 6. Agricultural banks are defined as banks with farm production and farm real estate loans equal to 25 percent or more of total loans.Return to text 7. See Supervision and Regulation SR Letter 11-14, "Supervisory Expectations for Risk Management of Agriculture Credit Risk."Return to text
In light of its discussions at previous meetings and the progress in normalizing the size of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings and the level of reserves in the banking system, all participants agreed that it is appropriate at this time for the Committee to provide additional information regarding its plans for the size of its securities holdings and the transition to the longer-run operating regime. At its January meeting, the Committee stated that it intends to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime in which an ample supply of reserves ensures that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve's administered rates and in which active management of the supply of reserves is not required. The Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization released in January as well as the principles and plans listed below together revise and replace the Committee's earlier Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the "Just Economy Conference" sponsored by the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C. (via prerecorded video) Good evening, and thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. The National Community Reinvestment Coalition (NCRC) and its member organizations are at the forefront of an important conversation about how to ensure that low- and moderate-income communities are fairly served by the banking industry. The work that you do to promote access to basic banking services, affordable housing, and entrepreneurship opportunities supports the Federal Reserve and other agencies that enforce fair lending laws. The large number and variety of NCRC's local member organizations allow the NCRC to draw a detailed picture of how the Federal Reserve's policies affect lower-income communities, and we deeply appreciate the information that you share with us and the work that it represents. As you know all too well, the current strength of the overall economy masks the struggles many individuals and families face in lower-income urban and rural communities. Low- and moderate-income homeowners saw their wealth stripped away as home values dropped during the financial crisis and have not recovered as quickly or completely as others. Because home equity has been the main source of wealth among low- and moderate-income people, the crisis dealt a particularly severe blow to these households. Most Americans rely on home equity to send their children to college, invest in their own education and training, or start or grow a business. These aspirations are the basis upon which a strong economy is built. That is why your work as NCRC member organizations offering financial counseling, homeownership education, and technical assistance for small businesses is as important as ever. When lower-income individuals and families struggle, it harms their health and well-being and also weakens our economy. When people are connected to education, training, and other resources that help them secure good jobs and other opportunities, they are better prepared to care for themselves and their families and contribute to a strong economy. The Federal Reserve has an extensive community development function, related to our responsibilities under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), that promotes partnerships between banks and community organizations to address local community and economic development needs. As you know, the CRA requires federal banking regulators--the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation--to encourage banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. To complement the work we do with the other regulators to write regulations and guidance implementing CRA, the Federal Reserve System's community development staff help banks understand and meet their responsibilities under the law. Fed staff members also act as liaisons between banks and community organizations to identify local community development needs and solutions. I know that you all are very interested in the agencies' activities related to possible revisions to the current CRA regulations. My colleague, Governor Brainard, who represents the Board in our interagency CRA discussions, will be speaking to you tomorrow, so I will leave it to her to discuss our efforts in detail. But I do want to express my support for an interagency effort to revise the regulations to promote clarity and consistency in our evaluations of banks, particularly in light of the changes in the way bank products and services are delivered. We value the CRA's role in meeting the credit needs of low- and moderate-income neighborhoods and want to be very careful that any revisions serve to strengthen the CRA's purpose. I commend your dedication to ensuring that all Americans have fair access to the economic opportunities that our nation offers. I hope you have a productive conference, and I look forward to our ongoing conversation about how the Federal Reserve can help.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemConference of State Bank SupervisorsFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the state regulators, collectively the agencies, recognize the serious impact of flooding in the Midwest on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found athttps://www.fema.gov/disasters. Lending:Financial institutions should work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by flooding in the Midwest. Prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas should not be subject to examiner criticism. Modifications of existing loans should be evaluated individually to determine whether they represent troubled debt restructurings. This evaluation should be based on the facts and circumstances of each borrower and loan, which requires judgment, as not all modifications will result in a troubled debt restructurings. In supervising institutions affected by flooding in the Midwest, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances these institutions face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound practices as well as in the public interest. Temporary Facilities:The agencies understand that many financial institutions face staffing, power, telecommunications, and other challenges in re-opening facilities after the flooding in the Midwest. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the primary federal and/or state regulator will expedite, as appropriate, any request to operate temporary facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by flooding in the Midwest. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal and/or state regulator will suffice initially to start the approval process, with necessary written notification being submitted shortly thereafter. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by flooding in the Midwest may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by flooding in the Midwest that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of the effects of flooding in the Midwest. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, institutions should review the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected by flooding in the Midwest. Institutions should monitor municipal securities and loans affected by flooding in the Midwest. Appropriate monitoring and prudent efforts to stabilize such investments are encouraged. For more information, refer to theInteragency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster, which is available as follows: CSBS:https://www.csbs.org/interagency-supervisory-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster FDIC:https://www.fdic.gov/news/news/financial/2017/fil17062.html FRB:https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1714a1.pdf OCC:https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2017/bulletin-2017-61.html NCUA:https://www.ncua.gov/Resources/Documents/SL-17-02-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster-enclosure.pdf
The Federal Reserve today announced the members of itsFraud Definitions Work Group, the latest initiative to advance the Federal Reserve's strategy for improving the U.S. payment system. Over the next year, these 22 payments industry leaders and subject matter specialists will work collaboratively with Federal Reserve leaders to formulate recommendations for improving the quality and consistency of automated clearing house (ACH), wire, and check fraud data. Although noncash payments fraud remains a very small fraction of total payments value, it is a large number in absolute terms--approximately $8.3 billion in 2015. This, combined with the growth of real-time payments, underscores the need to better understand payment confidentiality, integrity, and security threats. "The Fraud Definitions Work Group is another step in the Federal Reserve's efforts to promote the safety, security, and integrity of the U.S. payment system through collaboration with the payments industry," said David Sapenaro, Federal Reserve System payments strategy director and chief operating officer at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. "Understanding payments fraud trends can help us mitigate fraud risk," said Ken Montgomery, Federal Reserve System payments security strategy leader and chief operating officer at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. "However, there often are inconsistencies in the classification and reporting of payments fraud data from study to study and a significant lag between the time that fraud occurs and when it's reported. In addition, fraudsters continually adapt their attacks as the use of ACH, wire, and checks for innovative faster payments evolves." In January, the Federal Reserve outlined the expertise needed to serve on the work group and asked payments experts to submit "expressions of interest." The Federal Reserve selected work group participants from these submissions and appointed some additional Federal Reserve and industry participants to ensure diversity of thought and strong expertise across the many needed disciplines. The Fraud Definitions Work Group seeks to build a recommended payments fraud classification model that includes detailed definitions and/or categories to help the industry better understand key data points and address ACH, wire, and check payments fraud. Work will begin later this month to examine existing payments fraud definitions and areas where new or changed definitions could be helpful. The work group also will create a roadmap to encourage broad industry adoption of this classification model to improve the consistency and timeliness of available payments fraud data. Members of the Fraud Definitions Work Group are: The Federal Reserve also has established the Fraud Definitions Community Interest Group for individuals who are interested in providing input and following the efforts of the work group. VisitFedPaymentsImprovement.orgto sign up for this community interest group and to learn more about how to contribute to the fraud definitions work. About the Federal Reserve and PaymentsAs the U.S. central bank, the Federal Reserve System provides payment services and seeks to foster the stability, integrity and efficiency of the nation's monetary, financial and payment systems. In 2013, the Federal Reserve initiated a broadly collaborative effort to achieve ubiquitous, nationwide access to safe and efficient faster payments in the United States. As a leader and catalyst for change in the U.S. payment system, the Federal Reserve now collaborates with industry stakeholders to advance five desired outcomes outlined in the 2015Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System(PDF)paper: speed, security, efficiency, international payments, and collaboration. For more information, visitFedPaymentsImprovement.org.
Beginning this month, financial institutions and payments organizations will receive invitations to participate in the seventh triennial Federal Reserve Payments Study, the Federal Reserve announced today. Based on survey data provided by participants, past reports from the studies have documented substantial change in the aggregate volume and composition of noncash payments in the United States since 2000. Recent reports have also revealed dynamic changes in aggregate payments fraud, automated teller machine withdrawals, and payment authentication methods, among other topics. "The U.S. payments system has changed dramatically since 2000, and the Federal Reserve Payments Study has served as an aggregate benchmark for the payments industry, policymakers, and the public," said Mary Kepler, senior vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the study's executive sponsor. "Robust industry support and respondents' willingness to participate is paramount to our ability to publish timely, accurate, and high quality results." The 2019 Federal Reserve Payments Study will administer two surveys, each contributing valuable information required to obtain robust estimates of totals and developing trends in the number and value of payments made with checks, cards, electronic transfers, and various alternative payment initiation methods and systems for calendar year 2018: The Federal Reserve will work with McKinsey & Company and Blueflame Consulting, LLC to conduct this research study. Only aggregate estimates are reported, and all survey data reported by participants remains strictly confidential. Data from previous implementations of the Federal Reserve Payments Study are available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/fr-payments-study.htm.
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the March 19-20 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the March 19-20 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by CenterState Bank Corporation, Winter Haven, Florida, to merge with National Commerce Corporation ("Commerce") and thereby indirectly acquire Commerce's subsidiary national bank, National Bank of Commerce, both of Birmingham, Alabama. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the proposals by: Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the proposals under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by First Interstate Bank, Billings, Montana, to merge with Idaho Independent Bank, Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, and to establish and operate branches at the locations of the main office and branches of Idaho Independent Bank. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that it will limit the use of the "qualitative objection" in its Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) exercise, effective for the 2019 cycle. The changes eliminate the qualitative objection for most firms due to the improvements in capital planning made by the largest firms. For the largest and most complex firms, CCAR includes both a quantitative evaluation of a firm's capital adequacy under stress and a qualitative evaluation of its abilities to determine its capital needs on a forward-looking basis. As applicable, a firm must pass both the quantitative and qualitative evaluation or the Board may object and restrict the firm's shareholder distributions. Firms that are newer to the CCAR exercise and as a result may have capital planning capabilities that are less established will remain subject to a possible objection on qualitative grounds. Specifically, a firm must participate in four CCAR exercises and successfully pass the qualitative evaluation in the fourth year to no longer be subject to a potential qualitative objection. If a firm does not pass in its fourth year, it will continue to be subject to a possible qualitative objection until it passes. For firms still subject to the qualitative objection, their fourth year will generally be the 2020 CCAR cycle. While the qualitative objection will no longer apply to certain firms, all firms will continue to be subject to a rigorous evaluation of their capital planning processes as part of CCAR. Firms with weak practices may be subject to a deficient supervisory rating, and potentially an enforcement action, for failing to meet supervisory expectations. In addition, all firms remain subject to a potential objection on quantitative grounds. The Board on Wednesday also released the instructions for this year's CCAR exercise. The instructions confirm that 18 firms will be subject to this year's CCAR exercise, with five of those firms subject to a possible qualitative objection. Eleven firms with large trading operations will be required to factor in a global market shock as part of their scenarios. Thirteen firms with substantial trading or processing operations will also be required to incorporate a counterparty default scenario. The chart below shows the parts of the test that each firm is subject to this year in addition to the hypothetical scenario. *All firms subject to the qualitative objection, except TD Group, will have their fourth year in the 2020 cycle. TD Group’s fourth year will be the 2019 cycle. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Amendments to the Capital Plan Rule
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Cogent Bancorporation, Inc., f/k/a Pinnacle Bank Holding Company, Inc., Orange City, FloridaWritten Agreement dated August 29, 2011 (PDF)Terminated March 1, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Commercial State Bank, Andrews, TexasCease and Desist Order, dated December 26, 2018Terminated March 18, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the appointment of Patrick J. McClanahan as chief operating officer (COO), effective April 29. As COO, McClanahan will be responsible for the operation of the Board's administrative and financial management functions, technology services, short- and long-term strategic planning, and data management. The Board's Management Division director, chief financial officer, chief information officer, chief data officer, and the director of the Office of Diversity and Inclusion will report to him. Since mid-2016, McClanahan has been vice president of people operations at Gannett. From 2014 to 2016, he was deputy director and controller in the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Financial Management. During a 20-plus year career as a naval officer, McClanahan spent time at the Department of Defense, the Department of the Navy, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. McClanahan succeeds Don Hammond, who had served as COO since 2012 and retired earlier this year after 35 years of federal government service. McClanahan received a B.B.A. in accounting from the University of Notre Dame, an M.S. from National Defense University, and an M.B.A from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday invited public comment on whether it should propose amendments to its Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) to lower the rate of interest paid on excess balances ("IOER") maintained at Reserve Banks by eligible institutions that hold a very large proportion of their assets in the form of balances at Reserve Banks. As set forth in the advance notice of proposed rulemaking, these narrowly focused depository institutions ("Pass‑Through Investment Entities" or "PTIEs") could attract a very large quantity of deposits from institutional investors, yet at the same time avoid the costs borne by other depository institutions, such as the costs of capital requirements and the other elements of federal regulation and supervision, because of the limited scope of their product offerings and asset types. The advance notice of proposed rulemaking requests comment on the potential benefits and potential costs associated with the presence of such institutions in the U.S. financial system and their receipt of IOER on their balances at a Reserve Bank. Comments are due within sixty days after the date of publication of the ANPR in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it is prohibiting Tim Leissner and Ng Chong Hwa, also known as Roger Ng, from the banking industry for their participation in a scheme to illegally divert billions of dollars from a Malaysian sovereign wealth fund. Leissner was also fined $1.42 million and consented to the permanent ban. Leissner and Ng, former senior investment bankers employed by foreign subsidiaries of The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., coordinated bond offerings arranged by Goldman for 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB) in 2012 and 2013. The funds diverted from 1MDB were then used for the conspirators' personal benefit and to bribe certain government officials in Malaysia and Abu Dhabi. In August 2018, Leissner pleaded guilty to criminal charges brought by the Department of Justice in the Eastern District of New York for conspiring to violate the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and to commit money laundering. Ng was indicted in October 2018 on similar charges. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday published a report on debit card transactions in 2017, including information on volume and value, interchange fee revenue, certain issuer costs, and fraud losses. The report is the fifth in a series published every two years pursuant to section 920 of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA). Section 920 also imposes limits on interchange fees that debit card issuers can receive on an electronic debit transaction. The Board's Regulation II (Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing), which implements section 920, provides that a debit card issuer subject to the interchange fee standard (a covered issuer) may not receive an interchange fee that exceeds 21 cents plus 5 basis points multiplied by the value of the transaction, plus a 1-cent fraud-prevention adjustment, if eligible. The regulation does not apply to debit card issuers with consolidated assets of less than $10 billion, certain government-administered debit cards, and certain prepaid cards. The interchange fee standard became effective on October 1, 2011. As in prior years, covered issuers' costs of authorizing, clearing, and settling (ACS) debit card transactions, excluding issuer fraud losses, varied greatly across respondents in 2017, with the issuer at the 25th percentile having an average ACS cost of 4.2 cents and the issuer at the 75th percentile having an average ACS cost of 18.5 cents. Issuers with the highest debit card transaction volume generally had the lowest ACS costs per transaction. The average ACS cost per transaction for covered issuers was 3.6 cents per transaction, down from 4.2 cents per transaction in 2015. Debit-card fraud losses to all parties (merchants, cardholders, and issuers) were 11.2 basis points as a share of transaction value at covered issuers in 2017, up from 10.3 in 2015. The median covered issuer's average fraud loss as a share of transaction value was 5.3 basis points, down from 6.6 in 2015. The median covered issuer had average fraud prevention and data security costs of 1.5 cents per transaction, down from 1.7 cents in 2015. In 2017, 76 percent of covered issuers had average ACS costs, including issuer fraud losses, below 21 cents plus 5 basis points of the value of a transaction (the base component of the interchange fee standard). This proportion is higher than the 65 percent of covered issuers with average ACS costs below the maximum interchange fee in 2015. Covered issuers with average ACS costs below the maximum interchange fee in 2017 processed 99.7 percent of all reported covered transactions, up from 99.5 percent in 2015. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 2017 Interchange Fee Revenue, Covered Issuer Costs, and Covered Issuer and Merchant Fraud Losses Related to Debit Card Transactions (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released a document providing additional information on its stress testing program. The release of the document follows an announcement in February that the Board had finalized changes intended to increase the transparency of its stress tests without compromising their ability to test the resiliency of the nation's largest banks. Stress tests ensure that banks have adequate capital to absorb losses and retain their ability to lend to households and businesses even in a severe recession. The Dodd-Frank Act stress tests are one component of the Federal Reserve's stress testing program along with the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest bank holding companies. The document is intended to improve public understanding of the Federal Reserve's stress tests. Today's document, with roughly 80 pages and more than 30 tables, provides significantly more information on the stress test models that are used to project bank losses, compared to disclosures from past years. The additional information consists of: In particular, the additional information on loss rates is provided for the models used for corporate loans and credit cards. These two models accounted for roughly half of total projected loan losses in the Federal Reserve's 2018 stress test. Similar information will be provided in 2020 for two additional models. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2019: Supervisory Stress Test Methodology (PDF) Cards High Risk (CSV) Cards Low Risk (CSV) Cards Typical (CSV) Corporate High Risk (CSV) Corporate Low Risk (CSV) Corporate Typical (CSV) Data Definitions
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Wednesday it has voted to affirm the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) at the current level of 0 percent. In making this determination, the Board followed the framework detailed in the Board's policy statement for setting the CCyB for private-sector credit exposures located in the United States. The buffer is a macroprudential tool that can be used to increase the resilience of the financial system by raising capital requirements on internationally active banking organizations when there is an elevated risk of above-normal future losses and when the banking organizations for which capital requirements would be raised by the buffer are exposed to or are contributing to this elevated risk--either directly or indirectly. The buffer could also help moderate fluctuations in the supply of credit. The CCyB is designed to be released when economic conditions deteriorate, in order to support lending and economic activity more broadly. The Board consulted with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in making this determination. Should the Board decide to modify the CCyB amount in the future, banking organizations would have 12 months before the increase became effective, unless the Board establishes an earlier effective date. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates that the labor market remains strong but that growth of economic activity has slowed from its solid rate in the fourth quarter. Payroll employment was little changed in February, but job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Recent indicators point to slower growth of household spending and business fixed investment in the first quarter. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation has declined, largely as a result of lower energy prices; inflation for items other than food and energy remains near 2 percent. On balance, market-based measures of inflation compensation have remained low in recent months, and survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. The Committee continues to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes. In light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman; John C. Williams, Vice Chairman; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Richard H. Clarida; Charles L. Evans; Esther L. George; Randal K. Quarles; and Eric S. Rosengren. Implementation Note issued March 20, 2019
The Federal Reserve System on Friday released the 2018 combined annual audited financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as statements for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. An independent public accounting firm engaged by the Board has issued unqualified opinions on the financial statements and on the Board's and the Bank's internal controls over financial reporting. The audited financial statements provide information about the assets, liabilities, and earnings of the Reserve Banks and the Board as of December 31, 2018. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2018 earnings were approximately $63.1 billion, representing a decrease of $17.6 billion from 2017. The Reserve Banks provided for remittances to the U.S. Treasury of $65.3 billion in 2018, including two lump-sum payments totaling approximately $3.2 billion that were necessary to reduce the aggregate Reserve Bank capital surplus to $6.8 billion as required by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 and the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. Interest income on securities acquired through open market operations totaled $112.3 billion, a decrease of $1.3 billion from the previous year. Interest expense on depository institutions' reserve balances during the year was $38.5 billion, an increase of $12.6 billion from the previous year. Interest expense on securities sold under agreements to repurchase was $4.6 billion, an increase of $1.2 billion from the previous year. Reserve Bank operating expenses were $7.0 billion, including assessments of $2.0 billion for Board expenses, currency costs, and the operations of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. Total Reserve Bank assets as of December 31, 2018, were approximately $4.1 trillion, a decrease of $392.1 billion from the previous year. Total Reserve Bank assets were composed primarily of $4.0 trillion of U.S. Treasury securities and federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise mortgage-backed securities acquired through open market operations. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York provides additional detailed information about open market operations and securities holdings on an ongoing basis on its website atwww.newyorkfed.org/markets/pomo_landing.html. During 2018, all remaining securities held by Maiden Lane LLC, a variable interest entity created to support the Federal Reserve's response to the 2008 financial crisis, were sold. The net proceeds were distributed to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and on November 1, 2018, Maiden Lane was dissolved. The Board engages KPMG LLP, an independent public accounting firm, to conduct annual audits of these financial statements in accordance with auditing standards issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, and, for the Board of Governors audit only, the Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards. The public accounting firm also conducts audits of internal controls over financial reporting for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. The Federal Reserve System financial statements are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/audited-annual-financial-statements.htm.
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "Strategic Approaches to the Fed's Balance Sheet and Communications" Spring 2019 Meeting of the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee, New York, New York It is a pleasure to address the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee (SOMC) today.1The SOMC has long served as an important forum for debate regarding the appropriate stance of monetary policy--debates that have often brought alternative perspectives to the challenges facing the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in the pursuit of its dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. As Allan Meltzer wrote about his and Karl Brunner's founding of the SOMC, "Our objective at the time and after was not just to complain about the results of policy actions. ... We hoped also to improve policy discussion."2 This afternoon, I will briefly remark on the economic outlook and the current stance of monetary policy, and I would then like to devote some time to a discussion of the approach the Federal Reserve has taken on the setting of the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) and why I see a setting of 0 percent, as recently affirmed by the Board, as the current appropriate setting for the CCyB. Also, I will review some of the international experience with the CCyB. Given that the CCyB is a relatively new element of our regulatory toolkit, the international experience has the potential to provide useful information on how the CCyB can be made most effective. The Economic OutlookBut first, let me turn to the economic outlook. At last week's meeting, the FOMC left the policy rate unchanged and reiterated its patient approach toward future policy adjustments.3I supported this decision. It is prudent at this point to watch the evolution of the incoming data in determining the appropriate stance of policy, particularly given some indication that growth has slowed, at least temporarily, in the most recent data. That said, I remain optimistic about the outlook for the U.S. economy, and I think that we have the potential to maintain growth at a healthy pace in the years ahead. With regard to the recent data, a sharp falloff in some retail sales measures in December suggested a slowing of consumption, the mainstay component of aggregate demand. While I would not suggest ignoring this decline, it does seem rather inconsistent with a number of other indicators, including the continued strength of the labor market and wage gains in recent months. And the labor market does remain strong. Even with a weak reading in February, the three-month average gain in payrolls, at 186,000, remains above most estimates of the pace of job gains needed to maintain downward pressure on an already historically low unemployment rate. As with retail sales, the February payroll number seems a bit odd, especially when measured against the continued strength of the household survey for the same month. That said, weak February payrolls are another reason to continue patiently watching the data to see how economic conditions evolve. Looking past the near-term data, I see many reasons to expect relatively strong growth in the coming years, supported by gains in the productive capacity of the economy. Regarding the inputs of production, I have been encouraged by the increase in labor force participation over the past year. After a period of subdued growth, investment was also strong last year, with spending on equipment and intangibles rising 7-1/2 percent, increasing the capital stock and adding to the productive potential of the economy. Though some recent investment indicators have been less robust, these data are volatile, and I expect continued gains supported by profit growth, continuing impetus from incentives in the tax bill, and a generally favorable business environment. Most important, I have been encouraged by the recent step-up in labor productivity growth. Last year's increase of almost 2 percent marked the strongest growth since the immediate aftermath of the financial crisis and was well above the 1 percent pace that prevailed in the preceding five years. I think there are many reasons to believe that this faster productivity growth could be persistent. My expectation for further increases in capital spending is one. For another, it could be that tight labor markets have played a role in boosting labor productivity growth as employers work to increase efficiency as new workers become harder to find. Turning to inflation, given the volatility and idiosyncrasies of the data, I view the current reading on core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation, at 1.8 percent, as being roughly consistent with our 2 percent objective. Overall, inflation pressures are muted. But I do not believe that the seeming unresponsiveness of inflation to the apparent tightness of the labor market and other aspects of the economy tells the whole story in evaluating slack versus constraint in the economy. Of the many explanations for this phenomenon that have been offered, one possibility that we have to keep in mind is that inflation has remained stable precisely because of the public's confidence that the Fed will maintain a framework that keeps the economy from overheating and inflation from rising significantly above the 2 percent benchmark. Inflation could then for some time remain quite stable in the face of an economy running hot. But if public confidence began to erode because of Fed inaction, a possible consequence could be the de-anchoring of inflation expectations, rather than a gradual and controlled move to an inflation rate sustainably around our 2 percent goal. Of course, there are a variety of alternative explanations for the current surprising relationship between inflation and unemployment, and perhaps all of them are part of a full account. We should also be wary of a material and durable downward drift in inflation expectations below our objective, were we to see that develop, perhaps due to secular changes in the formation of prices or perceived constraints on the ability of monetary policy to react to future downturns. Either way, as a matter of prudent risk management, we must conduct policy in a manner consistent with keeping inflation near target, validating the public's trust in our commitment to our inflation objective and keeping inflation expectations anchored. In regard to policy, I am very comfortable remaining patient at this point and monitoring the incoming data. That said, my sense is that further increases in the policy rate may be necessary at some point, a stance I believe is consistent with my optimistic view of the economy's growth potential and momentum. In the language of central banking, my estimate of the neutral policy rate remains somewhat north of where we are now. Communicating a data-dependent policy framework can be challenging, especially if we do not want to appear to be overly discretionary. It would probably be clearest if we defined what data we are dependent on and how we depended on those data--that is to say, if we adopted a monetary policy rule. Strict rules, however--to achieve their valuable heuristic benefit--are as much about ignoring some data as they are about paying attention to other specific data. Indeed, while rules provide useful and important benchmarks, the complexity and evolving nature of the economy at the current juncture argue for the consideration of a wide range of indicators in assessing the state of that economy. This, in turn, can complicate the communication of data dependence: How can we adopt and convey a clear strategic stance on policy while maintaining our credibility if evolution of the data requires an evolution of that strategy? I prefer a framework where we make it clear that we are focused on broad trends--elsewhere I have used the aviation analogy that we should not "chase the needles" on the instrument panel. We should be clear that, while we will respond to clear and durable evolution in these broad trends, we are not reacting to every piece of volatile data.4 The Countercyclical Capital Buffer and Financial StabilityLet me now shift gears and return to the CCyB, beginning with how it fits within our broad set of efforts to promote financial stability. The core of that approach has been to establish a set of structural, through-the-cycle regulatory and supervisory standards to ensure resilience against a broad range of shocks. In contrast to the pre-crisis framework, banks, especially the largest and most systemic banks, are now required to maintain substantially higher and higher-quality loss-absorbing capital and other cushions; stress testing examines the resilience of large banks to severely adverse economic conditions; liquidity requirements and regulatory incentives to limit reliance on short-term wholesale funding have reduced funding risk among large banks and their affiliated broker-dealers; and resolution planning requirements reduce the risks that the failure of a large firm would spill into the broader economy. Outside of the banking system, money market mutual fund reform has reduced this sector's susceptibility to destabilizing runs by investors, and requirements that many derivatives be centrally cleared have decreased the opacity and interconnectedness that contributed to the chaos of 2008. In addition to these through-the-cycle measures, the Federal Reserve actively monitors for the buildup of financial stability vulnerabilities and can require large banks to increase their loss-absorbing capacity through increases in the CCyB when systemic vulnerabilities are sufficiently large. While such countercyclical tools are new, their goal is to mitigate the buildup of vulnerabilities during buoyant periods, since experience has proven time and again that vulnerabilities can build during good times as risk appetite grows and memories of earlier instability fade. Effectively mitigating the buildup of risk through the CCyB requires a systematic framework for analyzing vulnerabilities and a mapping of such changes in financial-sector risks into the appropriate level for the CCyB. The Board developed its framework outlining the objectives of the tool and the factors that would influence the determination of its appropriate level through a process of public consultation.5 Under our policy, the primary objective for activating the CCyB is to build financial-sector resilience during periods when the risks to financial stability have risen to meaningfully above normal levels and there is an elevated possibility of potential losses within the banking sector that could place strains on the supply of credit or otherwise substantially impede economic and financial activity. A secondary objective for using the CCyB is its potential to limit the buildup of financial vulnerabilities by slowing the rate of credit expansion--that is, the possibility that the CCyB may "lean against the wind" of credit fluctuations. This secondary objective, both in the original Basel discussions and in the Federal Reserve's framework, is less central. A notable feature of the Board's current framework is the decision to maintain a 0 percent CCyB when vulnerabilities are within their normal range. Because we set high, through-the-cycle capital requirements in the United States that provide substantial resilience to normal fluctuations in economic and financial conditions, it is appropriate to set the CCyB at zero in a normal risk environment. Thus, our presumption has been that the CCyB would be zero most of the time. Current Assessment of Financial VulnerabilitiesWhen, then, would it be appropriate--given this framework--to activate the CCyB? That is, how do we know when financial vulnerabilities are elevated? The Federal Reserve continuously monitors vulnerabilities, as highlighted in our recentFinancial Stability Report.6Our approach is organized around tracking four broad vulnerabilities that academic research and practical experience have shown can amplify negative shocks and result in outsized losses in the real economy. These are asset valuation pressures, household and business debt, funding risk, and financial-sector leverage. As part of this process, the Board considers a number of quantitative indicators--one of which is the credit-to-GDP (gross domestic product) gap proposed in the Basel Committee guidance--that are indicative of potential vulnerabilities. Nonetheless, judgment must play an important role in this process, especially in assessing how interactions between vulnerabilities may serve to mute or amplify the transmission of different kinds of shocks. The framework requires further judgment as to whether the CCyB is the most appropriate tool to address the particular areas of concern, which will depend on, among other things, the extent to which banks subject to the CCyB are exposed to vulnerabilities or contributing to them. Assessing the current state of financial vulnerabilities is thus a critical part of the decision on whether to activate the CCyB. Let me briefly give you my view of each of the four categories in turn. Asset valuations increased to the high end of their historical ranges in many markets over 2017 and the first half of 2018, supported by the solid economic expansion and an apparent increase in investors' appetite for risk. The market volatility and subsequent rebound have muddied the picture somewhat; however, it does seem that valuation pressures have eased to some extent in a particular locus of concern, the market for leveraged loans--that is, syndicated loans to lower-rated or unrated borrowers with already significant debt loads. Now, regarding debt outstanding, borrowing by businesses has reached a historically high level relative to the size of the economy or business assets and there are also signs of deteriorating underwriting standards. Of course, this has happened at a time when corporate profits relative to the size of the economy are also quite high, mitigating some of the concern this might suggest--but the riskiest forms of business debt have increased the most amid such signs. These developments could potentially leave the corporate sector vulnerable to a sharp slowing in economic growth, although we think the banking sector has only limited direct exposures to such borrowers and, to the extent they can be measured, indirect exposures are also limited. The notable levels of vulnerability in asset valuation pressures and business borrowing must be considered alongside modest vulnerabilities associated with household borrowing and the historically low levels of financial-sector leverage and funding risk. Household debt relative to GDP has fallen substantially from the level of a decade ago, and the credit quality of household borrowing remains relatively solid, despite pockets of weakness evident in some areas of auto lending. Even more important, banks now have substantially higher-quality capital and more of it than in the 2000s, owing importantly to the structural reform of capital requirements and stress testing. In fact, under last year's stress tests, capital levels at the largest U.S. banks after a hypothetical severe global recession would have been higher than the actual capital levels of large banks in the years before the crisis. Moreover, around 20 percent of the assets of the most systemically important financial institutions are highly liquid assets that can be sold quickly in the event of stress. And, following reforms to money market mutual funds and other steps, the volume of short-term uninsured funding, most prone to runs, is well below pre-crisis levels. Taken as a whole, financial system vulnerabilities strike me as being not outside their normal range, which is consistent with a zero CCyB under the Board's framework and is why I supported the Board's decision to keep the CCyB at zero earlier this month. International Experience with the Countercyclical Capital BufferWhile policymakers in the United States have maintained the CCyB at zero since 2016, other countries have adjusted their countercyclical buffers in response to vulnerabilities within their financial sectors. Currently, 13 countries have announced a CCyB above zero, ranging from 0.25 percent in Luxembourg to 2.5 percent in Hong Kong, Norway, and Sweden.7The CCyB is a novel approach to financial regulation, and I think it is important that we, as regulators, learn from other countries' experiences with the CCyB. I see three important explanations for differences in the CCyB across countries. Perhaps the most important and direct reason for different CCyB levels among different countries is that they face different vulnerabilities. According to national authorities' announcements, the decisions to activate the buffers were generally motivated by credit growth, household debt, and housing prices; in this regard, it is notable that mortgage credit or house prices have expanded rapidly in several countries deploying the CCyB, including Hong Kong and the Nordic countries that have set their CCyB at 2.5 percent. For example, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority's decision to increase the CCyB level to 2.5 percent in January 2018 was importantly linked to housing developments. Another explanation for the differences in observed CCyB levels across countries is the range of available macroprudential tools to stem the buildup in financial vulnerabilities in different countries and the degree to which such tools have been the preferred means for addressing identified vulnerabilities.8For example, housing market booms, as noted above for Hong Kong, have been a concern in several countries in recent years.9Accordingly, some national authorities have used macroprudential tools focused on housing, such as caps on loan-to-value ratios, to try to increase the resilience of borrowers and to indirectly strengthen the resilience of the banks and the financial system should their housing booms turn to busts. For example, policymakers in Canada have not activated the CCyB in response to concerns about housing market risks, but they have lowered the maximum loan-to-value ratio for various mortgage products and capped debt-service-to-income ratios.10The availability of such alternative tools for limiting systemic risk may be among the factors influencing the decision to adjust, or not adjust, the CCyB in a number of countries. In this regard, it is notable that the set of macroprudential tools in the United States is limited relative to that in many other countries.11 Finally, another difference, one that is particular to the United Kingdom, is the framework adopted by the U.K. Financial Policy Committee (FPC) to integrate the CCyB with its structural capital requirements. Specifically, under the FPC's framework, the CCyB would equal 1 percent in standard risk conditions--but to avoid having this be a significant increase to already very high levels of capital, the FPC undertook a one-time adjustment to its other capital buffers in order to offset part of this increase. The effect of the policy is that the buffer can be varied--both up and down--in line with the changing risks that the banking system faces over time. This approach is an interesting deviation from the idea in the original Basel discussions and the framework adopted in many other jurisdictions, in which structural capital requirements are set at levels aimed to deliver the desired level of resilience, with the CCyB raised to positive values only at times when vulnerabilities are above normal. In practice, the U.K. framework appears to have provided the FPC with additional flexibility, as it has adjusted the CCyB with evolving financial risks associated with, for example, Brexit. As I examine this experience, systems similar to the United Kingdom's, where the CCyB is positive during normal times, may allow policymakers to react more quickly to economic, financial, or even geopolitical shocks that occur amid otherwise normal conditions, without relying on the slow-moving credit aggregates contemplated in the original Basel proposal. Moreover, this setting of the CCyB permits more gradual adjustments in the CCyB, especially in periods with a high degree of uncertainty about the level of financial vulnerabilities. Another possible benefit of a system that has additional flexibility is the ability to coordinate the setting of the CCyB with the setting of monetary policy in situations where such coordination is valuable. At the same time, I would not expect such situations to be the norm, as the objectives and governance of monetary policy and macroprudential policies are separate for good reasons. ConclusionIn the United States, we have built a substantially safer financial system by focusing on using structural tools that confer through-the-cycle resilience. With that construction work largely behind us, attention naturally turns to the set of time-varying financial regulations--particularly the CCyB. The overall capital framework in the United States has been designed to ensure high capital levels without having to activate the CCyB, with the implication being that the bar for activation would be a high one; but, as a result, much of the time there would not be any buffer to reduce if conditions were to precipitously deteriorate. The United Kingdom's approach to setting the CCyB also relies on having a high overall level of capital during normal times, but, by "swapping" some portion of static capital for CCyB in reaching that high capital level during normal times, and thus making some of that capital part of a releasable buffer, U.K. policymakers have built in more flexibility to move buffers down in times of stress. Other countries provide additional "data points" in terms of possible ways of approaching the CCyB. With the CCyB in active use around the world, I am confident that the academic and policy communities will learn a great deal about how best to use this new tool to build a more resilient financial system. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Allan H. Meltzer (2000), "The Shadow Open Market Committee: Origins and Operations,"Journal of Financial Services Research,vol. 18 (December), pp. 119-28 (quoted text on p. 120).Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, March 20.Return to text 4. See Randal K. Quarles (2018), "Don't Chase the Needles: An Optimistic Assessment of the Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York Luncheon, New York, October 18.Return to text 5. In December 2015, the Board invited public comment on a proposed policy statement describing the framework that the Board would use to set the amount of the U.S. CCyB. See Regulation Q--Capital Adequacy of Bank Holding Companies, Savings and Loan Holding Companies, and State Member Banks, 12 C.F.R. pt. 217, app. A (2018). See also Federal Reserve System (2016), "Regulatory Capital Rules: The Federal Reserve Board's Framework for Implementing the U.S. Basel III Countercyclical Capital Buffer," proposed policy statement with request for public comment (Docket No. R-1529),Federal Register,vol. 81 (February 3), pp. 5661‑66.See 12 CFR part 217, Appendix A. See also 81 FR 5661 (February 3, 2016).Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018),Financial Stability Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November).Return to text 7. This figure includes countries that have announced a positive CCyB that will become effective at some point within the next year.Return to text 8. See International Monetary Fund, Financial Stability Board, and Bank for International Settlements (2016),IMF-FSB-BIS,Elements of Effective Macroprudential Policies: Lessons from International Experience(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: IMF, FSB, and BIS,,(August 2016).Return to text 9. Such booms have raised concern in Australia, Canada, and the Nordic countries. See International Monetary Fund (2018), Source: IMF,Global Financial Stability Report, (Washington: IMF, October 2018).Return to text 10. See Bank of Canada (2017),Financial System Review(PDF), (Ottawa: BOCBank of Canada, November 2017). Another example of a macroprudential tool used in some countries is a sector-specific version of the CCyB. Switzerland, for example, has activated a housing-sector CCyB to address imbalances related to residential mortgage and real estate markets. See Swiss National Bank (2013),"Countercyclical Capital Buffer: Proposal of the Swiss National Bank and Decision of the Federal Council," (PDF)press release, February 13.Return to text 11. See Douglas J. Elliott, Greg Feldberg, and Andreas Lehnert (2013),"The History of Cyclical Macroprudential Policy in the United States," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-29 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 2013).Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the "The Euro Area: Staying the Course through Uncertainties" BDF Symposium and 34th SUERF Colloquium sponsored by Banque de France and the European Money and Finance Forum, Paris, France Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be here at the Banque de France and take part in this important symposium on the "Euro Area: Staying the Course through Uncertainties."1 Both in the financial press and in international policy circles, one hears a great deal about the spillovers of U.S. monetary policy to other economies. One hears somewhat less, though, about how global shocks affect the U.S. economy.2So, in my remarks today, I will discuss how the U.S. economy's increasing integration with the rest of the world has made it more exposed to foreign shocks, and I will focus in particular on the channels of transmission through which these shocks operate. I will close with a few words on current prospects, in which global crosscurrents are again posing challenges for the U.S. economy and monetary policy. Greater Integration between the United States and the Rest of the WorldThe U.S. economy's integration with the rest of the world, both in terms of trade and finance, has risen substantially over the past 60 years. Since the 1960s, both U.S. exports and imports have about tripled as a share of gross domestic product (GDP), with their sum now about 30 percent of GDP--still relatively small by international standards, but certainly notable. Financial linkages have grown enormously as well. The United States has had open capital markets for a long time, but the sum of U.S. external assets and liabilities has grown from about 25 percent of GDP in 1960 to more than 300 percent today. And, reflecting the greater integration of global financial markets, the correlation of U.S. and foreign equity and bond markets has trended broadly upward for several decades.3 Channels of Transmission of Global Shocks to the U.S. EconomyThis increased integration I have described has heightened the exposure of the U.S. economy to external shocks. But what are the channels of transmission of these shocks to the United States? For concreteness, let us consider the case of a negative demand shock originating abroad, such as a foreign recession. First, this shock affects the United States through direct trade links, lowering demand for U.S. exports and, thus, lowering U.S. GDP. Second, the foreign recession leads to lower interest rates abroad and, other things being equal, raises the value of the dollar, which in turn lowers U.S. exports and boosts U.S. imports. The dollar appreciation also puts downward pressure on U.S. import prices and, thereby, inflation. The extent to which foreign worries lead to safe-haven flows may add to the dollar's strength. Finally, there is contagion to U.S financial markets. Let me first elaborate on the exchange rate channel I just mentioned. The traditional determinants of exchange rates--that is, differentials in expected rates of return--apply to the United States as to other countries. But the U.S. economy is different because of the special role of U.S. government bonds as global safe assets. As a consequence, an adverse foreign shock that damped the demand for risky assets would be expected to trigger safe-haven flows that boost the dollar, weighing on the U.S. economy.4The spillover of risk aversion to U.S. markets might well also push down equity prices and widen corporate credit spreads, adding to the contractionary pressures. However, the same safe-haven flows into Treasury securities would cause U.S. long-term yields to fall, mitigating these adverse effects on domestic demand and activity.5 Historical ExperienceLet us consider some historical examples of the effect of adverse foreign shocks on the U.S. economy. The Mexican peso crisis of 1994 and '95 and the Asian financial crisis of 1997 through '98 resulted in substantial hits to aggregate emerging market economy (EME) growth, but they had fairly muted effects on U.S. growth.6In part, this limited response in previous decades reflected the smaller share of the EMEs in the global economy and, as a related matter, in U.S. trade. Furthermore, the weight of EMEs in the global financial system was lighter in previous decades, so their crises were less disruptive to global markets.7Finally, even back then, the safe-haven flows into dollar assets that I highlighted earlier were an important mitigating factor, pushing down U.S. long-term yields. To be sure, the Russian default of August 1998, followed by the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management, had more-substantial effects on global markets and posed greater risk to the U.S. economy, which triggered a policy response by the Fed in which the federal funds rate was cut 75 basis points between September and November of that year.8Of note, after economic prospects appeared to stabilize, the Fed reversed those cuts in 1999. In recent times, global shocks have also been consequential for U.S. economic prospects and monetary policy. Examples include the 2011-13 euro-zone recession and the China devaluation and capital flight episode of 2015 and '16, when worries about a hard landing and renminbi depreciation, respectively, roiled world markets. Both of these shocks originated in economies with large footprints in the global economy and financial system, and, as a result, they induced substantial disruptions in global financial markets. During both episodes, U.S. stock markets fell and the dollar appreciated, especially during 2015 and 2016. As ever, these negative shocks were associated with safe-haven flows that pushed U.S. Treasury yields down.9Despite the drop in yields, overall financial conditions in the United States tightened, weighing on aggregate demand.10 Yet, in these episodes, accommodative policy responses in the United States helped ward off actual contractions of U.S. activity. During the 2011-13 euro-zone recession, the United States was already pursuing very accommodative policies in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis, but the timing of the maturity extension program and the third phase of U.S. quantitative easing suggests they were helpful responses to the spillovers to the United States from this downturn.11For the China episode of 2015 and '16, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) statements from the time indicate that concerns about foreign developments and their effect on U.S. financial conditions were a factor contributing to the delay in previously anticipated policy rate increases, thereby supporting the economy. The message from these recent episodes is not just about the importance of timely policy adjustments by the central bank. It is also about the importance of the enhanced resilience of financial institutions that has been achieved since the Global Financial Crisis. Undoubtedly, this resilience helped prevent adverse financial shocks from contributing to a more serious downturn. Recent DevelopmentsLet me conclude with some remarks on recent developments. U.S. and other financial markets are attuned to a number of prominent downside global risks, which include Brexit, a sharp slowdown in global growth prospects, and trade tensions. Even though the Fed has been and is committed to a dual mandate to achieve maximum employment and price stability, in today's world, U.S. policymakers can hardly ignore these risks, and three of our most recent FOMC statements have highlighted concerns about global economic and financial developments. In addition, in our policy statements, as well as in other communications, we have indicated that, in the presence of these risks and with inflation pressures muted, we can afford to be patient and data dependent as we assess in future meetings what adjustments in our policy rate might be necessary to sustain growth, employment, and price stability in the U.S. economy. ReferencesBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018). "The Recent Rise in Oil Prices (PDF),"Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, July 13. Bodenstein, Martin, Christopher J. Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2009). "The Effects of Foreign Shocks When Interest Rates Are at Zero (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 983. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Clarida, Richard H. (2012). "The Euro Crisis and the U.S. Economy," interview by Christopher Alessi, Council on Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C., May 25. Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Jeronimo Zettelmeyer, and Isabel Schnabel (2002). "Moral Hazard and International Crisis Lending: A Test," IMF Working Paper WP/02/181. Washington: International Monetary Fund, October. Duca, John V., David M. Gould, and Lori L. Taylor (1998). "What Does the Asian Crisis Mean for the U.S. Economy? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,Southwest Economy,March/April, pp. 1-7. Economist(2015). "The Causes and Consequences of China's Market Crash," Market Turmoil,Economist,April 24. Ferrara, Laurent, and Charles-Emmanuel Teuf (2018). "International Environment and U.S. Monetary Policy: A Textual Analysis," Banque de France,Eco Notepad,September 25. Harrigan, James (2000). "The Impact of the Asian Crisis on U.S. Industry: An Almost-Free Lunch? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,FRBNY Economic Policy Review,vol. 6 (September), pp. 71-81. Kilian, Lutz (2008). "The Economic Effects of Energy Price Shocks,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 46 (December), pp. 871-909. Kilian, Lutz, and Robert J. Vigfusson (2017). "The Role of Oil Price Shocks in Causing U.S. Recessions,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 49 (December), pp. 1747‑76. Kohn, Donald L. (2008). "Global Economic Integration and Decoupling," speech delivered at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Frankfurt, Germany, June 26. Pollard, Patricia S., and Cletus C. Coughlin (1999). "Going Down: The Asian Crisis and U.S. Exports (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review,vol. 81 (March/April). van Wincoop, Eric, and Kei-Mu Yi (2000). "Asian Crisis Postmortem: Where Did the Money Go and Did the United States Benefit? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,FRBNY Economic Policy Review,vol. 6 (September). 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I am grateful to Shaghil Ahmed of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. A recent exception is Ferrara and Teuf (2018), who construct an international environment indicator, based on a textual analysis of Federal Open Market Committee minutes, and examine the connection between this indicator and U.S. monetary policy.Return to text 3. Among others, Kohn (2008) documents the increase in recent decades of U.S. trade links with the rest of the world, including through internationally integrated production as well as the increased financial linkages of the United States with the rest of the world.Return to text 4. Other countries that are also recipients of safe-haven flows include Japan and Switzerland.Return to text 5. An additional channel I have abstracted from here is that of commodity prices, which often move significantly in response to foreign factors. Since the United States is both a large exporter of some commodities and a large importer of some other commodities, the overall implications for U.S. activity are likely to be mixed. In particular, the effects of oil prices on the U.S. economy have been quite extensively studied. For example, Kilian (2008) and Kilian and Vigfusson (2017) present evidence on how increases in oil prices have historically adversely affected U.S. economic performance, as the United States is a net importer of oil. More recently, as outlined in Board of Governors (2018, pp. 16-17), with the net oil import share trending lower in the United States, the drag on U.S. GDP from higher oil prices has likely declined.Return to text 6. Most studies discussing contagion effects of the Mexican peso crisis focus on effects on other Latin American countries and do not highlight effects on U.S. growth. Studies on the effects of the Asian financial crisis on U.S. activity generally find from modest adverse to even slightly positive effects (see, for example, Duca, Gould, and Taylor, 1998; Harrigan, 2000; and van Wincoop and Yi, 2000). Duca, Gould, and Taylor (1998) called the effect on the United States "more of a swell rather than a tsunami" (p. 1). One study, Pollard and Coughlin (1999), found significant negative effects of the Asian crisis on U.S. exports in certain industries, but it also concluded that this effect did not translate into much of an effect on industry outputs.Return to text 7. Support provided by the official international financial community also helped mute global market disruptions during these EME crises.Return to text 8. Dell'Ariccia, Zettelmeyer, and Schnabel (2002) argue that the more-substantial response of global financial markets to the Russian default was because investors were expecting Russia to be rescued from having to default by the International Monetary Fund, and there was a global retreat from risk when that did not happen.Return to text 9. Media commentary from 2015 and 2016 is replete with descriptions of the rout in global financial markets resulting from financial turbulence in China. See, for example,Economist(2015).Return to text 10. In May 2012, I gave an interview at the Council on Foreign Relations highlighting the potential risks to the fragile U.S. economic recovery posed by the euro-zone sovereign debt crisis; see Clarida (2012).Return to text 11. The quantitative easing was important, because the United States had already reduced the policy rate to zero and--as argued, for example, in Bodenstein, Erceg, and Guerrieri (2009)--the spillover effects of adverse foreign demand shocks to the U.S. economy are significantly amplified at the zero lower bound for the policy rate in the absence of other expansionary policies.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, a place dedicated to scholarship supporting policies to better peoples' lives. As today is International Women's Day, I would like to preface my remarks by commending the American Economic Association for highlighting the diversity challenges of the economics profession and charting a way forward. Diversity is also a priority at the Fed: I want the Fed to be known within the economics profession as a great place for women, minorities, and others of diverse backgrounds to be respected, listened to, and happy. Just over 10 years ago, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC, or the Committee) lowered the federal funds rate close to zero, which we refer to as the effective lower bound, or ELB. Unable to lower rates further, the Committee turned to two novel tools to promote the recovery. The first was forward guidance, which is communication about the future path of interest rates. The second was large-scale purchases of longer-term securities, which became known as quantitative easing, or QE. There is a range of views, but most studies have found that these tools provided significant support for the recovery. From the outset, the Committee viewed them as extraordinary measures to be unwound, or "normalized," when conditions ultimately warranted. Today I will explore some important features of normalization and then turn to what comes after. In some ways, we are returning to the pre-crisis normal. In other ways, things will be different. The world has moved on in the last decade, and attempting to re-create the past would be neither practical nor wise. As normalization moves into its later stages, my colleagues and I also believe that this is an important moment to take stock of issues raised by the remarkable experiences of the past decade. We are therefore conducting a review of the Fed's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices. I will conclude with some thoughts on the review. Balance Sheet NormalizationBetween December 2008 and October 2014, the Federal Reserve purchased $3.7 trillion in longer-term Treasury and agency securities in order to support the economy both by easing dislocations in market functioning and by driving down longer-term interest rates. Consistent with the Committee's long-stated intention, in October 2017 we started the process of balance sheet normalization. We began gradually reducing the reinvestment of payments received as assets matured or were prepaid, allowing our holdings to shrink. The process of reducing the size of the portfolio is now well along. To frame the discussion of the final stages of normalization of the size of the balance sheet, it is useful to consider what the phrase "normal balance sheet" meant in the decades before the crisis. During that period, the main monetary policy decision for the FOMC was choosing a target value for the federal funds rate. Subject to that choice, the Fed allowed the demand for its liabilities to determine the size of the balance sheet. This is a feature of "normal" that we are returning to: After normalization, the size of the Fed's balance sheet will once again be driven by the demand for our liabilities. To see what this means, considerfigure 1, which shows the size of the Fed's balance sheet through time, as measured by total liabilities. The values are stated as a percentage of the dollar value of GDP, or gross domestic product.1Liabilities began to grow sharply at the end of 2008 and continued to increase until the end of 2014. Since that time, liabilities relative to GDP have fallen appreciably. To understand these changes, it is useful to focus on a snapshot of the balance sheet at three points in time: before the crisis, when the balance sheet was at its largest, and a rough projection for the end of this year (table 1). In 2006, the dominant liability was currency held by the public, and the dominant asset was Treasury securities. The Fed's asset purchase programs increased the balance sheet from just below 6 percent to nearly 25 percent of GDP by the end of 2014.2Balance sheets must balance, of course, and the Fed issued reserves as payment for the assets purchased. This action pushed reserves to nearly 15 percent of GDP. The Committee has long said that the size of the balance sheet will be considered normalized when the balance sheet is once again at the smallest level consistent with conducting monetary policy efficiently and effectively. Just how large that will be is uncertain, because we do not yet have a clear sense of the normal level of demand for our liabilities. Current estimates suggest, however, that something in the ballpark of the 2019:Q4 projected values may be the new normal. The normalized balance sheet may be smaller or larger than that estimate and will grow gradually over time as demand for currency rises with the economy. In all plausible cases, the balance sheet will be considerably larger than before the crisis. To understand the differences between the new and old normal, consider the final column in the table, which shows the change, measured in percentage points of GDP, between 2006:Q4 and the 2019:Q4 projection in the table. In this estimate, relative to before the crisis, the balance sheet will have grown as a share of GDP by about 10.6 percentage points. Bank reserves account for the biggest part of the growth, or about 5.6 percent of GDP. The crisis revealed that banks, especially the largest and most complex, faced much more liquidity risk than had previously been thought. Because of both new liquidity regulations and improved management, banks now hold much higher levels of high-quality liquid assets than before the crisis. Many banks choose to hold reserves as an important part of their strong liquidity positions. The rest of the increase in liabilities is accounted for by three other categories. First, public currency holdings will have grown by 2.4 percentage points as a share of GDP. Second, the U.S. Treasury maintains an account at the Fed, which has been running 1.4 percentage points higher as a share of GDP. And, third, other liabilities, which are mainly associated with the mechanics of the national and international financial system, will have grown by 1.1 percentage points. As was the case before the crisis, the FOMC's chosen operating regime for controlling short-term interest rates also plays a role in determining the appropriate quantity of reserves. In January, the Committee stated its intention to continue in our current regime in which our main policy rate, the federal funds rate or possibly some successor, is held within its target range by the interest rates we set on reserves and on the overnight reverse repo facility.3In this system, active management of the supply of reserves is not required. Thus, the supply of reserves must be "ample," in the sense of being sufficient to satisfy reserve demands even in the face of volatility in factors affecting the reserve market.4Put another way, the quantity of reserves will equal the typical reserve demands of depositories plus a buffer to allow for reserve market fluctuations. While the precise level of reserves that will prove ample is uncertain, standard projections, such as those in the table, suggest we could be near that level later this year. As we feel our way cautiously to this goal, we will move transparently and predictably in order to minimize needless market disruption and risks to our dual-mandate objectives. The Committee is now well along in our discussions of a plan to conclude balance sheet runoff later this year. Once balance sheet runoff ends, we may, if appropriate, hold the size of the balance sheet constant for a time to allow reserves to very gradually decline to the desired level as other liabilities, such as currency, increase. We expect to announce further details of this plan reasonably soon. There is no real precedent for the balance sheet normalization process, and we have adapted our approach along the way. In these final phases, we will adjust the details of our normalization plans if economic and financial conditions warrant. After decisions regarding the size of the balance sheet have been made, we will turn to remaining issues, such as the ultimate maturity composition of the portfolio. The Committee has long stated that it intends to return to a portfolio consisting primarily of Treasury securities. Forward Guidance and the Normalization of Policy CommunicationThe Committee has also been normalizing communication about our policy after a decade of forward guidance. Since December 2008, the FOMC's postmeeting statement had contained ever-evolving forms of guidance about keeping the federal funds rate at the ELB or about the gradual pace at which that rate would return to more normal levels. We removed the last elements of this crisis-era guidance in January.5The federal funds rate is now within the broad range of estimates of the neutral rate--the interest rate that tends neither to stimulate nor to restrain the economy. Committee participants generally agree that this policy stance is appropriate to promote our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Future adjustments will depend on what incoming data tell us about the baseline outlook and risks to that outlook. Policy communication will not simply revert to the ways of the early 2000s, however, for transparency advances have continued apace since then. The most significant change from the standpoint of forward guidance is that, since January 2012, the FOMC's quarterly Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) has included federal funds rate projections reaching up to three years into the future--often referred to as the "dot plot." Returning to a world of little or no explicit forward guidance in the FOMC's postmeeting statement presents a challenge, for the dot plot has, on occasion, been a source of confusion. Until now, forward guidance in the statement has been a main tool for communicating committee intentions and minimizing that confusion. For example, in early 2014, the Committee's intentions were at odds with a common misreading of the dots, and Chair Yellen explained, "[O]ne should not look to the dot plot, so to speak, as the primary way in which the Committee wants to or is speaking about policy to the public at large. The FOMC statement is the device that the Committee as a policymaking group uses to express its opinions . . . about the likely path of rates."6If the Committee remains largely out of the business of explicit forward guidance, we will need to find other ways to address the collateral confusion that sometimes surrounds the dots. As readers of the FOMC minutes will know, at our last meeting in January there was an impromptu discussion among some participants of general concerns about the dots. My own view is that, if properly understood, the dot plot can be a constructive element of comprehensive policy communication. Let me follow my two predecessors as Chair in attempting to advance that proper understanding. Each participant's dots reflect that participant's view of the policy that would be appropriate in the scenario that he or she sees as most likely. As someone who has filled out an SEP projection 27 times over the last seven years, I can say that there are times when I feel that something like the "most likely" scenario I write down is, indeed, reasonably likely to happen. At other times, when uncertainty around the outlook is unusually high, I dutifully write down what I see as the appropriate funds rate path in the most likely scenario, but I do so aware that this projection may be easily misinterpreted, for what is "most likely" may not be particularly likely. Very different scenarios may be similarly likely. Further, at times downside risks may deserve significant weight in policy deliberations. In short, as Chairman Bernanke explained, the SEP projections are merely "inputs" to policy that do not convey "the risks, the uncertainties, all the things that inform our collective judgment."7 Effectively conveying our views about risks and their role in policy projections can be challenging at times, and we are always looking for ways to improve our communications. I have asked the communications subcommittee of the FOMC to explore ways in which we can more effectively communicate about the role of the rate projections. For now, let me leave you with a cautionary tale about focusing too much on dots. Here is a picture composed of different colored dots (figure 2). The meaning of it is not clear, although if you stare at it long enough you might see a pattern. But let's take a step back (figure 3). As you can see, if you are too focused on a few dots, you may miss the larger picture. Delivering on the FOMC's intention to ultimately normalize policy continues to be a major priority at the Fed. Normalization is far along, and, considering the unprecedented nature of the exercise, it is proceeding smoothly. I am confident that we can effectively manage the remaining stages. Beyond NormalizationWe live in a time of intense scrutiny and declining trust in public institutions around the world. At the Fed, we are committed to working hard to build and sustain the public's trust. The Fed has special responsibilities in this regard. Our monetary policy independence allows us to serve the public without regard to short-term political considerations, which, as history has shown, is critical for sound monetary policymaking. But that precious grant of independence brings with it a special obligation to be open and transparent, welcoming scrutiny by the public and their elected representatives in Congress. Only in this way can the Fed maintain its legitimacy in our democratic system. Among other initiatives, my colleagues and I on the FOMC are undertaking a year-long review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. The review will involve a series of "Fed Listens" events around the country. These will include town-hall-style meetings and a conference where academic and nonacademic experts will share their views. These events will inform staff work and FOMC discussions as we plan for the future. While this is the first time the Fed has opened itself up in this way, many central banks around the world have conducted similar reviews, and our approach builds on their experiences. We believe that our existing framework for conducting monetary policy has generally served the public well, and the review may or may not produce major changes. Consistent with the experience of other central banks with these reviews, the process is more likely to produce evolution rather than revolution. We seek no changes in law and we are not considering fundamental changes in the structure of the Fed, or in the 2 percent inflation objective. While there is a high bar for adopting fundamental change, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage broadly with the public as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability. Without ruling out other topics, we have highlighted three questions that seem particularly important at present (figure 4): 1. Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective? 2. Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? 3. How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved? I would like to spend a few minutes discussing the first topic. Because interest rates around the world have steadily declined for several decades, rates in normal times now tend to be much closer to zero than in the past (figure 5).8Thus, when a recession comes, the Fed is likely to have less capacity to cut interest rates to stimulate the economy than in the past, suggesting that trips to the ELB may be more frequent. The post-crisis period has seen many economies around the world stuck for an extended period at the ELB, with slow growth and inflation well below target. Persistently weak inflation could lead inflation expectations to drift downward, which would imply still lower interest rates, leaving even less room for central banks to cut interest rates to support the economy during a downturn. It is therefore very important for central banks to find more effective ways to battle the low-inflation syndrome that seems to accompany proximity to the ELB. In the late 1990s, motivated by the Japanese experience with deflation and sluggish economic performance, economists began developing the argument that a central bank might substantially reduce the economic costs of ELB spells by adopting a makeup strategy.9The simplest version goes like this: If a spell with interest rates near the ELB leads to a persistent shortfall of inflation relative to the central bank's goal, once the ELB spell ends, the central bank would deliberately make up for the lost inflation by stimulating the economy and temporarily pushing inflation modestly above the target. In standard macroeconomic models, if households and businesses are confident that this future inflationary stimulus will be coming, that prospect will promote anticipatory consumption and investment. This can substantially reduce the economic costs of ELB spells.10Researchers have suggested many variations on makeup strategies.11For example, the central bank could target average inflation over time, implying that misses on either side of the target would be offset. By the time of the crisis, there was a well-established body of model-based research suggesting that some kind of makeup policy could be beneficial.12In light of this research, one might ask why the Fed and other major central banks chose not to pursue such a policy.13The answer lies in the uncertain distance between models and reality. For makeup strategies to achieve their stabilizing benefits, households and businesses must be quite confident that the "makeup stimulus" is really coming. This confidence is what prompts them to raise spending and investment in the midst of a downturn. In models, confidence in the policy is merely an assumption. In practice, when policymakers considered these policies in the wake of the crisis, they had major questions about whether a central bank's promise of good times to come would have moved the hearts, minds, and pocketbooks of the public. Part of the problem is that when the time comes to deliver the inflationary stimulus, that policy is likely to be unpopular--what is known as the time consistency problem in economics.14 Experience in the United States and around the world suggests that more frequent ELB episodes could prove quite costly in the future. My FOMC colleagues and I believe that we have a responsibility to the American people to consider policies that might promote significantly better economic outcomes. Makeup strategies are probably the most prominent idea and deserve serious attention. They are largely untried, however, and we have reason to question how they would perform in practice. Before they could be successfully implemented, there would have to be widespread societal understanding and acceptance--as I suggested, a high bar for any fundamental change. In this review, we seek to start a discussion about makeup strategies and other policies that might broadly benefit the American people. ConclusionTonight I have focused on policy normalization and our efforts to engage the public in what may come after. Before concluding, I will say a few words on current conditions and the outlook. Right now, most measures of the health and strength of the labor market look as favorable as they have in many decades. Inflation will probably run a bit below our objective for a time due to declines in energy prices, but those effects are likely to prove transitory. Core inflation, which is often a reliable indicator of where inflation is headed over time, is quite close to 2 percent. Despite this favorable picture, we have seen some cross-currents in recent months. With nothing in the outlook demanding an immediate policy response and particularly given muted inflation pressures, the Committee has adopted a patient, wait-and-see approach to considering any alteration in the stance of policy. Considering monetary policy more broadly, we are inviting thorough public scrutiny and are hoping to foster conversation regarding how the Fed can best exercise the precious monetary policy independence we have been granted. Our goal is to enhance the public's trust in the Federal Reserve--our most valuable asset. ReferencesBank of Japan (2016). "New Framework for Strengthening Monetary Easing: 'Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing with Yield Curve Control' (PDF)," announcement, September 21. Bernanke, Ben S. (2017). "Monetary Policy in a New Era," paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute of International Economics, Washington, October 12-13. Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019). "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver, eds. (2018). "The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF)," ECB Occasional Paper Series No. 217. Frankfurt, Germany: European Central Bank, December. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 139-211. English,William B., J. David López-Salido, and Robert J. Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (April), pp. 22-70. Friedman, Milton (1969).The Optimum Quantity of Money.New York: MacMillan. Hebden, James, and J. David López-Salido (2018). "From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108 (May, Supplement 1), pp. S59-S75. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017), "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," BrookingsPapers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317-72. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014). "Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams (2019).Monetary Policy Frameworks and the Effective Lower Bound on Interest Rates (PDF), Staff Report 877. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January. Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005). "Average Inflation Targeting,"Journal of Money, Credit andBanking,vol. 37 (October), pp. 837-63. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017). "Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay?"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 13 (September), pp. 1-42. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000), "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936-66. Wolman, Alexander L. (2005). "Real Implications of the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 37 (March), pp. 273‑96. 1. The balance sheet had been steady at around 5 percent of GDP since about 1980, as currency slowly grew as a share of GDP, but the increase was offset by a decline in reserves.Return to text 2. This size is similar to that of the balance sheet relative to GDP in the wake of the Great Depression.Return to text 3. As noted in the minutes of the November 2018 FOMC meeting (seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20181108.htm), participants discussed costs and benefits of various alternatives to the federal funds rate, such as the overnight bank funding rate, and recommended further study of the issue.Return to text 4. Both supply and demand factors can show large fluctuations.Return to text 5. Of course, "patience" as used in the January FOMC statement (seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130a.htm) might be seen as forward guidance. This type of guidance was used at times before the crisis and may play a role in the future. It is not, however, the explicit guidance about the medium-term level or direction of rates that distinguished the crisis-era guidance.Return to text 6. See page 9 of Chair Yellen's March 2014 press conference transcript, available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20140319.pdf.Return to text 7. See page 6 of Chairman Bernanke's April 2012 press conference transcript, available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20120425.pdf. Note that the SEP does provide some general information about the balance of risks, but this information is far less complete than the detail provided on the modal outlook.Return to text 8. For evidence on the secular decline in interest rates in the United States and abroad, see King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).Return to text 9. See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) and references therein.Return to text 10. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), for example, show that optimal policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during subsequent economic expansions. See also Wolman (2005) for a discussion of the effectiveness of price-level targeting at the ELB. For a discussion of the relationship between price-level targeting and average-inflation targeting, see Nessén and Vestin (2005).Return to text 11. The strategy in Reifschneider and Williams (2000), for instance, involves a central bank following a Taylor rule modified to make up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes. Kiley and Roberts (2017) study a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during normal times to compensate for below-target inflation during ELB episodes. See also Bernanke (2017) for a strategy in which low inflation is made up if it occurs when the federal funds rate is at or near the ELB.Return to text 12. See, for example, English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015); Hebden and López-Salido (2018); Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019); and Mertens and Williams (2019).Return to text 13. The Bank of Japan (2016) came closest, announcing in September 2016 an "inflation-overshooting commitment" (p. 1). The commitment did not, however, come with any explicit goal for a degree or duration of overshoot.Return to text 14. Transcripts of FOMC discussions (see, for example, 2011 transcripts, available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomchistorical2011.htm) reveal that some policymakers were dubious about whether it would be appropriate or even feasible for a current FOMC to bind a future FOMC to a policy that it might find objectionable, which contributed to more general doubts over whether the policy would be credible.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard At the Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance and the Bendheim Center for Finance, Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey While our economy continues to add jobs at a solid pace, demand appears to have softened against a backdrop of greater downside risks. Prudence counsels a period of watchful waiting--especially with no signs that inflation is picking up. With balance sheet normalization now well advanced, it will be appropriate to wind down asset redemptions later in the year.1 The Modal OutlookLet me start by discussing prospects for the U.S. economy. Policymakers tend to distinguish the most likely path, which I will refer to as the "modal" outlook, from risks around that path--events that are not the most likely to happen, but that have some probability of happening and that, if they do materialize, would have a one-sided effect. Both the modal outlook and the risks around it have important implications for monetary policy, but in somewhat different ways. Let me first discuss the modal outlook. While the economy performed very well last year, I have revised down my modal outlook for this year, in part reflecting some softening in the recent spending and sentiment data. This softening could be a harbinger of some slowing in the underlying momentum of domestic demand. In the initial estimate released last week, real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a 2.6 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2018. However, the latest report on retail sales showed a sharp decline. Analysts note that there is some reason to be skeptical of that report; it is subject to revision, and other data sources suggest a more muted movement. Although the magnitude of the drop may be revised smaller, coming in the last month of the quarter, that decline suggests that growth in consumer spending may be held down in the first quarter of this year. Surveys of consumer sentiment, which may provide some additional insight into the strength of spending in the first quarter, fell on net between November and January and rebounded partially in February. The lengthy government shutdown likely contributed to the January decline. And although recent readings are below those that prevailed for much of 2018, they are still in a range consistent with ongoing spending growth. Other spending indicators have also shown some slowing. Residential construction data have been soft for some time, reflecting in part earlier increases in interest rates, and homebuilders report that supply constraints on available lots, shortages of skilled workers, and tariffs on inputs are also contributing to the slowdown. Business investment registered strong gains last year, including in the latest quarter, but there are some indications of softening there as well. The latest data on capital goods orders, for example, suggest some softening in equipment spending gains. Surveys of businesses, such as the Institute for Supply Management's purchasing managers index and similar regional indexes, have generally moved lower over the past six months, reversing much of the run-up seen in 2017 and late 2016. The National Federation of Independent Business's Small Business Optimism Index is also lower than its mid-2018 peak, although it remains well above the levels of 2015 and much of 2016. The weaker foreign outlook also acts as a crosscurrent to the modal outlook. While strong foreign growth provided tailwinds early last year, foreign growth projections have been revised down repeatedly more recently.2The slowdown of foreign growth now appears to be more persistent than initially assumed, with growth likely running below potential for most of last year. Economic activity slowed noticeably in the second half of 2018 in China, where policymakers have been trying to achieve a balance between restraining very elevated levels of domestic debt, on the one hand, and maintaining strong aggregate growth, on the other. The protracted trade conflict with the United States has further complicated that challenge. Concerns about China's slowdown are reverberating globally, as was true in 2015-16, although the incidence is somewhat different. While Germany had appeared to be weighed down primarily by transitory factors late last year, some of the weakness in industrial production now appears likely to be more persistent, in part reflecting spillovers from China. The euro area is also seeing slowing in some other large member economies. Global weakness in trade and manufacturing has also weighed on Japan. The slowdown in foreign demand spills over into the United States through a variety of channels. Although the dollar has weakened somewhat lately, its earlier appreciation and slowing foreign growth contributed to a decline in exports and a fall in import prices over the second half of last year. In contrast, the recent step-down in long-term rates and easing in the dollar have lessened pressures on yields in emerging markets and provided more policy space in some cases. In the United States, financial markets saw substantial volatility late last year, which may still be affecting sentiment. From September to December of last year, financial conditions tightened considerably, with the stock market falling as much as 20 percent, and corporate bond premiums rising. This year, much of that tightening has reversed: The S&P 500 has made up more than half of its earlier losses, and corporate risk spreads have reversed much of their earlier tightening. Long-term Treasury yields rose from September through November and have since more than retraced, returning to the levels of early 2018. While the dollar has edged down from the peaks reached in the fall, it is about 7 percent higher than the lows seen early last year. Overall, the softer spending data in the U.S. and the slowdown abroad, along with earlier financial volatility, are likely weighing on the modal outlook and might in turn warrant a softening in the modal path for policy. Risks to the OutlookLet me turn now to the second category of crosscurrents facing the U.S. economy: the risks around the modal outlook. Policy uncertainty has been elevated recently and has been cited as an important factor in the financial volatility late last year. Although some of the risks have been anticipated for some time, recent events have brought them into heightened focus, and the accumulation of these risks could lead to some erosion in sentiment that could in turn feed into activity. Trade dispute escalation remains a risk. The tariffs and trade disruptions that have occurred so far are estimated to have had relatively modest effects on aggregate growth and inflation, although damaging disruptions have been concentrated in some sectors, such as soybeans. While recent reports suggest some progress, the prospect of additional tariffs in the trade conflict with China or on automobiles have been cited frequently as a risk in earnings reports and reports from business contacts. The recent longest-ever government shutdown created hardship for many families and has increased attention on upcoming fiscal negotiations. On current estimates, the debt ceiling will need to be raised around the fall. The Bipartisan Budget Act, which is estimated to boost GDP growth by 0.3 percentage point, on average, per year in 2018 and 2019, is scheduled to expire in 2020. If agreement is not reached, spending levels could fall back to the sequester caps, which would amount to a significant headwind. There are also important downside risks abroad. Most immediately, a "no-deal Brexit" would have adverse consequences for Britain, and potentially more broadly, given London's role as a financial center. Within the euro area, countries such as Italy and France face domestic challenges. And a hard landing in China would have spillovers through financial and trade channels. Employment, Inflation, and PolicyIn contrast to the softening in spending indicators, job gains have remained strong so far. Job gains have averaged 240,000 per month over the past three months--more than twice the pace necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force. The January unemployment rate of 4 percent is near a multidecade low. The strong labor market has drawn many Americans into productive work, and the overall employment-to-population ratio for workers between the ages of 25 and 54 is now within 1/2 percentage point of its pre-crisis peak. Many of the main measures of wages have been increasing at rates not seen on a sustained basis in almost 10 years, although labor's share of overall income remains stubbornly depressed.3Nonetheless, recent data on claims have shown some softening, and I will be watching a broad set of labor market indicators carefully, including the payrolls data for February, which will be released tomorrow. Just as the economy is performing well on the maximum-employment goal set by the Congress, it is also close to meeting our price-stability mandate. Following many years of low readings, the core price index for consumer purchases for the 12 months through December was up 1.9 percent.4That reading lines up with the median Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) forecast from a year ago. So inflation is very close to the Committee's 2 percent objective and its earlier expectation. Even so, we will need to be vigilant to ensure inflation achieves 2 percent on a sustained basis. As I have observed for some time, underlying trend inflation may be running slightly below the Committee's 2 percent objective. Many statistical filtering models put underlying inflation modestly below 2 percent, and some survey measures of inflation expectations are running somewhat below pre-crisis levels. Similarly, the difference between the yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities is lower than it was before the crisis, and that difference may provide some insight into market participants' views of underlying inflation.5 The fact that estimates of underlying trend inflation remain a bit on the soft side reinforces the evidence that the Phillips curve is very flat, a key element of the post-crisis new normal that I have noted previously.6The responsiveness of price inflation to resource utilization at the national level has been very weak for some time. This raises the possibility that the economy may have room to run. As the unemployment rate has fallen to levels not seen in many decades, we have heard concerns that the steeper Phillips curve of the past might reassert itself, perhaps in a nonlinear manner.7But all available evidence suggests inflation expectations remain well anchored to the upside. Indeed, the contours of today's new normal suggest we should be equally attentive to a risk of erosion in inflation expectations to the downside. A range of evidence suggests that the long-run "neutral" rate of interest--the rate of interest consistent with the economy growing at its potential rate and stable inflation--is very low relative to its historical levels. The low long-run neutral rate limits the amount of space available for cutting the federal funds rate to buffer the economy from adverse developments and is likely to increase the frequency or length of periods when the policy rate is pinned at the lower bound. In turn, more frequent or extended episodes when inflation is below target and policy is at the effective lower bound risk pulling down private-sector inflation expectations in a self-reinforcing downward spiral, which could further compress the monetary policy buffer to cushion downside shocks.8 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has made clear that the 2 percent inflation goal is symmetric.9As the median SEP forecasts have indicated, a number of Committee members have previously projected a policy path consistent with inflation rising somewhat above 2 percent for a time, which is in line with the symmetry of the target. There is a separate discussion of policies that would pre-commit to make up for past misses on inflation, such as temporary price-level targeting, which may be important in circumstances with a low long-run neutral rate and more frequent effective-lower-bound episodes.10I expect this will be part of our review of monetary policy strategies, tools, and communication practices later this year.11 Our policy goal now is to preserve the progress we have made on maximum employment and target inflation. Core inflation last year came in around target. It is heartening to see so many American workers coming back into the jobs market with rising wages. Our business contacts note they are currently hiring and investing in training workers who may not have been considered just a few years ago. With regard to policy, modest downward revisions to the baseline outlook for output and employment would call for modest downward revisions to the path for our conventional policy tool, the federal funds rate, helping to offset some of the weakness that would otherwise weigh on the economy. Moreover, basic principles of risk management would suggest that the increase in downside risks warrants a modest downward revision to the modal path for policy. These downside risks, if realized, could weigh on economic activity.12So heightened downside risks to output and employment would argue for a softer federal funds rate path even if the modal outlook for the economy were unchanged. At a time when the modal outlook appears to have softened a bit, and risks appear more weighted to the downside than the upside, the best way to safeguard the gains we have made on jobs and inflation is to navigate cautiously on rates. Risk management in an environment of a low long-run neutral rate and an attenuated relationship between resource utilization and overall inflation supports this approach. Watchful waiting will allow us to gather more information about domestic momentum and foreign growth as well as some of the policy risks weighing on sentiment. Balance Sheet NormalizationLet me turn now to the second tool used by the Federal Reserve in recent years--asset purchases. Recall that, after reducing the federal funds rate to its effective lower bound of zero in the 2008-09 recession, the FOMC sought a mechanism for providing additional stimulus in order to achieve maximum employment and target inflation.13The Federal Reserve purchased longer-term Treasury securities in an effort to push down longer-term interest rates to support economic activity, an approach sometimes referred to as quantitative easing. It also purchased agency mortgage-backed securities for the same reason, as well as to provide support to the housing sector, which was at the heart of the crisis. Although the empirical estimates vary, most conclude that the asset purchase programs were successful in supporting the recovery.14 Once recoveries become well established, the Federal Reserve moves its policy settings to more normal levels. Our current extended recovery is no exception: The Federal Reserve first started moving the federal funds rate to more normal values once the expansion was well established, and then it started normalizing the balance sheet once normalization of the federal funds rate was well under way. Of course, the benchmark for normalization has changed since before the financial crisis. Demand has grown for the Fed's liabilities from a variety of sources. The demand for U.S. currency has grown notably relative to nominal GDP, the Treasury Department now holds large balances in its account at the Fed as an important part of its cash management, and foreign central banks hold larger deposits than in the past. In addition, the demand from commercial banks for deposits at the Fed--that is, "reserves"--appears to have increased substantially. Spurred by new liquidity regulations and their own internal liquidity management practices, the largest banks hold substantial amounts of so-called high-quality liquid assets to protect against the risk of a sudden "run" on their uninsured short-run liabilities, as occurred during the financial crisis. So it appears that the new normal size of the balance sheet is likely to remain greater relative to the size of the economy than it was before the financial crisis. How much larger is still an open question. For the past decade, the Federal Reserve has operated a regime with reserves that are very abundant relative to banks' demand for reserves. The current framework relies on the Federal Reserve's interest rate on reserves to control the federal funds rate, in the context of the provision of ample reserves. In contrast, the pre-crisis framework featured a scarce supply of reserves, which the Federal Reserve would vary on a daily basis to control the federal funds rate by closely matching the demand for reserves. The FOMC recently affirmed that it would continue to operate the current framework.15This approach makes sense for a variety of reasons. The current framework has been effective in providing good control of the policy rate and ensuring effective transmission to other money markets and the financial system. Not only is the demand for reserves likely to remain much higher than it was before the crisis, but it is also likely that there will be fluctuations in reserves, along with other elements of the Fed's liabilities, such as the deposits the Treasury holds with the Fed. Accommodating those swings with scarce reserves would require much larger daily open market operations than was the case before the crisis. By remaining in a regime with ample reserves, the Fed is able to control short-term interest rates without the need to conduct daily open market operations. Because there are ample reserves, the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates are determined along the flat portion of the reserve demand curve. As a result, the system can absorb swings in the demand and supply of reserves with limited need for open market operations. The alternative of pushing reserves close to the transition point between the flat and steep parts of the demand curve would likely lead to active intervention as an ongoing feature, along with volatility in rates. Given that the Committee is now operating with two instruments, it is important to note that the Committee clarified that it would seek to use only one tool actively at a time, and that the preferred active tool would be the federal funds rate when it is above the effective lower bound. I want to make it clear that we would not want our two tools to be working at cross-purposes. For instance, we would not want the balance sheet to be shrinking at a time when the FOMC thought it was appropriate to cut the federal funds rate. After holding the size of the balance sheet roughly flat since mid-2014, once the normalization of the federal funds rate was deemed well under way in October 2017, the Committee started to allow the size of the balance sheet to shrink in line with the pledge to "hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively."16We have made substantial progress, as demonstrated by the level of reserves. Reserves are already down by 40 percent since their peak and are likely to be down by more than half this summer. In my view, asset redemptions should come to an end later in the year, which would provide a sufficient buffer of reserves to meet demand and avoid volatility. We have gathered information from market contacts and have surveyed banks to assess their demand for reserves.17I would want to see a healthy cushion on top of that to avoid unnecessary volatility and ensure that the federal funds rate will be largely insulated from daily swings in factors affecting reserves. With regard to the composition of the balance sheet, I favor moving eventually to a portfolio of only Treasury securities--that is, without any agency mortgage-backed securities remaining. It is important to do so in a way that continues to avoid market disruptions. That shift will be under way naturally, albeit slowly, as these securities mature and are replaced by Treasury securities.18 For the portion of our portfolio in Treasury securities, the Federal Reserve currently holds no Treasury bills, and our portfolio has a much longer weighted-average maturity than the current stock of Treasury securities outstanding in the market or than our pre-crisis portfolio, which was more heavily weighted toward short-dated securities than the holdings of the public. When the Federal Reserve System begins once again purchasing Treasury securities, we will need to decide what maturities to purchase. Given how far out of step the System's current portfolio is from common benchmarks, however, it might make sense to weight those purchases more heavily toward Treasury bills and other shorter-dated Treasury securities for a time. Further into the future, there may be good reasons to shift toward greater holdings of shorter-term securities to provide greater flexibility. However, I want to emphasize that I do not expect this issue to be addressed for some time. ConclusionThe most likely path for the economy appears to have softened against a backdrop of greater downside risks. Our goal now is to safeguard the progress we have made on full employment and target inflation. Prudence counsels a period of watchful waiting. And with balance sheet normalization now well advanced, it will soon be time to wind down our asset redemptions. ReferencesBall, Laurence, Joseph Gagnon, Patrick Honohan, and Signe Krogstrup (2016).What Else Can Central Banks Do?(PDF)Geneva Reports on the World Economy 18. Geneva and London: International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies and Centre for Economic Policy Research. Bernanke, Ben S. (2017). "Monetary Policy in a New Era (PDF)," paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 12-13. Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019). "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, September 17. -------- (2017). "FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, June 14. -------- (2019a). "Federal Open Market Committee Reaffirms Its 'Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,'" press release, January 30. -------- (2019b). "Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications," webpage, Board of Governors. -------- (2019c). "Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization," press release, January 30. Brainard, Lael (2015). "Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, October 12. -------- (2016). "The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12. -------- (2017). "Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5. -------- (2018). "Navigating Monetary Policy as Headwinds Shift to Tailwinds," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, March 6. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2017). "Estimating the U.S. Labor Share,"Monthly Labor Review(February). Hooper, Peter, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Amir Sufi (2019). "Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or Is It Just Hibernating?" paper presented at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 22. International Monetary Fund (2019). "A Weakening Global Expansion," World Economic Outlook Update. Washington: IMF, January. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317-96. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2019). "OECD Sees Global Growth Slowing, as Europe Weakens and Risks Persist," press release, March 6. 1. I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See International Monetary Fund (2019) and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2019).Return to text 3. For the share of overall income going to workers, see, for instance, data on the labor share in the nonfarm business sector--available from the FRED database on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's website athttps://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/PRS85006173--and Bureau of Labor Statistics (2017).Return to text 4. I focus on the core measure because food and energy prices are volatile, and total inflation has generally fluctuated around core inflation. The alternative Dallas trimmed mean measure tells a similar story.Return to text 5. Brainard (2017) provides more details on these factors.Return to text 6. See Brainard (2015, 2016) for a discussion of this and other elements of what I referred to as the new normal.Return to text 7. See Hooper, Mishkin, and Sufi (2019) for a comprehensive discussion of research on the Phillips curve.Return to text 8. This risk is reinforced by the pro-cyclicality of fiscal policy over the past five years and the erosion of fiscal space. See Kiley and Roberts (2017).Return to text 9. See Board of Governors (2019a).Return to text 10. See, for instance, Bernanke (2017) and Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019).Return to text 11. See Board of Governors (2019b).Return to text 12. The limited amount of conventional policy space reinforces the importance of guarding against the materialization of downside risks.Return to text 13. Some foreign central banks have reduced their short-term policy rates below zero. See Ball and others (2016) for a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of such a policy.Return to text 14. See the evidence cited in Ball and others (2016).Return to text 15. See Board of Governors (2019c).Return to text 16. As described in Board of Governors (2017), the reduction in reinvestment was implemented through a series of gradually rising caps on repayments of principal. Quoted text is from the penultimate bullet point in Board of Governors (2014).Return to text 17. The Senior Financial Officer Survey, which was undertaken in September 2018 and is being undertaken again, gathered views systematically from a number of banks concerning their reserve balance management strategies and practices. The survey is available on the Federal Reserve Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sfos/sfos-release-dates.htm.Return to text 18. The Committee has indicated it may choose to sell agency mortgage-backed securities at some point to help accomplish the Treasury-securities-only goal. In this eventuality, there would be considerable advance notice, with an aim to minimizing any market disruptions.Return to text
I'm deeply saddened by the death of Alan Krueger of Princeton University, whom I have known since graduate school more than 30 years ago. As an economist, he inspired his colleagues by combining a zeal for academic rigor with a passion for public service. Alan made a difference and inspired everyone who learned from his research or benefited from the policies he developed. His untimely passing represents an enormous loss to our profession. I extend heartfelt sympathy to his family.
Governor Lael Brainard At the 2019 Just Economy Conference, National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C. It is a pleasure to have an opportunity to discuss how we can preserve what is working well with the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and make it better.1In recent months, we have seen a high level of engagement from banks and community organizations in discussions and comments about revising the CRA regulations, which serves as testament to the value of the CRA and provides valuable suggestions for improving our regulatory approach. The one message that comes through most clearly is that the CRA is highly valued by bankers and community groups alike. A second message is that the CRA could be even more effective in mobilizing community and economic development. Purpose and HistoryBefore offering some thoughts on what we have learned and some possible ways forward, I want to begin by recalling why the CRA was established and what it was designed to achieve, as well as the important role it has played for over 40 years in low- and moderate-income communities across this country. The CRA was one of several landmark pieces of legislation to address inequities in the credit markets in the wake of the civil rights movement. The Fair Housing Act of 1968 and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 1974 addressed lending discrimination in mortgage and consumer credit based on race, sex, and other personal characteristics, while the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) of 1975 and later amendments recognized the importance of data in making these laws enforceable. In 1977, Congress passed the CRA to address the credit needs of low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. With the passage of the CRA, Congress aimed to reverse the urban disinvestment from years of government policies and market actions that deprived lower-income areas of credit by redlining--using red-inked lines to set apart neighborhoods that were deemed too risky. The CRA is unique in important ways. Unlike previous government efforts to address the needs of lower-income areas, the CRA puts decisionmaking about a community's needs and priorities in the hands of local actors. By stipulating that banks have an affirmative and continuing obligation to meet the credit needs of all segments of the local communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income communities, the CRA changed the way banks approach their lending and investment decisions in those communities. More than 40 years later, the CRA continues to animate a vibrant community development ecosystem connecting community members with the banks that lend and invest, community organizations that deliver services and develop housing, and state and local governments that direct incentives and subsidies. We participate actively through our community development and examination staff around the country, who help to connect stakeholders, analyze community needs, and assess outcomes. A second unique feature is the public nature of evaluations. The CRA, as amended in 1989, directs federal regulators to evaluate banks' records of helping to meet the credit needs of their local communities and assign one of four statutorily mandated ratings to their performance.2Following additional amendments in 1991, the law requires that the agencies make public the banks' ratings and the analysis supporting them. The public nature of CRA evaluations provides a strong incentive for good performance as well as a platform for public input on community needs. Opportunities for ImprovementCongress largely left it to the banking agencies to describe in regulations how they would evaluate a bank's CRA performance. This flexibility is valuable because it enables the agencies to revise the implementing regulations from time to time to keep the CRA relevant in response to technological innovation and other changes in the landscape for banking and community development financing.3 The agencies have discussed revising the CRA regulations on and off since 2010, when interagency hearings were held in several locations across the country. Last August, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) issued an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) to request comments on a variety of questions related to defining the areas in which regulators evaluate a bank's CRA performance, clarifying and expanding the types of activities that are eligible for CRA consideration, and establishing a metrics-based approach to rating a bank's CRA performance, among other things. The OCC received nearly 1,500 comment letters in response to the ANPR, and we have been reading those letters with great interest. To augment this analysis, since October, the Federal Reserve System has held more than 25 outreach meetings across the country with banks and community organizations, including representation from the other banking agencies, culminating in an in-depth research symposium at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Several themes are emerging from the comment letters and outreach. Perhaps most important, stakeholders overwhelmingly support the CRA and its goals, noting a significant increase in loans and investments in low- and moderate-income communities since the law's enactment. Many commenters emphasize the importance of the CRA in supporting a vital community development ecosystem by bringing together banks, community organizations, state and local governments, educators, foundations, and other stakeholders to address community and economic development needs. Many cautioned the banking agencies to proceed carefully so as not to disturb this important ecosystem. I share this commitment to the CRA and to strengthening its role in community and economic development in the low- and moderate-income communities where it can make the greatest difference. Defining a Bank's Community: Where Activities CountBanks and community organizations agree that the regulations should better reflect the way in which banking products and services are currently delivered. Much has changed since the last major revision to the CRA regulations, which occurred at a time when physical branches were essential for all the deposit and lending needs of bank customers. The current definition of a bank's assessment area--the area in which a bank's performance is assessed--relies on the area around its main branches and deposit-taking automated teller machines (ATMs), which includes a substantial portion of its lending. The internet was just becoming available for commercial use when the current assessment area regulations were finalized. Since that time, technology and changing consumer preferences have led to banks gathering deposits and making loans well outside of their physical branches--for example, online and via mobile devices. So it is fair to ask whether the CRA's current assessment area definition adequately reflects the community a bank serves today. Clearly, it is time to better define the area in which the agencies evaluate a bank's CRA activities, but it is important to retain a focus on the credit needs of local communities. As tempting as it may be to think that digital channels have rendered bank branches unnecessary, my discussions with banks and community stakeholders around the country have underscored the importance of branches as a venue for banks to engage with their communities. Branches are the places that provide the personal face-to-face assistance valued by many consumers and business customers. Moreover, branches provide a local presence for lenders to get to know the borrowers and the communities in which they live, lend, and invest. While technology has much to offer by way of convenience and customer experience, it is often a complement to rather than a replacement for bank branches. For this reason, and to be true to the original intent of the law, I believe that CRA evaluations should retain a focus on the credit needs of the local communities banks serve as indicated by their physical presence in those areas, but not be limited to where they have a physical presence. Each quarter, I have been fortunate to make community visits around the country along with Board and Reserve Bank community development staff. I have seen firsthand the success of the CRA in bringing banks to the table along with community organizations to address complex community needs. Recently, I met with bankers in Denver, Colorado, who were working with local government officials and nonprofits to maintain affordable housing near newly developed public transit lines. In North St. Louis, I met with a community bank that was working with a place-based community development organization called Better Family Life to develop a micro-loan fund that is empowering low-income entrepreneurs. In other places, particularly in high-poverty and rural areas, I saw firsthandhow difficult it can be to get access to basic banking services. In a visit to the Mississippi Delta in 2016, I heard from community members about having to drive long distances to deposit a check or access an ATM. The same was true for my visits to Pine Ridge, South Dakota and some towns in the Appalachian region of Kentucky. There is a complex balancing between banks' need to operate branches profitably with communities' needs to connect to the financial mainstream, which we want to recognize in any revisions to the CRA regulations. Bankers and other commenters have emphasized the high value that bank branches have for retail customers and small business owners in underserved communities, and research corroborates this. Similar to banks, community organization commenters support updating the CRA regulations as they relate to a bank's assessment area. They suggest retaining assessment areas around a bank's branches in order to retain the CRA's focus on local low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, while adding areas where banks conduct significant activity without branches. Both bank and community organization commenters were open to having a larger area defined for the purposes of pursuing meaningful community development activities, particularly in cases where banks operate largely without branches. By allowing for more activity in a broader geographic area, they argue that the artificial competition for investments in areas served by several banks (such as New York or Salt Lake City)--so-called credit hot spots--could be mitigated. This could be to the benefit of credit deserts--those perennially underserved rural areas or small metropolitan areas that may not have a bank branch or, if they do, may not constitute a major market for purposes of banks' CRA evaluations. In reflecting on these suggestions, we have been considering a possible approach that might rework the assessment area definition so that banks of a certain scale would have separate assessment areas for their retail activities and their community development activities. This would retain the law's focus on the credit needs of a bank's local community by evaluating the retail lending and services it offers in the county or other geographic area surrounding its branches,deposit-taking ATMs, and other concentrations of lending and deposit-taking.4 As part of this approach, a bank would get CRA consideration for community development activities in a more expansive area. Under the current rule, there is no ex ante certainty that a bank's community development activities will receive CRA consideration if they are in the broader statewide or regional area that includes the bank's assessment area. This current approach has proven challenging in practice, as banks sometimes invest in a community development activity only to find that their examiner doesn't agree that the activity is located within the bank's assessment area. Community development activities, in order to achieve an appropriate scale, often operate in larger areas that may not neatly overlap with a bank's assessment area. A more expansive and ex ante clearer community development assessment area definition would afford CRA consideration for any such activity in a state where the bank has an assessment area. This approach would help eliminate uncertainty and could encourage more capital for affordable housing, community facilities, and economic development activities in underserved areas. Moreover, a broader assessment area for community development activities could help address the concentration of investment dollars in metropolitan areas where several banks may have branches, while other smaller metropolitan and rural areas remain chronically underserved. My recent visit to the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota brought home the importance of addressing the problem of credit hot spots and deserts that result from the CRA's current assessment area definition. I met with the Thunder Valley Community Development Corporation and viewed their impressive 34-acre mixed-use project to create a new commercial center for the reservation. When completed, it will include single-family and multifamily housing units, a boarding house for visitors, a community center, and a retail shopping area in a community where residents currently must drive an hour to reach a grocery store. In examining a list of all the project funders, it was noticeable that there were active financing commitments from many foundations, but no banks. Although this is likely to be a very impactful investment, there is only one bank currently whose assessment area may extend to Pine Ridge. In contrast, under the proposed community development assessment area approach, more of the banks with branches in Aberdeen, South Dakota, for instance, might be inclined to make such a community development loan with confidence it would get CRA consideration. By creating separate assessment areas for retail and community development activities, we believe that banks would continue to place their community at the center of their retail lending and service activities while participating in meaningful community development opportunities that may have greater impact due to their broader reach. Evaluating Community Development Performance: What CountsIn reflecting on the comments, listening sessions, and research conference, we have also been contemplating approaches to what community development activities count in order to provide greater predictability and better incentives. Banks and community organizations have noted that the current structure of the large bank performance tests may actually hinder community development financing in a couple of ways. First, under the existing approach, community development loans are considered in the lending test, while community development investments are considered in a separate test. A number of banks and community organizations argue that the form of community financing may be influenced more by the structure of the CRA performance tests than by what makes the most sense for the project. For example, if a bank is concerned about passing its lending test, it might structure financing as a loan rather than an investment to beef up its lending test performance even if an investment would be more effective. Second, a number of banks and community organizations pressed the case for giving CRA consideration to any community development loan outstanding, rather than only those originated since the bank's last CRA evaluation. Under the current rule, banks often make short-term, renewable community development loans simply to ensure that the incremental lending receives CRA consideration at each examination. By contrast, when it comes to investments, all investments on the bank's books at the time of the evaluation are given consideration. Banks and community organizations alike make a compelling argument that all types of community development finance, whether in the form of a loan or an investment, have greater impact when they serve as patient, reliable, committed sources of financing. One possible approach to address these distortions and provide more effective incentives is to create a separate, comprehensive community development test to evaluate community development loans and qualified investments through a similar lens, possibly along with community development services. A separate, comprehensive community development test could encourage banks to provide the patient, committed financing--in the form of loans as well as investments--that community development organizations value the most. This is important because banks are uniquely situated to evaluate the community development finance projects in the states where they operate and to provide the smaller, more complex, and often more impactful, investments that don't attract institutional investors. If banks cannot be confident ex ante that they will get the benefit of CRA consideration for these efforts, which may be time-consuming to evaluate and structure, it is not surprising they would instead gravitate toward activities they know will count.5 In addition to these broad changes to what and how community development activities should be counted, we recognize there are several definitional issues that merit consideration. For example, many commenters advocated for an expansion of the definition of "community development" to include loans to or investments in community development financial institutions (CDFIs), regardless of the bank's assessment area, because the sole purpose of CDFIs is community development. There are also suggestions that in high-poverty rural areas, where incomes overall may be low relative to federal benchmarks, it may be helpful to adjust the definition of what qualifies as low- and moderate-income so that more CRA activity receives consideration, which we will study. TailoringRecognition of the variation in how banks deliver their products and services brings me to the third theme expressed by both banks and community organizations, which is the need for the CRA regulations to be flexible enough to evaluate banks of widely different sizes and business strategies. Different perspectives were offered about some aspects of how to better tailor the regulations, particularly with regards to whether more banks should be considered "small" and, as such, eligible for a streamlined evaluation. Indeed, one of the benefits of creating separate assessment area definitions and performance tests for retail activities and community development activities could be streamlining the tests and applying them in different ways to tailor CRA evaluations to banks based on their size and business strategy. Small banks could have their lending and retail services evaluated under the retail test, while larger banks could be evaluated under both the retail and community development tests. The assessment area definition could be flexible enough to allow banks that conduct most or all of their retail activity online to identify states in which they have a significant level of deposits, lending, or other banking activity in which they would have obligations under either the retail or community development test, as appropriate. Consistency and PredictabilityThere was also wide support for making CRA definitions and evaluation criteria clearer and taking other actions to improve the consistent and predictable application of the regulations during evaluations. Perhaps more important, the commenters strongly supported the agencies continuing the tradition of working together to have one set of rules, consistent interpretive guidance, and regular examiner training to ensure that the CRA is implemented as consistently as possible both within and across the agencies. At the Federal Reserve, we agree that it is important for the banking agencies to take a consistent approach. MetricsFinally, there was broad support for expanding the use of metrics in CRA evaluations, where appropriate, especially if they are clearly articulated, are used in tandem with performance context information, and add to the transparency of CRA ratings. We recognize that effective and predictable evaluations rely on good metrics. Metrics, in turn, require good data. Currently, CRA evaluations use HMDA data, which are very useful in understanding where mortgages are made, to whom, and at what cost. Moreover, HMDA data are collected from both banks and non-bank mortgage lenders. But the data collected under CRA to support our analysis of small business and small farm loans are not as comprehensive as mortgage lending data. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act charges the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau with promulgating regulations for the collection of small business loans, and that data should be very helpful when they become available. Separately, the data collected under the CRA on community development loans are not adequate to support the analysis of a separate community development test, so it may be necessary to consider a better reporting system. Collecting data and developing clear metrics will provide the improved clarity and ex ante predictability that banks seek. More and better data will allow for more meaningful metrics by which we can evaluate performance criteria, such as the borrower and geographic distribution of lending and how a bank's performance compares with other similarly situated banks. We may also consider providing more baseline information that describes a bank's performance context, such as the demographic and economic information that helps to describe the credit needs and opportunities present in each assessment area. In addition, there may be ways to more effectively incorporate community engagement into the process--for example, by having the banking agencies develop a joint community contacts database to facilitate access to information from local community stakeholders. ConclusionOverall, I have been impressed with the number of organizations that took the time to comment on the OCC's ANPR to and attend the Federal Reserve's outreach meetings. It is encouraging to see the high level of commitment to the CRA from banks and community organizations alike. As we think about the path forward, it is important that we retain the CRA's core focus on place while improving upon the regulation's flexibility in order to provide meaningful CRA evaluations of banks that largely deliver their products and services digitally. We want whatever we design to be clear and more predictable for banks in order to promote more and more impactful CRA activity. Taken together, changes to the CRA regulations' definition of assessment areas and performance test structure, along with improved metrics based on better data have the potential to enhance the regulations and better serve its purpose of encouraging banks to help meet the credit needs of low- and moderate-income communities. We understand and appreciate that banks want to be able to make plans and manage their risks carefully through clearer standards regarding what counts, where it will be counted, and how. If we can address these suggestions effectively, banks will be more effective in addressing the needs of their local communities and in some cases extend their activities to benefit chronically underserved communities. I will be interested to hear whether some of the ideas I have shared today resonate with you. I want to assure you that we will continue to engage with bank and community stakeholders to find a path forward that honors the purpose of the CRA by encouraging banks to attend to the credit needs of their local communities and to better address the needs of underserved areas. This engagement will be vital as we join together with the other banking agencies to formulate regulatory changes that preserve what is best about CRA while ensuring its value and relevance for another generation. 1. I am grateful to Theresa Stark of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The banking agencies are the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The ratings are: Outstanding, Satisfactory, Needs to Improve, and Substantial Non-compliance.Return to text 3. The current regulatory structure dates back to 1995 when the agencies reworked the regulations to provide for a variety of evaluation methods for banks of different sizes and business strategies and set out criteria by which a bank's lending, investment, and service activities in its community are evaluated. There were further regulatory revisions in 2005.Return to text 4. The agencies could consider requiring assessment areas around a bank's other physical locations, such as loan production or trust offices, or in areas where the bank has significant deposit or lending activity.Return to text 5. We recognize that the agencies will need to give careful consideration to how to weight community development loans, investments, and services, so as not to harm the complex system of community development financing that is dependent largely on CRA-motivated investments.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles At the Joint Conference of the European Central Bank and the Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Frankfurt, Germany It is a pleasure to be here today at the European Central Bank in my capacity as chair of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to help celebrate theJournal of Money, Credit and Banking's(JMCB) 50th anniversary. The broad scope of the JMCB, and the diversity of its scholarship parallels, in some ways, the FSB itself. As we dealt with the global financial crisis, the heads of state and government of the G20 tasked the FSB with identifying and addressing vulnerabilities in the global financial system and developing stronger regulatory and supervisory policies to create a more resilient global financial system in the pursuit of financial stability. Our broad mandate has considerable overlap with the fields that the JMCB covers within its pages. The FSB includes 24 jurisdictions and 73 representatives, including all the members of the G20. Also similar to the JMCB, the FSB is celebrating an anniversary this year, with its creation having occurred 10 years ago. We are a far cry from the JMCB's 50 years, but I hope that in time our continuing work--and not just our response to the late crisis--will prove valuable enough that we one day merit a similar celebration. I am especially pleased to speak at this conference today because the FSB welcomes and encourages the participation of the academic community in tackling issues of global financial stability. I would like to see a greater and more direct contribution of academic subject-matter experts to our work. You may have noticed that the FSB sent out a call for nominations last month for academics to advise our work in evaluating post-crisis reforms--in this particular instance, the evaluation that will examine the effects of the too-big-to-fail reform package that the G20 endorsed in 2010 and that the FSB and other standard setters have implemented since then. In our initiatives to examine the consequences of post-crisis reform, the academic community can help advance the field with analytical tools and critical insight. The financial crisis exposed fault lines in the financial system that had to be addressed immediately, comprehensively, and vigorously. The body of post-crisis regulation that resulted was founded on the work of academics, including important papers published in the JMCB, and involved the energy and efforts of many standard setters, regulators, supervisors, and central banks. It was an exemplary feat of cooperation and coordination, and it has unquestionably made the financial system safer and more resilient. Today, the post-crisis reform agenda has been largely completed. Basel III is final, the largest global banks have substantially more capital and liquidity, over-the-counter derivatives markets are safer, and steps have been taken to address the risks of too-big-to-fail institutions. Through greater monitoring and policy measures, the FSB is addressing risks from nonbank financial intermediation. And there has been remarkable progress on the difficult and unglamorous task of establishing workable resolution regimes that are consistent with the FSB's clearly defined principles. While we must still work to ensure full, timely, and consistent implementation of the agreed reforms, it is time for the FSB to turn more of its energy and attention to the future. In my time with you today, I would like to do two things. First, I would like to share with you my view on how the work of the FSB must evolve if we are to merit that future celebration and some of the core principles that I think should inform that work. After discussing those principles, I want to focus your attention on some of the work priorities that the FSB will be addressing throughout 2019 and beyond, including nonbank financing, fintech, and evaluating the too-big-to-fail reforms. Core PrinciplesLet me turn to the core principles--engagement, rigor, and analysis. These core principles reflect goals that are both inward and outward looking. From within, FSB members have the occasion to reflect on how our work is executed--that is, we must ask ourselves how we can accomplish our mission more effectively, improving the financial sector's ability to support economic growth without threatening financial stability. Outwardly, we will endeavor to reach out to a greater number of constituents and stakeholders for their input on the important financial stability issues they are encountering. This is also a good time to inform a wider public audience on the nature of our mission in a clear, articulate, and jargon-free manner. EngagementAs the FSB pivots away from the urgency of post-crisis reform development, it is an opportune time to improve our efforts at effective engagement. Recognizing the wide-reaching effects of its work, the FSB must seek input from a broad range of stakeholders, each of whom brings a different perspective to the issues under consideration. While we are directly accountable to the G20, we are, through the G20, accountable to all of the people affected by our actions. In my view, that means we must engage in genuine, substantial dialogue with all of these stakeholders, to a greater and more effective degree than we have in the past. To start, we can strengthen the role of the six regional groups that are a part of the FSB organization. In 2011, the FSB established six consultative groups representing large regions of the globe--the Americas, Europe, the Middle East and North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, the Commonwealth of Independent States, and Asia. The intent was to expand its outreach program beyond the membership in a systematic manner to better reflect the FSB's global mission. Each group meets once or twice a year and helps the FSB obtain broader input into its policy development agenda. These groups should be re-engineered to not only promote implementation of international policy initiatives within their respective regions, but also to be in a strong position to keep abreast of developments in financial markets and thus inform FSB policy. We have initiated a study of the operations of the regional groups that will help inform us on ways to upgrade their effectiveness as an outreach and feedback mechanism. I am particularly interested in how we can take lessons learned from this study to move forward with our enhanced engagement. Engagement outside of the FSB is also very important to our mission. We currently engage with businesses, institutions, market participants, and academics on much of our FSB work. For example, we have in the past conducted public consultations on FSB policy recommendations, albeit sometimes with very short timetables. We have now established an expectation that public consultation will be at least 60 days. We need to give the public adequate time to comment on FSB proposals, which can, at times, be quite complex. Beyond public consultation, we must convene more meetings with the private sector and academic community to build a more robust and meaningful dialogue. For example, we kicked off the work we have undertaken at the behest of the Japanese G20 Presidency to study differences in regulatory environments and market conditions across jurisdictions that may have financial stability implications--often referred to as "market fragmentation"--by hosting a workshop with key stakeholders and academics. This was quite successful, and I look forward to such interactions being the rule. In addition, we need to improve our interaction and cooperation with other standard-setting bodies, such as the Basel Committee, the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). While we have worked together in the past, we all owe it to the global community to seek out opportunities for improved cooperation and engagement. To improve FSB transparency, we will be taking a number of important steps. For example, on February 12, 2019, the FSB published a comprehensive work program on its website for the year ahead.1This is the first time in the FSB's history that the work program was disseminated publicly. Over the term of my chairmanship, I will continue to look for steps that will allow all stakeholders to have a more open window into the FSB's decisionmaking process and products. I believe improved transparency into the FSB process is critical to our mission. I'm reminded of Lord Hewart's famous--and oft-quoted--remark concerning the importance of jurisprudence to the public: "Not only must justice be done; it must also beseen to be done." We should be able to apply this concept to the field of global financial standard setting. Rigorous VigilanceThe second principle I would like to discuss concerns how we assess and mitigate vulnerabilities in the global financial system. The post-crisis reforms addressed the fault lines that led to the crisis and the contagion effects felt around the world, but they will never replace the need for vigilance. If we are not rigorously vigilant, we still risk another crisis. What we need are forward-looking methodologies that use the most advanced analytical tools to spot vulnerabilities well in advance before they lead to widespread financial distress and economic costs. Here the academic community can continue to contribute with cutting-edge and robust modeling techniques. We can only mitigate financial vulnerabilities if we identify them accurately and in a timely manner. As such, the FSB's Standing Committee on Assessment of Vulnerabilities under the leadership of FSB Vice Chair Klaas Knot of the Dutch National Bank will be directing a considerable amount of energy to developing a cutting-edge framework for the identification and assessment of financial vulnerabilities. Again, the principles of transparency and engagement will shape the work of the group. It is important that a wide spectrum of financial participants be brought into the process, from banks and nonbank financial institutions to financial regulators to national authorities and multilateral standard-setting bodies and the broad academic community. This task is essential to the mission of the FSB; financial developments move at a rapid pace, and being able to quickly and accurately assess vulnerabilities is essential if we are to take action to prevent future crises. AnalysisFinally, the FSB members must employ a critical eye toward the effects of the regulations that have been put in place. Many of the reforms have been in place long enough for them to be evaluated. We can judge whether reforms are having their intended effects and making the financial system more resilient. Are any regulatory reforms causing unintended, adverse effects? Can we achieve the same, strong level of financial resilience with reforms that are more efficient, simple, transparent, and tailored? The FSB must champion efficient and effective regulation in order to maintain public support for the progress we have made. Key Pieces of the FSB's Work PlanNow I would like to turn to three prominent issues on the FSB's agenda in 2019. I will start with two relatively new issues that continue to evolve and grow in sophistication: nonbank financing and fintech, and then I will turn to the important work we are beginning on evaluating the effects of reforms aimed at ending too big to fail. FintechI will loosely define fintech as technology-enabled financial innovation that results in material changes to the provision of financial services. As is often the case when technological innovation meets established business, fintech has attracted a great deal of attention, ranging from utopian claims to hostile skepticism. Claims about fintech's promise abound: it has the power and potential to reduce economic inequality, increase financial inclusion, and boost economic growth. Through the introduction of new methodologies, greater information curation, and reduction in processing costs, fintech could potentially reduce financial volatility and vulnerabilities. We are already seeing significant changes to how many people around the world obtain financial services. For example, in Kenya, a mobile payments technology has introduced mobile wallets to millions of people, many of whom never had a bank account. In the United States, the largest mortgage provider is an online lender. In China, a technology firm started the world's largest money market fund. Yet, alongside this growth in fintech, as my predecessor as FSB chair emphasized, we as regulators must ensure that as we maximize the potential benefits in the development of fintech we minimize the potential risks and costs. The FSB monitors and analyzes the financial stability implications of financial innovation as part of our mandate to identify and address vulnerabilities in the global financial system. Let me outline two areas that we have started to examine in greater detail: the potential effects from the entry of large technology firms into financial services and the potential effects from the growth in decentralized financial technologies. Over the last decade, the world has witnessed an explosion of large technology firms that are weaving themselves into our daily lives: for example, Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Tencent, and Baidu. Some of these firms are increasingly providing some financial services, such as payments, credit, insurance, and asset management. Their involvement can support financial services broadly. For example, their technology may increase speed and efficiency, and the ubiquity of their presence in our lives may allow them to offer financial services in a more convenient way or at lower cost to consumers. Further, as they are only dipping their toes into the edges of the financial services water, the effects they have on the provision of financial services could grow enormously if they were to dive in. Looking at the technologies that underlie some of the recent innovative financial products, we see a move toward decentralization--that is, a movement toward technologies that connect financial market participants directly without an intermediary. The potential areas of impact are broad: settling interbank payments; verifying and reconciling trade finance invoices; executing, enforcing and verifying the performance of contracts; and keeping an audit trail to deter money laundering. Both the potential entry of large, established technology companies into financial services and the ability of technology to decentralize financial transactions raise a number of issues, some of which may touch on financial stability. Technological innovation offers the promise of a substantially more efficient financial system. But new systems, processes, and types of businesses will bring with them novel fragilities. We continue to be responsible for ensuring that the financial system be sufficiently resilient that businesses and households worldwide need not fear the collapse of the system that serves their needs. These are open questions that need to be addressed, and because they touch on issues of financial stability, the FSB is putting significant resources into understanding these potentially important developments. To be clear, we are not trying to oppose innovation, because innovation, including fintech, offers the world many potential benefits. As the group charged with ensuring financial stability, however, we have to work to ensure that we can reap the benefits offered by these new technologies without harming financial stability. We hope to offer some answers to these questions in the coming years and to do so in line with the principles I outlined earlier. We will address the questions with discipline and analytical rigor in a way that incorporates the views of the public and key stakeholders and that results in answers that are practical and intelligible. Nonbank Financial IntermediationThe second issue I would like to discuss is nonbank financing. Since the global financial crisis, nonbank financing has grown relatively rapidly, in both its absolute size and its relative importance in intermediating credit. In the jurisdictions that the FSB closely monitors, nonbank financial assets are just under 50 percent of total global financial assets, a share that has grown by close to 5 percentage points since 2009. Nonbank financial intermediation (the artist formerly known as "shadow banking") provides a valuable alternative to bank financing and helps to support real economic activity. Accordingly, the shift within the financial system toward nonbank financing represents a welcome increase in the diversity of the sources of lending to both firms and households. Even though the core of the financial system is much more resilient than before the global financial crisis, with strengthened bank capital and liquidity requirements, nonbank financing has been a source of systemic risk. Nonbank financing often features high leverage, maturity and liquidity mismatches, opaque structures, and concentrated holdings of risky assets. Nonbank financing can also lead to lower lending standards, bidding up the price of risky assets and sending an encouraging signal to credit underwriters. All of these channels played a role in the recent global financial crisis. More recently, new forms of interconnectedness between nonbank financial firms and the banking system have emerged that could, in some scenarios, act as channels for domestic and cross-border amplification of risks. Given these potential risks, and the large--and increasing--role for nonbank financing, we need to monitor closely its development. Is the growth of nonbank financing altering the existing market structures? Are there new vulnerabilities in the financial system? How will nonbank financing develop? To answer these important questions, the FSB is progressing on three related tracks. First, the FSB produces an annual report that outlines the developments in nonbank financing, detailing the global trends and potential risks. Second, the FSB promotes the resilience of nonbanks through the development of a range of policies to address systemic vulnerabilities where they arise, while not impeding the growth of sustainable nonbank financing models. In this way, we hope to promote resilient nonbank financial intermediation. The FSB, working alongside other standard-setting bodies such as the Basel Committee and IOSCO, is monitoring the implementation of these policies. Finally, knowing it is arrogant to expect that we got everything right the first time around, it is imperative that we start analyzing the effectiveness of the policies that have been implemented. How should we alter our policies? Have we modelled the risks from nonbank financing accurately? Have we missed a crucial new source of systemic risk? These are all questions that we must ask ourselves. Evaluation of Too-Big-To-Fail ReformsThe third issue that I would like to raise is the problem of "too big to fail"--that is, the perception by investors that some institutions will receive support from their governments if they become distressed. This weakens market discipline and allows such firms to become even larger, more leveraged and more complex. To address this challenge, the FSB and other global standard setters developed a framework and a set of policy measures intended to reduce the moral hazard risks posed by systemically important financial institutions. These measures are intended to make the financial system more resilient, for example through higher capital and liquidity requirements, while simultaneously allowing these institutions to fail without causing disruption to critical services, such as payments. A key element of the FSB's policy measures to address too big to fail is its total loss absorbing capacity standard. Under this standard, the FSB introduced a bail-in (in contrast to a bailout) strategy that necessarily employs a gone concern or post-failure loss-absorbing and recapitalization capacity for the set of global systemically important banks. Crucially, by raising resolution standards, we have improved the potential for non-disruptive bank failure. The implementation of these standards is most advanced in the banking sector, especially for the largest globally important banks. The FSB established crisis management groups, collections of supervisors who monitor resolution plans of the firms. At the same time, we must be conscious that we have not actually tested the failure of a large bank in the marketplace--surely a good thing! Standing over a decade on from the start of the financial crisis, we must ask ourselves, how effective have we been at reducing the problem of too big to fail? Have we achieved our objective to reduce or eliminate the problem? Have we introduced new unintended risks to the financial system or costs to other financial market participants? To start answering these important questions, as part of its broader effort to evaluate the effects of reforms, the FSB is launching an evaluation of the effects of these too-big-to-fail reforms. We intend to bring analytical rigor to these questions, and we recognize that the academic community has undertaken much work in this area. As a result, we will draw extensively on academic advisors during all phases of the work we are undertaking. I also encourage other experts in this field to look closely to the consultative document that will be coming from the study next year. We welcome the input as we undertake the study of this signature issue from the crisis. ConclusionLet me conclude by reiterating some of the broad themes I intended to convey today. First, I touched on some of the key principles that I hope will guide the FSB work while I am chair. Those principles include expanded engagement with a broad range of stakeholders and experts, rigorous and careful examination of financial vulnerabilities that may threaten our financial system, and analytical examination of past reforms to ensure that they are making the financial system as resilient as it can be in the most efficient manner possible. Second, I shared some of the key questions we are working on relating to the rise of large technology firms in the financial sector and decentralized financial technologies, the growing importance of the nonbank financial sector, and our burgeoning efforts to look at how well we have addressed too big to fail, the signature issue of the recent financial crisis. Moving forward there will surely be additional issues to address and areas to examine.a During my time as chair of the FSB, I hope to make progress not only on the areas I have outlined but on a range of forward-looking issues and continue to demonstrate the value of the FSB. International standard-setting bodies serve an important role within our global financial sector, and I look forward to the FSB advancing our progress and work in these areas. 1. The document is available athttp://www.fsb.org/2019/02/fsb-work-programme-for-2019/Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the National Agricultural Credit Conference, Washington, D.C. Good afternoon. It is a great pleasure for me to join the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City in welcoming you to the Federal Reserve Board for the 2019 National Agricultural Credit Conference. For nearly 80 years, these meetings have been at the forefront of important discussions for those with a stake in agricultural lending, with the first National Agricultural Credit meeting held in 1941. At that time and with war looming, there was a clear need to ensure that our nation's farmers had the resources and capability to support the nation in the wake of the great depression, deflation, and the dust bowl. This meeting provided a vital forum for candid conversation, to exchange information, and to forge relationships that would enable lenders to take steps to ensure a sound future for agriculture--a future supported by the efficient and effective provision of credit. In the decades since that first meeting, this conference has seen a number of boom and bust cycles in agriculture, most often the result of volatile swings in commodity prices, land price valuations, and borrowing costs for agricultural business owners. Through all of these challenges, this conference has provided an important opportunity to promote a greater understanding of emerging issues in agricultural finance. Further, the success of these meetings largely depends on the interactions of everyone here today, so I want to thank you for attending and for participating. I am honored to welcome you to the first conference meeting to be held at the Federal Reserve Board. And I'm pleased to support this group's mission to foster discussion on issues pertaining to ag finance, and I look forward to meeting with you and learning from the discussion. Today and tomorrow, we will discuss recent developments in agricultural credit markets. We will also hear from presenters on topics that connect in various ways to the agricultural sector. I am especially pleased to see there is a special focus on rural communities at this year's meeting. As many of you know, this topic holds a special place in my heart. My family has deep roots in rural Kansas and a long history in farming, ranching, and ag banking. I have spent much of my life and career living, working, and raising a family in a rural area. Rural communities are critical for our nation for many reasons including food production and processing, manufacturing, and leading innovation in these industries. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 97 percent of the country's land mass is rural, and about 60 million Americans call a rural community their home.1To put that number in perspective, the rural population of the United States is larger than the combined populations of the New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago metro areas. If we were talking about the economies of those great cities, we'd stress their regional differences, the complexities of demographic change, and the distinct challenges each city faces to remain vibrant and innovative. When the focus shifts to the rural economy, however, the discussion tends to be overly broad and simplistic. The diversity and complexity of our vast rural communities too often gets lost--and I think that needs to change. There are challenges in rural communities. We know them all too well. There is a notable gap in access to broadband. As of 2016, 31 percent of Americans in rural areas were not able to access broadband compared to just 2 percent of Americans in urban areas.2This can have a significant business impact on ag producers--for example, limiting access to internet-based cattle auctions or inhibiting the ability of dairies to leverage technology to remotely access animal nutritionists to formulate feed to maximize milk production. Many rural schools struggle to attract and keep qualified teachers who can teach STEM and advanced math classes. These subjects are vital to preparing our children for the opportunities and challenges of a more competitive and technological workplace.3 One in five people in rural areas have a bachelor's degree, compared to one in three in urban areas.4This educational disparity helps explain why the employment-to-population and labor force participation rates in rural areas are lower than in many urban areas.5Another contributing factor to low rural labor force participation is the opioid crisis, which the entire nation is struggling to overcome. Policymakers need to be aware of and be willing to confront these issues. But let me be clear: I am optimistic about the future of rural America. The narrative of rural decline is too sweeping and brushes aside the diversity of the rural experience. Just as many cities thrive while others struggle, there are deteriorating rural communities and rural communities that are thriving and growing. So let's build on these successes and highlight a few of the positives. Following six years of steady population losses, up through 2016, the rural population appears to have stabilized. And while employment is growing more slowly in rural areas than in urban areas, rural unemployment has recovered and is now 1 percentage point below pre-recession levels.6The rate of poverty in rural areas is also falling. From a peak in 2013, the rural poverty rate has fallen 2 percentage points to 16.4 percent in 2017. There are also many creative and innovative rural communities. In manufacturing, innovation rates are similar for urban and rural manufacturers, although the services sector in rural areas lags its urban counterparts.7And, I am greatly encouraged to see younger generations choosing to live in and return to their roots in rural communities, just as my family and I chose to do. These younger generations are often seeking a rural lifestyle and a deeper connection to a smaller community‑‑a community where they can have a lasting impact. They are bringing with them the same innovative spirit they bring to so many industries. For example, some of these young entrepreneurs and farmers are capitalizing on the recent trend for broader access to locally produced and sourced food. Which brings us back to our focus today: agriculture is the foundation for many rural economies and it is the central topic for this conference. Current conditions in agriculture appear to be stable, though at a low level of income, following sharp declines for several years from the peak in 2013. The prices of major agricultural commodities have also remained low in early 2019. For example, today, the price of corn is about 40 percent less than it was from 2010 to 2013. As noted in the Federal Reserve's latestFinancial Stability Report, farmland values are at exceptionally high levels, though down from their 2016 peak. And price-to-rent ratios are at historic highs. At the same time, equity levels at many farms are higher than in the past. We also see above-trend yields are helping to support many operators, though working capital at many farms has fallen along with incomes. Although the increase in problem loans associated with lower incomes has been modest, the Federal Reserve is monitoring the risk that has emerged in recent years. One risk that we are actively monitoring is the recent and devastating flooding in the Midwest and its effect on both agriculture and rural communities across the region. Our thoughts and prayers are with all those who live in the areas affected by this disaster. I would be especially interested to hear your thoughts on how the flooding may affect agricultural operations and how lenders are currently responding. The topics you are discussing today are integral to my role as governor. On Thursday, I will be visiting with and speaking to farmers and community bankers in Deming, New Mexico. An important part of my job is to hear directly from leaders like you and others across this country to better understand current challenges facing your communities, your companies, and your industry. My goal is to bring back the knowledge I gain from these discussions to inform and improve our work to support both the financial sector engaged in agricultural lending and our mission as the central bank of the United States. I hope that conferences like this will help generate a richer discussion about the challenges and unique advantages in rural America so we can develop more creative, effective and direct policy responses. A deeper debate that, for example, distinguishes between low-density and higher-density rural areas, between rural communities that are relatively isolated and those that are connected and close to thriving cities, will help us develop more durable solutions. Before I close, I want to thank you again, as well as the many people at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and from the Federal Reserve Board who helped organize this year's conference. Thanks to all of you for your work to ensure continued success for American agriculture. 1. U.S. Census Bureau,America Counts: Stories Behind the Numbers, "What Is Rural America?" August 9, 2017.Return to text 2. Federal Communications Commission (FCC),2018 Broadband Deployment Report(Washington: FCC, February 2, 2018).Return to text 3. Megan Lavalley,Out of the Loop(PDF)(Alexandria, VA: Center for Public Education, January 2018).Return to text 4. U.S. Census Bureau, "New Census Data Show Differences between Urban and Rural Populations," news release, December 8, 2016.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Monetary Policy Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, February 22, 2019), 10–12.Return to text 6. Board of Governors,Monetary Policy Report, 10–12.Return to text 7. Tim Wojan and Timothy Parker,Innovation in the Rural Nonfarm Economy: Its Effect on Job and Earnings Growth, 2010–14(PDF)(Washington: USDA, September 2017).Return to text