Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency The Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency have adopted a final rule that increases the threshold for residential real estate transactions requiring an appraisal from $250,000 to $400,000. The appraisal threshold was last changed in 1994. Given price appreciation in residential real estate transactions since that time, the change will provide burden relief without posing a threat to the safety and soundness of financial institutions. For transactions exempted from the appraisal requirement, the final rule requires institutions to obtain an evaluation to provide an estimate of the market value of real estate collateral. Evaluations are generally less burdensome than appraisals and have been required since the 1990s. The final rule incorporates the appraisal exemption for rural residential properties provided by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act and similarly requires evaluations for these transactions. The final rule also requires institutions to review appraisals for compliance with the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice. The agencies have consulted with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), and, as required by statute, have received its concurrence on the increased threshold. The CFPB released its letter concurring that the increased threshold provides reasonable protection for consumers who purchase 1-4 unit single-family residences. Federal RegisternoticeHTML Concurrence letter from the CFPB (PDF)
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the September 17-18 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the September 17-18 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Hancock Whitney Corporation, Gulfport, Mississippi, to merge with MidSouth Bancorp, Inc. and indirectly acquire MidSouth's national bank subsidiary, MidSouth Bank, N.A., both of Lafayette, Louisiana. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Vista Bank, Ralls, Texas, to establish a branch at 5840 West Northwest Highway, Dallas, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Homestar Financial Group, Inc., Manteno, IllinoisWritten Agreement, dated September 27, 2010Terminated September 3, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Optimumbank Holdings, Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, FloridaWritten Agreement, dated June 22, 2010Terminated September 11, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia decreasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Bank from 2‑3/4 percent to 2-1/2 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Thursday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Kansas City, decreasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 2‑3/4 percent to 2-1/2 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday invited public comment on a proposal to establish capital requirements for certain insurance companies supervised by the Board. The proposal builds on existing state-based insurance standards, while also establishing minimum capital requirements that are specific to the business of insurance. Under the proposed framework, known as the Building Block Approach (BBA), holding companies significantly engaged in insurance activities would be required to aggregate their state-based capital requirements into a consolidated requirement. The proposal would establish both minimum requirements and a buffer on top of the minimum. The BBA accounts for risks that are specific to the business of insurance and is different from the calculations used for bank capital requirements. However, the minimum standard under the BBA would be comparable to one of the key measures of banks' health, the minimum total capital ratio, which is set at 8 percent for banks. "The Building Block Approach looks to the well-known insurance capital standards from state regulators to establish minimum requirements," Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles said. "Banks and insurance companies can face materially different risks and this proposal takes that into account." The proposal builds on comments received on a conceptual proposal from June 2016 that described the BBA. The Board supervises depository institution holding companies, including those significantly engaged in insurance actaivities, and the Board currently oversees eight firms. Their insurance activities include life, title, and property and casualty, and the firms range in size from less than $10 billion in total assets to more than $250 billion. As part of the proposal, the Board will conduct a quantitative impact study of the BBA to better inform the framework. The Board also published a white paper that explains the methodology the Board proposes to use to adjust for the differences between different state-based insurance capital requirements and bank capital requirements. Comments on the proposal will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTMLComments for Proposal:Submit|View Report Forms
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: First State Bank Nebraska, Lincoln, NebraskaFlood insurance violation, civil money penalty, dated September 3, 2019 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: American Express Bank International (now known as Standard Chartered Bank International (Americas), Limited), Miami, FloridaCease and Desist Order, dated August 3, 2007 (PDF)Terminated August 27, 2019 After the enforcement action was issued in August 2007, Standard Chartered PLC, London, England, purchased American Express Bank International. After the acquisition, American Express Bank International was renamed Standard Chartered Bank International (Americas) Limited and remained subject to the action. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition against Bettie McGuire Shomaker, former employee of Highlands Union Bank, Abingdon, Virginia, for violating lending policies for her own benefit. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in July indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Although household spending has been rising at a strong pace, business fixed investment and exports have weakened. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In light of the implications of global developments for the economic outlook as well as muted inflation pressures, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1-3/4 to 2 percent. This action supports the Committee's view that sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective are the most likely outcomes, but uncertainties about this outlook remain. As the Committee contemplates the future path of the target range for the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair, John C. Williams, Vice Chair; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; Richard H. Clarida; Charles L. Evans; and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against the action were James Bullard, who preferred at this meeting to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent; and Esther L. George and Eric S. Rosengren, who preferred to maintain the target range at 2 percent to 2-1/4 percent. Implementation Note issued September 18, 2019
Governor Lael Brainard Before the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and Financial Institutions, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Chairman Meeks, Ranking Member Luetkemeyer, and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to be here today to discuss financial stability. The Federal Reserve's Role in Promoting Financial StabilitySafeguarding financial stability is integral to achieving the Federal Reserve's objectives of full employment and price stability. We need only look back a decade to see the dramatic damage from financial vulnerabilities that increased unchecked: millions of Americans lost their livelihoods and their homes, businesses failed, and the government had to provide extraordinary support. We learned from this experience that we must be especially vigilant to fortify the resilience of our financial system in good times when vulnerabilities may be building. Following the financial crisis, the Congress assigned important responsibilities for safeguarding the stability of the financial system to domestic regulators. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act created the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) to identify, coordinate and respond to emerging threats to the financial system. The Federal Reserve was assigned responsibility for enhanced supervision of systemic firms, and we have placed great emphasis on strengthening our approach to promoting financial stability. Safeguarding financial stability is a shared responsibility, requiring cooperation across U.S. regulatory agencies, as well as with foreign regulators and central banks. Chair Powell represents the Federal Reserve in the FSOC, where we participate alongside other domestic regulators and the Treasury, and I am pleased to be joined today by Dino Falaschetti of the Office of Financial Research. We also participate in a variety of international forums, including the Financial Stability Board, which Vice Chair Randal Quarles chairs, and where I serve as the Federal Reserve representative. The Board instituted a new organizational framework to carry out our responsibilities on financial stability. We created the Division of Financial Stability to strengthen our cross-disciplinary approach to the analysis of potential risks to the financial system and to support macroprudential supervision of large financial institutions. I serve as chair of the Committee on Financial Stability, which was created to guide staff work and make recommendations to the Board.1We develop a financial stability assessment four times per year that is discussed by the Board and the Federal Open Market Committee. We have also taken steps to ensure transparency and accountability. Last year, I was pleased that the Board accepted my recommendation to publish a publicFinancial Stability Reporttwice a year.2The report provides an account of our assessment of vulnerabilities as well as a summary of market participants' views on potential risks to the financial system. Through this public communication, we hope to gain feedback from the broader financial stability community and the public on threats to the financial system. How the Federal Reserve Approaches Financial StabilityOur approach to financial stability recognizes that the financial system and the broader economy are intertwined. The buildup of financial imbalances in good economic times has the potential to amplify shocks in a downturn and push the economy away from full employment and price stability. When financial vulnerabilities build, adverse developments can lead to disruptions in credit and other financial services, potentially amplifying declines in employment and economic activity. Our goal is to promote a resilient financial system that is able to continue meeting the demands of households and businesses for financial services when faced with adverse events. Accordingly, we have developed a systematic forward-looking approach to assessing financial vulnerabilities that could amplify negative shocks, transmitting damage more broadly. The historical record here and abroad points to several key areas of vulnerability. Vulnerabilities can build when there is excessive or poorly underwritten borrowing across many households, such that incomes are not keeping up with debt payments. Similarly, elevated levels of corporate debt can create problems not only for the borrowers, but also for lenders, when the business cycle turns, and debt servicing obligations or refinancing prove challenging, leading businesses to pull back on investment and employment. Vulnerabilities historically have often been associated with conditions where asset prices are higher than what economic fundamentals support, often because of elevated risk appetite, potentially leading to much larger-than-expected losses should a sharp correction occur. Separately, we track leverage in the financial system for signs that banks and other financial intermediaries potentially have inadequate buffers of capital to absorb adverse shocks, increasing the risk of their distress and possible spillovers to the financial system. We also monitor funding risk in the financial system. Where banks or nonbank financial intermediaries fund long-term lending through potentially flighty short-term borrowing, it may pose the risk of a loss of confidence, precipitating a withdrawal of short-term funding and strains on institutions as they try to meet withdrawals. To illustrate, I will provide my brief assessment in each of these areas. In contrast to the years preceding the crisis, when household borrowing was growing at a pace far above that of gross domestic product (GDP), it has since come down and is now growing more slowly than the economy overall. Moreover, while much of the increase before the crisis reflected borrowing that proved unsustainable, more recent borrowing has been concentrated among households with strong credit profiles. That said, the increase in student debt in recent years deserves attention, although not primarily through the prism of financial stability. The regulated financial sector is more resilient, owing to far-reaching reforms as well as favorable conditions. Insurers appear generally well capitalized, and broker-dealers, including those not affiliated with large bank holding companies, have reduced their leverage in recent years. In contrast, there has been some evidence of rising use of leverage by hedge funds over the past couple of years. Large banks increased both the size and quality of their capital buffers following the crisis, although the risk-weighted capital ratio at the largest banks has moved down somewhat as payouts have exceeded earnings over the past couple of years. Financial reform has reduced funding risks associated with banks and money market funds. Large banks subject to liquidity regulation are less reliant on unstable short-term wholesale funding and have thicker liquidity buffers. Money market reforms have also reduced funding risks. A range of asset prices remain high relative to historical benchmarks, even with the recent financial market volatility. In particular, yields on high-yield corporate bonds relative to Treasury securities remain somewhat narrow on a historical basis despite recent increases. Similarly, although they have moved up in recent months, spreads on leveraged loans remain in the bottom half of their range since the financial crisis, which is notable given the evidence of weakening protections. Finally, capitalization rates on commercial real estate properties, which measure annual income relative to prices for recently transacted properties, have been low relative to Treasury yields. In addition to generating losses for investors, declines in valuations could make it more challenging for firms to obtain or extend financing—especially among risky, indebted firms—which in turn could be amplified by the high levels of risky corporate debt. Finally, business borrowing has risen more rapidly than GDP for much of the current expansion and now sits near its historical peak. The run-up in corporate debt has brought the ratio of debt to assets close to its highest level in two decades on an overall basis, and this is also true for speculative-grade and unrated firms. And whereas previously, mostly high-earning firms with relatively low leverage were taking on additional debt, analysis of detailed balance sheet information indicates that firms with high leverage, high interest expense ratios, and low earnings and cash holdings have been increasing their debt loads the most. Historically, high leverage has been linked to elevated financial distress and retrenchment by businesses in economic downturns. Regarding corporate bonds outstanding, recent years have witnessed little change in the relative shares of investment-grade bonds and high-yield bonds. Credit quality has deteriorated within the investment-grade segment, where the share of bonds rated at the lowest investment-grade level has reached near-record levels. As of mid-2019, just over half of investment-grade corporate bonds outstanding were at the lowest end of the investment-grade segment. In comparison, the share of high-yield bonds outstanding that are rated "deep junk" has stayed flat at about one-third over the past few years, well below the financial crisis peak of 50 percent. In an economic downturn, widespread downgrades of these low-rated investment-grade bonds to speculative-grade ratings could induce some investors to sell them rapidly—for instance, because lower-rated bonds have higher regulatory capital requirements or because bond funds have limits on the share of non-investment-grade bonds they hold. This concern may be higher now than in the past, since total assets under management in bond mutual funds have more than doubled in the past decade, and these funds now hold about one-tenth of the corporate bond market. The redemption behavior of investors in these funds during a market correction is unclear. Further down the credit quality ladder, there has been sizable growth in leveraged lending, accompanied by a notable deterioration in underwriting standards. Net issuance of leveraged loans to risky borrowers grew rapidly last year and boosted leveraged loans outstanding to a level exceeding $1 trillion overall, although the pace of issuance has slowed more recently as the interest rate environment has shifted. While leveraged loans have traditionally had important investor protections, covenants for leveraged loans issued in the past few years have weakened dramatically, and they often include features that increase opacity and risk. A substantial share of the leveraged loans are packaged in collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) whose issuance increased sharply in 2018 and has since moderated somewhat. Many large banks originate leveraged loans with an intent to distribute, often to CLOs. While the direct exposures of the banking system in the form of loan portfolios and warehousing exposures can be monitored, there are also indirect exposures, including through bank investments in CLOs and credit lines, which bear vigilance. By contrast, nonbank exposures are harder for us to track. To date, the default rate on leveraged loans has been at the low end of its historical range, and corporate credit conditions have been favorable, with low interest expenses and low expected default rates. However, if spreads rise sharply or economic conditions deteriorate significantly, we could see downgrades, refinancing challenges, rising delinquencies and defaults, and losses to investors. Recognizing that financial imbalances played a key role in each of the past three U.S. downturns, policy should seek to moderate financial vulnerabilities when they are likely to materially exacerbate an economic downturn, leading to deeper declines in output and higher levels of unemployment. Both economic theory and econometric evidence point to the risk that excesses in corporate debt markets could amplify adverse shocks and contribute to job losses.Over-indebted businesses may face payment strains when earnings fall unexpectedly, and they may respond by pulling back on employment and investment. The slowdown in activity lowers investor demand for risky assets, thereby raising spreads and depressing valuations. As business losses accumulate, and delinquencies and defaults rise, banks are less willing or able to lend. This dynamic feeds on itself, potentially amplifying downside risks into more serious financial stresses or a downturn. Recognizing this feedback loop between financial imbalances and the macroeconomy, in addition to strong through-the-cycle regulatory requirements, our toolkit includes a countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The CCyB is intended to require the nation's largest banks to build capital when conditions are favorable to sustain resilience for times when there is elevated risk of above-normal losses, which often follows periods of rapid asset price appreciation or credit growth. CCyB requirements are intended to lean against rising risks at a time when the degree of monetary tightening needed to achieve the same goal could be inconsistent supporting full employment and target inflation. And they build resilience, unlike monetary policy. Second, when conditions are favorable, the covered banks could build the modest additional buffer simply by moderately reducing payouts. Third, the CCyB is a simple, predictable, and slow-moving tool that applies equally across all large banks. It does not single out shortfalls in particular banks or result in volatility in individual banks' stressed capital requirements. Finally, the additional capital can be released when conditions deteriorate to ensure the ability of large banks to lend into a downturn. The criteria for implementing the CCyB described in the Board's framework of September 2016 are calibrated so that the CCyB will be above its minimum value of zero about one-third of the time, when financial vulnerabilities are assessed to be in the upper one-third of their historical distribution.3The Board votes once a year on the level of the CCyB. The Board voted to set the CCyB at zero earlier this year.4Many other jurisdictions have raised their CCyB above zero.5 Going forward, we will continue to monitor financial vulnerabilities closely, recognizing the potential for such vulnerabilities to amplify any negative developments. We plan to share our assessment with you in our nextFinancial Stability Reportlater in the year and look forward to hearing from you about any issues that warrant further monitoring. Thank you and I look forward to your questions. 1. Federal Reserve Boardhttps://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve,Financial Stability Report(Washington: Board of Governors).Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, "Framework for Implementing the U.S. Basel III Countercyclical Capital Buffer (PDF)," September 8, 2016.Return to text 4. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, "Federal Reserve Board Votes to Affirm the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) at the Current Level of 0 Percent," press release, March 6, 2019.Return to text 5. See the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, updated August 21, 2019,https://www.bis.org/bcbs/ccyb/index.htm#table.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles At the Financial Stability Board Workshop on Pre-Positioning, Ring-Fencing, and Market Fragmentation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Regulatory and supervisory colleagues, members of the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) Resolution Steering Group (ReSG) and Standing Committee on Supervisory and Regulatory Cooperation (SRC), representatives from academia, and the private sector: Thank you for being here, and for taking part in today's workshop on pre-positioning, ring-fencing, and market fragmentation. I particularly want to thank Ryozo Himino, our new SRC chair, for his leadership in highlighting these issues; his remarks and efforts around market fragmentation are especially timely, as we begin the difficult task of examining the post-crisis reforms. I also want to recognize and thank Sir Jon Cunliffe, for proposing a workshop where we can explore these issues together; as he recently said, quoting Ben Franklin, "we must all hang together, or most assuredly, we shall all hang separately."1Finally, I want to thank the leadership and staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, for not just accommodating us, but making us feel welcome in the nation's first capital.2 The Philadelphia Fed is three blocks north, and another three west, from the birthplace of American central banking. That birthplace is not the site of the First or Second Banks of the United States, whose neoclassical headquarters are still standing and open to the public.3Instead, the first national bank sat just west of North 3rd Street and Chestnut: the Bank of North America.4 Its charter came from a new nation on the verge of bankruptcy.5Six years of war had drained an already-short supply of domestic specie, a necessity for international trade. So little specie remained in the treasury that the "continentals," used to finance the war, had depreciated to about two cents on the dollar. The United States lacked a common, sound currency to settle its debts, and without federal authority to levy taxes, it lacked a ready path back to solvency. (Another Franklin quote applies: "Glass, China, and Reputation, are easily crack'd, and never well mended."6) In desperation, the Founding Fathers made a successful Philadelphia merchant, Robert Morris, their new superintendent of finance. Drawing on a plan from Alexander Hamilton, Morris proposed a new institution, with the power to issue notes backed by $400,000 in private capital. When it could muster only a fraction of that in subscriptions, the country turned overseas. A substantial loan in French bullion financed the new bank and saved the republic from collapse. America could declare independence, but she could not secure it without credit from abroad. That lesson was both hard earned and short-lived. Four years later, a new Pennsylvania legislature claimed that dividends to foreign creditors were draining much-needed specie from America's shores. James Wilson, Pennsylvania's representative to the Continental Congress, wrote an impassioned legal and political defense of the bank, emphasizing its role in international commerce. He quoted Sir James Steuart, one of the world's first economists, calling banking "that branch of credit which best deserves the attention of a statesman."7It wasn't enough. The charter was repealed—a pattern that would repeat with two more national banks, with even more disruptive results.8 International banking is a very different enterprise than two centuries ago, but it still "best deserves the attention of a statesman." Cross-border finance is an essential part of the international economic infrastructure. It is a conduit to direct financial resources to their most efficient use, regardless of national borders. It channels capital to places and projects it could not otherwise reach, fostering innovation, international ties, and the exchange of ideas. At its best, it is also self-sustaining, extending the financial and technical capacity of emerging economies, and expanding their role in the global economy. America's experience, however, reminds us that the benefits of international banking are not automatic. Cross-border finance is a common good, and like any common good, sustaining it requires collective action from a range of parties.9These parties are both public and private, elected and appointed—not just central banks and supervisors, but finance ministries, legislatures, and commercial banking organizations. Each has a distinct mission and a duty to serve a distinct set of stakeholders. When those duties conflict, trust alone cannot sustain cooperation; only a careful configuration that recognizes mutual and separate interests can do so. With such a configuration, the cross-border financial system can be open, stable, and safe; without it, the system can become unpredictable and dangerous. "Ring-fencing" often serves as a catch-all for this dynamic, capturing any and all impediments to the free flow of finance, however and whenever they arise. However, as I have noted previously, that term obscures a distinction that plays a vital role in cross-border finance—between prudently placing a constrained amount of capital and liquidity within jurisdictions and legal entities before a crisis, and competitively seizing capital and liquidity during a crisis. This distinction determines more than just the possibility of an orderly cross-border resolution. Pre-positioning of resources—when properly calibrated—can also provide the certainty that lets cross-border finance occur at all. Certainty is the critical ingredient in achieving the careful configuration of interests I described. Financial institutions need some certainty about the requirements they face by participating in cross-border activity. Supervisors need some certainty about safety and soundness, not just of the foreign banks they host, but of their domestic banks operating overseas. Creditors and investors need some certainty that a foreign authority won't abrogate their contracts. Elected officials need certainty that their constituents are not unfairly disadvantaged. All these parties—and the public—need some certainty that the resources promised to them won't disappear at the first sign of stress. Certainty fosters financial stability. It supports clear monitoring and thoughtful planning, by both institutions and their regulators. It signals the clear intention of authorities to cooperate, during normal times and in an emergency. It increases the odds that a cross-border financial institution will keep operating through a crisis. It fosters more and deeper cross-border financial activity, by decreasing its risks and increasing its benefits, both to participants and to the global economy. Certainty does require tradeoffs. None of us has perfect foresight. If we pursue certainty to the complete exclusion of any flexibility to respond to future events, we may end up undermining our ultimate goal: maintaining a financial system that is resilient to unexpected shocks. However, this workshop begins by revisiting the consequences when certainty disappears. These consequences were on full display during the financial crisis—the collapse in cross-border activity, when trust broke down; the rush to secure assets and prioritize domestic claims; the ambiguous relationship between banks' resources and their needs; and the long, halting return to a more integrated financial system. Today's panelists will also revisit the steps that the international community took to address those consequences. The workshop also examines the effect those steps have had on cross-border financial intermediation and the management of global financial institutions. The panelists will provide their views on whether we have achieved the right balance among certainty, the kinds of economic opportunity that cross-border finance promotes, and the flexibility to manage through a future disruption. This decade-long account is the latest chapter in a much older story, whose moral is clear: in regulating cross-border finance, expectations matter. When capital and liquidity requirements are imposed only at the level of the consolidated institution, they create a good deal of flexibility, but they cannot reassure host supervisors that sufficient resources will truly be available in a time of need. Opaque, vague, and uncertain requirements for pre-positioning and reporting, and lack of clarity on when they may be imposed, make compliance difficult, costly, and potentially disruptive. Pre-positioning, at levels that go beyond what may be needed in a given jurisdiction in stress, can also create rigidity and limit growth opportunities. The consequence of getting the balance between these considerations wrong is a less integrated and less resilient global financial system. These details are as complex as they are important, and I commend my FSB colleagues, particularly the ReSG, for exploring them in the context of the too-big-to-fail reforms.10The FSB's work brings together a wide range of experts to better understand the intent, implementation, and effects of our post-crisis work. As with market fragmentation, the broader context of this work matters immensely, including the desired impact of the reforms and their anticipated and unanticipated consequences. Within the Federal Reserve Board, we are considering similar questions—not only what level of loss-absorbing capacity is appropriate for the material legal entities within a large, cross-border financial institution, but also what tools we and other supervisors use to ensure such capacity exists. The roles that supervision and regulation play in addressing these issues are important. There are clear advantages to setting liquidity and capital pre-positioning requirements through regulation. Regulation ensures consistency and clarity; provides a conduit for improvement, through public notice and comment; and offers a clear rational basis for any measures imposed. There is also a role for supervision, not just in addressing the particular conditions at a given firm, but in generating and sharing better information on how stress may manifest, not just in the firm overall, but in each jurisdiction where it operates. More information sharing by home to host supervisors may help convince host supervisors that they need fewer pre-positioned resources in their jurisdiction. Today's workshop is a worthy step forward in discussing these issues, and towards preserving and expanding the benefits of cross-border finance. We are all ultimately responsible for creating the conditions where capital can flow freely, giving rise to genuine opportunity and sustainable growth. We should patiently and thoughtfully examine how best to create those conditions. As William Penn put it, "business can never be well done, that is not well understood: Which cannot be without patience."11I look forward to engaging together, rigorously and openly, in the work ahead. 1. John Bartlett,Familiar Quotations(10thed., 1919).Return to text 2. U.S. Senate, "The Nine Capitals of the United States" (citing Robert Fortenbaugh,The Nine Capitals of the United States(1948), at 9).Return to text 3. National Park Service, "First Bank of the United States" (October 18, 2016); National Park Service, "Second Bank of the United States" (April 12, 2017).Return to text 4. Library of Congress, "Bank of North America, 305-307 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, Philadelphia County, PA" (documentation compiled after 1933).Return to text 5. This account is derived from Edward S. Kaplan,The Bank of the United States and the American Economy(1999), at 3-10, and from Janet Wilson, "The Bank of North America and Pennsylvania Politics: 1781-1787," 66(1)Penn. Magazine of History and Biography3 (Jan. 1942).Return to text 6. Benjamin Franklin,Poor Richard's Almanack(1732), 160.Return to text 7. James Wilson,Considerations on the Bank ofNorth-America(1785) (quoting Sir James Steuart,An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy[sic]: Being an Essay on the Science of Domestic Policy in Free Nations, in which are particularly considered Population, Agriculture, Trade, Industry, Money, Coin, Interest, Circulation, Banks, Exchange, Public Credit, and Taxes,"Vol. 2 (1770), at 358). Supporters also produced more popular literature. In a satire in thePennsylvania Gazette, a critic of the bank complains: "All honest men should support their country, by cheating their creditors: Creditors are the bane of a young country: So here is confusion to them all—a tender-law forever!" Janet Wilson,supranote 5, at 12 quotingPennsylvania Gazette(September 21, 1785).Return to text 8. Unlike its successors, the bank's headquarters no longer stands; it was demolished sometime after 1959.SeeLibrary of Congress,supranote 4.Return to text 9.SeeElinor Ostrom and Oliver E. Williamson, "Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric Governance of Complex Economic Systems," Nobel Prize Lecture delivered at Aula Magna, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden (December 8, 2009).Return to text 10. Financial Stability Board, "FSB launches evaluation of too-big-to-fail reforms and invites feedback from stakeholders," news release (May 23, 2019).Return to text 11. William Penn,Some Fruits of Solitude in Reflections and Maxims(1682), 399.Return to text
Thomas Sullivan, Associate Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and Members of the Committee, thank you for your time and for your invitation to testify today on the Federal Reserve's efforts with respect to global insurance regulatory and supervisory forums. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board) engages on global insurance regulatory and supervisory issues chiefly through its participation in the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) alongside the U.S. Treasury's Federal Insurance Office, state insurance regulators, and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). The U.S. members of the IAIS are informally known as "Team USA." The mission of the IAIS is to promote effective supervision of internationally active insurance companies. It is important to note that none of the standards set by the IAIS have binding effect on the United States. We believe that it is in our national interest to engage in the international insurance standards-development process so that it produces standards that protect the U.S. market and U.S. consumers when foreign insurers operate here and are appropriate for U.S. companies operating abroad. The Federal Reserve's participation at the IAIS is consistent with our responsibilities under law.1The Federal Reserve regulates insurance holding companies that own a federally insured depository institution and any designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). The insurance thrift holding companies supervised by the Federal Reserve represent over 10 percent of U.S. insurance industry assets and span a wide range of sizes, structures, and business activities. The core focus in our supervision is ensuring the safety and soundness of the supervised insurance institutions and protecting their subsidiary depository institutions. We leverage the work of state insurance regulators where possible and continuously look for opportunities to coordinate with them. Our collaboration with the state insurance regulators and other Team USA members is prominently visible in our advocacy at the IAIS. Collectively, Team USA brings the relevant technical expertise to the work of the IAIS to identify and to address a range of policy issues. We are committed to continuing to support approaches that are appropriate for U.S. companies operating internationally. The Federal Reserve also participates in insurance policy work streams as a member of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which is responsible for monitoring and assessing vulnerabilities affecting the global financial system and recommending actions to address them. As part of this role, the FSB provides an appropriate framework for the work of the IAIS, but the responsibility for setting detailed international standards for insurance regulations rests with the IAIS. In my testimony today, I would like to highlight and elaborate upon a few items discussed in the submitted reportEfforts of the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System with respect to Global Insurance Regulatory or Supervisory Forums in 2018. First, I will comment on the efforts of the IAIS to develop an Insurance Capital Standard (ICS), arguably its most significant current project. Along with that, I will discuss the Federal Reserve's recent proposal of a capital rule that would apply to depository institution holding companies significantly engaged in insurance. The efficacy of this domestic approach should be useful to us during upcoming IAIS deliberations. After this, I will provide an update on the Federal Reserve's efforts to increase transparency at the IAIS and FSB. Insurance Capital StandardIn 2013, the IAIS announced its plans to develop an ICS. The IAIS intends for the ICS to be a global, risk-based capital standard that is fit for application to all large internationally active insurance groups. To that end, the IAIS has engaged in two public consultations and four field tests, which assessed the impact of the ICS using data from large insurance companies that was provided on a voluntary basis. The IAIS plans to approve the ICS for confidential use during a five-year monitoring period. The IAIS intends for the structure of the ICS to remain relatively stable during the monitoring period so that the current design and calibration of the ICS can be evaluated. To aid in the evaluation, large internationally active insurance groups will be able to report confidentially on the ICS to their home country supervisors. An international standard, such as the ICS, could limit regulatory arbitrage and help provide a level playing field for internationally active insurance groups. An international standard could also help to ensure that internationally active U.S. companies are not held to bespoke and onerous standards when they operate in foreign countries. Additionally, it could reduce risk to U.S. consumers by ensuring that foreign insurers operating within the United States are held to appropriate capital regulation by their foreign groupwide supervisor. There are concerns that the ICS currently includes a valuation method and other requirements that may not be optimal for the U.S. insurance market. Insurers generally operate with a buy-and-hold, long-term approach to investing, yet the ICS, as proposed, uses a market- based valuation method, whose volatility could ultimately reduce the availability of insurance products with long-term guarantees. Because of these concerns, the Board has proposed applying a building block approach (BBA) to the insurers we supervise rather than the ICS in its current formulation. The BBA builds on existing state-based insurance standards, while also establishing minimum capital requirements that are specific to the business of insurance. The Board specifically sought to leverage the well-known insurance capital standards from state regulators to establish minimum requirements. I support the NAIC's efforts to move forward with developing a Group Capital Calculation (GCC), which they successfully have moved into field testing.2We will continue to work with the NAIC to align these approaches to the greatest extent possible. The Federal Reserve intends to continue to advocate for the recognition of the building block approach internationally. Through Team USA's efforts, we believe space has been created in the international dialogue for the BBA and GCC to be evaluated and recognized as an outcome-equivalent approach for the ICS. The BBA can assist in our collective advocacy by demonstrating how an approach that leverages existing capital requirements can work. Because of the concerns regarding the current design of the ICS, U.S. members support continued development of the ICS during the monitoring period. Furthermore, substantive changes to the ICS may emerge during the monitoring period given that elements of the developing standard have not been thoroughly tested and key areas remain unresolved. TransparencyTeam USA has continued to advocate for increased transparency at the IAIS. For example and most importantly, all significant policy proposals are subject to public consultation periods. Recently, the IAIS has established a norm that these periods will be for at least 60 days, allowing adequate time for the public to comment. We also have advocated for obtaining stakeholder feedback earlier in the IAIS process. The development by IAIS of a Holistic Framework to mitigate systemic risk from the insurance industry is a good example of this. At the start of the IAIS's review of its macroprudential approach, key stakeholders were invited to present recommended changes. Several stakeholders suggested replacing the entities-based approach, which involved designating certain insurers as systemically risky, with an activities-based approach. The IAIS then worked to develop stakeholder ideas into a conceptual public consultation document, which was released in late 2017. Following this conceptual consultation, the IAIS released a more detailed consultation on its Holistic Framework in November 2018. Finally, earlier this year, the IAIS solicited input on the most granular details of the framework and plans to issue a final Holistic Framework this November. While this extensive engagement process required time, the IAIS has benefited from the engagement, and stakeholder reaction has generally been very supportive in this area. The Federal Reserve has also worked to increase transparency at the FSB through its leadership role. Since December 2, 2018, Federal Reserve Vice Chair for Supervision, Randal K. Quarles has served as FSB chair. He has made increasing FSB transparency and stakeholder engagement a key part the group's agenda. Earlier this year, for the first time in the FSB's history, the FSB publically disseminated its comprehensive work program. Vice Chair Quarles and the FSB continue to look for ways to further increase stakeholder engagement. The FSB is currently conducting a study of its regional consultative groups, which will improve the efficacy of outreach and feedback mechanisms. The FSB has also increased its direct engagement with insurers, including on the ICS. Recently, the FSB and IAIS held a joint stakeholder engagement event with representatives of the large internationally active insurance groups. Thank you. I look forward to answering your questions. 1. See 12 USC section 1467a.Return to text 2. See NAIC, “Group Capital Calculation (E) Working Group."Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At a Fed Listens Event sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri In keeping with the purpose ofFed Listens,I would like to spend most of our time in conversation, but I do want to offer a few thoughts about why the Fed is reaching out to seek a broad range of views, and what we are trying to achieve. This kind of comprehensive outreach on monetary policy is new for the Fed. For many decades, there was a sense at the Board that the public wasn't interested or willing to dive into the complexities of monetary policy. That view has changed in a fundamental way, especially in the aftermath of the financial crisis when it was urgently important that the public understand what we were doing. So we began explaining as accessibly and clearly as we could what we were doing and why. Now we are listening broadly as well. Since I became a Board member almost a year ago, it's become clear to me that people not only are willing to engage on complex economic issues, they also want to know that their concerns are being taken into account on issues that affect their financial well-being. The movement toward greater transparency and public engagement is ongoing, and advancing that effort is one of my top priorities. At the same time, we recognize that clear communication of our policies actually helps us achieve our goals. When we communicate our views on the economic outlook and our expectations for where interest rates may be heading, consumers and businesses take that information into account when making decisions on spending, investment, and hiring. For that reason, our policy communications are themselves an important part of the Fed's toolkit for influencing the direction of the economy. Fed Listensis a natural outcome of this commitment to public engagement. We want to hear from people, from different parts of the country and different sectors of the economy, about how monetary policy affects them and their communities. It is our responsibility as a public institution to be accountable to the public. And, hearing a broad range of perspectives on these issues will help us make good decisions as we consider new approaches to monetary policy. This afternoon, individual stakeholders representing different economic sectors will meet to discuss their perspectives. Later, President Bullard and I will do what we came here to do, which is listen. I come from a background in farming and ranching, so, naturally, I am interested in hearing the St. Louis Fed's Agriculture Industry Council's priorities for the monetary policy review. And as a former community banker, I am of course interested in what your Community Depository Institution Council has to share with us today. But I am also eager for other perspectives, and I look forward to all of the presentations. I want to know, for example, how monetary policy affects rural communities, like the one I come from in Kansas, but I also want to know how it affects urban communities. Our monetary policy review will have implications for financial markets, but we also want to know more about what the effect will be on Main Street—which, by the way, happens to be the name of the street where my family's bank is located, in Council Grove, Kansas. My colleagues and I are keenly aware of our responsibility to focus on how the decisions we make affect the real economy for people in communities all across the country. And we will continue these listening sessions for the rest of this year as we consider possible changes to the Federal Reserve's approach to monetary policy. The two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices—are determined by the Congress and are not subject to our review. How we reach those goals is what is up for discussion. One question I hope to explore is whether we need new strategies to more effectively achieve our goals. For many years, inflation has run modestly below our 2 percent objective. Given that, it would be helpful to hear from you whether you think the Federal Open Market Committee should consider strategies that aim to have inflation exceed our target for a time, to make up for the earlier period of time when it fell short. Or would that threaten the decades of success the Fed has had keeping the public's expectations for inflation low and stable? A related question concerns the Fed's existing toolkit for monetary policy. Currently, our policy levers include setting interest rates, adjusting the size and composition of our balance sheet, and communicating the expected future path of policy. Are there other tools we should consider to help us reach and sustain our objectives more effectively? I also want to know how the Federal Open Market Committee's communication of its policy framework to the public might be improved. How can we help you better understand our work so you can hold us accountable? Your perspectives on questions like these are a vital part of this monetary policy review, so I want to thank you, again, for your time and your contribution. Once the policy review is complete, we will share our findings with the public, probably during the first half of next year. And now I look forward to our discussion.
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the “Law and Macroeconomics,” a conference at Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C. Good morning. I would like to thank Georgetown University Law Center and the conference organizers, Anna Gelpern and Adam Levitin, for the opportunity to speak to you. I was particularly delighted to be asked to speak at today's conference because the topic is law and macroeconomics, a field that my experience has persuaded me is of the first importance, but ill understood, and surprisingly understudied. Now, this may at first blush sound like a beloved former president, venturing into a grocery store—"Golly, can you believe these scanners!?"—because the field of law and economics was already sturdily established when I was in law school back in the Coolidge Administration, and is now well over half a century old. It has been the source of some of the most innovative and influential legal scholarship over the lifetimes of everyone here, and in many ways the insights of the law and economics movement have become the default framework that policy makers and practitioners alike use when we think about the law conceptually, and often even at the level of granular application. Yet, while we have called this law and economics, it would be more precise to call it law andmicroeconomics. Both law and microeconomics are centrally concerned withincentives—how are they constructed, how do they operate, how do legal or economic actors respond to them—and the interplay between these different ways to think about incentives has been a natural and fruitful focus of investigation in a broad range of legal studies: tort law, property law, criminal law, contract law, corporate law. But both law and economics are also centrally concerned withsystems, the performance and relationships of broad aggregates of laws or economic activity. Not merely how do individual actors react to changes in incentives, but how do large-scale combinations of actors respond to changes in systems: how are legal or economic systems constructed, how do they operate, how do those systems constrain wide areas of human activity. The interplay between those two ways of thinking about systems would seem to be as natural and fruitful a focus of investigation as is law and microeconomics, but it is only just beginning to be thought of as a field in itself. For a concrete example, think about the often observed fact that corporate profit margins have been increasing steadily over the last few decades. Law is likely to have been a significant element in this evolution, but not any individual law. Rather an entire system of laws—laws relating to corporate governance, corporate combinations, taxation, litigation, labor—have evolved over an extended period of time. And, under this theory, one outcome of this system—higher corporate profit margins—would likely give firms greater scope to increase wages without increasing prices, thus offering a potential explanation for the flattening of the Phillips curve, the traditional macroeconomic relationship between the unemployment rate and inflation. For a policymaker who accepted this theory, his comfort in maintaining a very low rate of unemployment could depend significantly on his understanding of that underlying legal system and his estimation of how its evolution would likely proceed in the future. Thus, the formal union of law and macroeconomics should seek to examine the interplay between a legal system and macroeconomic outcomes, above and beyond the connections a particular law may have with its impact on human behavior. Scholars and policymakers have spent our time primarily thinking about the impact of single laws, but it is appropriate to focus more broadly, especially since we have in fact repeatedly sought over the past century to revamp our system of laws to improve macroeconomic outcomes. Consider the roaring debate in the half-dozen years after the 1929 market crash that led to the establishment of the foundations of federal financial regulation in the United States. Laws creating the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and a federal deposit insurance and receivership framework, establishing the Securities and Exchange Commission, and greatly expanding the responsibilities and capabilities of the Federal Reserve System were very purposefully intended to help restore confidence in the U.S. financial system as a necessary condition to foster a recovery from the devastation of the Great Depression. In essence, we designed and implemented a new system of financial regulatory laws to alter macroeconomic outcomes, not only to affect individual behavior. The debate around those laws, in the 1930s, was not an academic one, because the pain and suffering of that era was evident—at the time Congress was debating the Banking Act of 1935, which established the modern framework for the federal bank regulation and supervision, the unemployment rate in the United States was still 20 percent.1 I will leave to others the question of whether every detail of the laws passed in this period was equally effective, in the short or long term, in promoting macroeconomic stability. But we should recognize that rules to promote financial stability and a healthy economy have deep roots in the American legal tradition. The Post-Crisis International ConsensusBuilding upon that strong tradition, I would like to focus this morning's remarks on the role that law and macroeconomics has played since the financial crisis in promoting a more stable economy. I am, of course, referring to macroprudential financial regulation. Let's rewind the tape. After many decades of remarkable financial stability in the United States since the 1930s, the focus of financial oversight had moved away from systemic risks. Prior to the financial crisis, the better part of our regulatory framework wasmicroprudential in nature—individual laws geared toward mitigating the fallout from idiosyncratic shocks to firms. This framework was designed to protect investors and depositors, viewed negative shocks as not originating from the financial system, and did not take into account risks that might be shared by financial firms.2This is not to say that regulators did not understand the consequences of an interconnected system and the potential of contagion. For instance, the U.S. government, under the able leadership of Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, recognized and responded to the financial stability risks of the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s. The United States had interests in stabilizing allies in Latin America, but a central part of the motivation was to contain potential risks to the U.S. economy. The events of 2008–09 redefined our mission by more explicitly connecting macroeconomic and financial stability, as in the 1930s. Congress and the executive branch embraced a sweeping response, designing a system of laws to reflect a recognition that the cumulative, interconnected behavior of financial institutions had implications for financial stability and that even the behavior of a single large and complex institution could have implications for financial stability. This new system was also adopted at the international level. Starting with the G20 summit in Washington, D.C., in November 2008, the global community established the runway for a structural change. The subsequent G20 summit in London led to the establishment of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), with a strengthened mandate as a successor to the Financial Stability Forum. Subsequently, including at the following summit in Pittsburgh, world leaders agreed that the supervision of individual financial institutions had to account for the financial system as a whole, and it was recognized that shocks could originate from within the system and could spread to institutions with common exposures. In other words, the supervisory framework had to bemacroprudential—focusing on mitigating systemic risk and accounting for macroeconomic consequences.3This reorientation was a defining part of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act, and internationally, in the Basel III Accord. Section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, in particular, requires the Board to implement heightened capital and liquidity standards, concentration limits, and stress testing—all to further the macroprudential purpose of preventing or mitigating risks to the financial stability of the United States. As I will discuss later, the Board has followed through with rules such as the G-SIB surcharge, the liquidity coverage ratio, and single-counterparty credit limits, just to name a few; and, importantly, we have used macroeconomic considerations in calibrating some of these rules. An Evolving Regulatory PerspectiveNow, let's fast forward to the present. Over a decade has passed since the migration began toward a renewed focus on macroprudential regulation. Our evolution did not stop with the Pittsburgh G20 summit in 2009. Indeed, global financial standard-setters have continued to adapt and learn as they implemented and updated regulations in line with the global consensus that was reflected in Basel III. I would like to highlight three important regulatory paradigm shifts that follow from this renewed focus on macroprudential regulation. Taking Stock of the Entire Banking SectorFirst, in line with the pivot away from microprudential regulation, we have a renewed focus not only on the health of individual financial firms but on the amount of capital in the entire banking sector. Note that the idea of improving the stability of the financial system by regulatingindividualbank capital has been around for decades. Global policymakers began construction of the modern risk-based, bank capital framework in the 1980s, when the aforementioned Latin American debt crisis increased concerns that the capital held by large international banks was deteriorating. Since then, regulators, such as the Board, have continued to have one eye focused on the capital held at individual firms. Now, over a decade after the crisis, exercises such as stress testing have caused us to have the other eye focused on and assessing the amount of capital in the entire banking system. Considering Macroeconomic Outcomes in Calibrations and Impact AnalysesThe second paradigm shift is that regulators have improved their methods of conducting quantitative analysis of regulations. Such analysis, including conventional –cost-benefit analysis, traditionally did not take macroeconomic variables like gross domestic product (GDP) growth or the unemployment rate. That is no longer the case. Since regulators are given the task of maintaining the stability of the system as a whole, they must concern themselves with externalities and spillover effects to the broader economy. At the Federal Reserve, several regulatory initiatives have exemplified this change in quantitative analysis. At the height of the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve created the first stress test, the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP), to estimate potential losses at those banks, if economic and financial conditions worsened. Building on SCAP, the Federal Reserve moved to the current stress testing assessment—the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)—to evaluate whether the largest firms have sufficient capital to absorb potential losses and continue to lend under stressful conditions. In the CCAR process, the Federal Reserve simulates macroeconomic scenarios like a recession in which GDP falls and the unemployment rate rises significantly. In the 2019 stress test cycle, for example, we tested banks against a hypothetical global recession in which the unemployment rate in the United States rose to 10 percent.4The stressed banks were required to show that they could continue to meet minimum capital requirements in the face of those hypothetical macroeconomic shocks. Aside from CCAR, the FSB compiles an annual list of global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), which are subject to stricter capital requirements in the form of a capital surcharge. These banks must meet this higher capital standard based on the judgement that their potential failure would have a larger, systemwide impact on the economy. The goal, therefore, is to reduce a G-SIB's probability of failure so that its expected impact on the economy would be the same as that of a non-G-SIB. Similarly, to reduce the risks of interconnectedness and contagion, the United States and other jurisdictions have implemented rules that limit the exposure that one bank may have to a single counterparty. Finally, research on optimal bank capital levels by staff at regulatory and supervisory bodies around the world have factored in macroeconomic costs and benefits. Specifically, these models assume that higher capital requirements would reduce the probability of a financial crisis occurring but would increase the cost of bank lending, thereby lowering GDP growth. Not surprisingly, these models have produced a wide range of capital estimates given the wide range of underlying assumptions. Combating Pro-cyclicalityThe third paradigm shift at the Fed is combatting pro-cyclicality. To be sure, none of the regulatory developments that I have discussed so far screams macroeconomics quite as loudly as a time-varying, discretionary regulatory regime the express goal of which is to fight pro-cyclicality. Cyclicality—in this case, fluctuations in the economy based on the business cycle—is a concept that is near and dear to every macroeconomist's heart. In fact, theoretical studies of economic cycles go back to the early 1800s, and the National Bureau of Economic Research's tracker of the U.S. business cycle dates economic contractions and expansions back to the 1850s. Quite impressive. There's also more than just a handful of volumes of articles and book chapters written on the business cycle and countercyclical fiscal policy. In the context of macroprudential regulation, pro-cyclicality represents a problem because banks tend to build up excessive credit during an economic expansion. Limiting pro-cyclicality means limiting both the highs and lows of a credit cycle. Along with many other jurisdictions, the United States adopted a countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) to address the issue. The U.S. CCyB is a capital buffer that ranges from zero percent to 2.5 percent of covered institutions' risk-weighted assets. Domestic regulators have discretion to switch the CCyB on or off anywhere within that range in order to prevent or mitigate the overheating of credit markets under their jurisdiction. In setting the buffer, the Federal Reserve takes into account, among other things, leverage in the financial sector, leverage in the nonfinancial sector, maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector, and asset valuation pressures. Notably, the CCyB is not calibrated bank-by-bank and is not calibrated asset-class-by-asset-class. Rather, regulators set the buffer based on their perception of the aggregate domestic credit cycle, whether it's too hot, too cold, or just right. Under the Board's current policy, we would activate the CCyB based on "when systemic vulnerabilities are meaningfully above normal." Based on this policy, the CCyB is currently set at zero percent in the United States but has been turned on in France, Hong Kong, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and Norway. It is worth noting that, in the United Kingdom, the CCyB is set equal to a positive level—1 percent—innormaltimes. As a result, their buffer can be adjusted upward or downward based on the perceived risks of the time-varying credit cycle. As I have recently said, I see real merit in exploring the U.K. approach as a tool to promote financial stability. ConclusionLet me conclude by offering a few thoughts on three research topics that fall squarely in the intersection of law and macroeconomics. Central Bank MandatesFirst, while international agreements such as Basel III demonstrate that the international regulatory community has agreed on the high-level systematic changes and developed similar perspectives following the crisis, national governments gave different regulatory powers—in both degree and scope—to their central banks in pursuit of the new post-crisis consensus.5In the United States, Congress did not change the Federal Reserve's dual mandate but did provide new responsibilities to promote financial stability. There was no change to the European Central Bank's monetary policy mandate, but it received direct supervisory authority over some of the Eurozone's largest banks through the Single Supervisory Mechanism and also continues to monitor financial sector risks. The Bank of Japan does not control Japan's macroprudential toolkit but does play an active role in monitoring systemic risk. The Bank of England, on the other hand, was explicitly tasked with a new financial stability mandate, and it oversees macroprudential regulation. In line with the debates over central bank independence and macroeconomic outcomes, legal scholars who engage in cutting-edge research on institutional design may have thoughts on which model leads to the best outcomes for financial stability. Financial Stability MonitoringSecond, in addition to giving varying degrees of power to their central banks, national governments also created new bodies that promote financial stability, such as the FSB and the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), to monitor systemic risk and identify systemically important institutions and activities. For example, the main issues on the FSB agenda for this year were developments in financial technology, nonbank financial intermediation, and evaluation of too-big-to-fail reforms.6In the same vein, the FSOC produces annual reports that highlight such threats and vulnerabilities, including news ones such as cybersecurity.7 Given today's audience, I very much look forward to hearing your thoughts on these issues, particularly suggestions on ways in which our legal framework can be used to mitigate these risks and the extent to which additional macroeconomic tools should be developed to monitor or address evolving risks. Due ProcessThird and finally, since I have spent a good part of this speech talking about issues that are near and dear to every economist, I feel like it is only fair for me to wrap up by discussing an issue of equal, if not greater, emotional import to lawyers: due process. Specifically, I'd like to close by talking about the due process considerations associated with the aforementioned macroprudential policies. There is nothing improper about mitigating negative externalities through regulation, and that is an important purpose of much post-crisis financial regulation. However, it is also well-accepted that due process requires the fair, evenhanded application of laws so that individuals are not at the mercy of the arbitrary exercise of government power.8As I have alluded to throughout my remarks, we are currently placing a much greater regulatory burden on a select group of banks—the largest and most complex firms—because we believe their failures would bring down the entire financial system. Some might argue that, during the financial crisis, we dispensed with due process considerations while conducting version 1.0 of the stress tests. This is why I have strongly pushed for the recent shift toward greater transparency around the structure of the stress tests and the models themselves. It affords greater due process to the affected participants. In the same vein, I would welcome greater legal scholarship on the due process considerations associated with bank supervision as a process distinct from bank regulation. By bank supervision, I refer to the processes and activities identified with examining banks, including checking compliance with laws and regulations, assessing bank capital and liquidity levels, assigning supervisory ratings to banks, and taking formal and informal enforcement actions. While it is important for bank supervision to be up to the task of assessing the world's largest banks, especially in light of the financial stability risks that I have been describing today, an equally important task is making sure that supervisors are acting fairly. Although questions of fairness are routine in law and economics, there is ample room to explore these issues as they relate to bank supervision. While transparency and fairness are pillars of due process, I appreciate that there are other approaches worth considering on this matter. With this growing field of law and macroeconomics, I hope to see and implement many interdisciplinary solutions on the path forward. 1. Arguably, the history of law and macroeconomics has even deeper roots. Prior to the Banking Act of 1935, Congress had passed the National Bank Act of 1863 in response to the financial crisis that emerged during the early days of the American Civil War. Its purpose was to create a national banking system and establish a national currency. The following year, Congress passed the National Bank Act of 1864, which established the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and gave the federal government the authority to supervise commercial banks. Some might even characterize the First and Second Banks of the United States as early efforts at law and macroeconomics.Return to text 2. See Claudio Borio,Towards a Macroprudential Framework for Financial Supervision and Regulation? (PDF)Bank of International Settlements Working Papers No. 128 (Basel, Switzerland: BIS, February 2003).Return to text 3. See Busch and van Rijin (2018), supra.Return to text 4. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,2019 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, February 2019).Return to text 5. See Ed Balls, James Howat, and Anna Stansbury,Central Bank Independence Revisited: After the Financial Crisis, What Should a Model Central Bank Look Like? (PDF)Harvard Kennedy School M-RCBG Associate Working Paper No. 87 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Kennedy School, 2018).Return to text 6. Randal K. Quarles, "The Financial Stability Board in 2019" (speech at the Joint Conference of the European Central Bank and theJournal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Frankfurt, Germany, March 2019).Return to text 7. See U.S Department of the Treasury,Financial Stability Oversight Council Annual Report 2018(Washington: U.S. Treasury, 2018).Return to text 8. See Paul Tucker,Unelected Power: The Quest for Legitimacy in Central Banking and the Regulatory State(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018).Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At Program on International Financial Systems Conference, Frankfurt, Germany IntroductionThanks to the Program on International Financial Systems and the European Central Bank for the opportunity to speak to you today. I would like to take as my text today this reflection of the 20th-century philosopher, sociologist, and welterweight champion of the world, Oscar de la Hoya: "There's always room for improvement, no matter how long you've been in the business." As all of you know, 2019 marks the 10-year anniversary of our stress testing program in the United States. In only 10 years, stress tests have developed from an innovative but untested tool to become a well-established element of the Federal Reserve's bank supervision program for large banks. But developing and running those first tests required a willingness to change, and an openness to innovation, which underlie every advance in human endeavor—whether banking or boxing. In that same spirit of being open to change and innovation, my remarks will include some thoughts that might have seemed novel just a few years ago, but in my view, are ideas whose time has now come. As the Federal Reserve has been considering refinements to our stress testing and capital frameworks, two goals have been at the forefront of our thinking: first, to simplify these frameworks to make them easier to apply and understand, and second, to maintain the overall high level of loss-absorbing capacity in the banking system. Let me expand on those two goals. Goals for Refining Stress Testing and Capital FrameworksOne of the great challenges of a regulator is to write rules that are comprehensive and detailed enough to be effective while also being consistent and simple enough to be well understood. There is a well-documented tendency for regulation to grow by accretion. And with that, there is always a risk that regulatory regimes will become less effective as they grow, developing redundancies and inconsistences that can obscure initial intentions and impair understanding. This is not a desirable outcome for financial regulation, and indeed, it is the responsibility of any regulator to ensure that the rule frameworks remain well integrated and credible. Congress has been adjusting the Dodd-Frank Act since its enactment, and, likewise, the Federal Reserve and other regulators have been making adjustments in the wake of the financial crisis to innovations such as stress testing, a public process that in my view has helped make financial oversight more effective. The thoughts that I am airing in these remarks, part of a public process of discussion and debate, should be seen as a continuation of the review and adjustment that has been taking place since the financial crisis. The goal is to simplify rules that have grown more complex in the past decade and in some cases redundant and harder to understand. My second goal, in considering these adjustments, is to maintain the high level of loss-absorbing capacity in the U.S. banking system. Our financial system today is far more resilient than it was before the crisis and I want to maintain that resiliency. We are all better served by well-capitalized banks that have the ability to continue lending to households and businesses even during stressful times. Adjusting regulation in measured ways, such as those I will describe, is an appropriate and, in fact, necessary way to preserve the success we have achieved in strengthening the financial system. Before I delve into describing the future direction of our stress testing and capital frameworks, allow me to begin with some background on the origins of the stress testing program and an overview of the changes we have made to our capital requirements since the financial crisis. Background on the Fed's Stress Testing ProgramAt the height of the crisis, as a way to help restore confidence in the largest U.S. banks, the Fed created the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) to estimate potential losses at those banks, if economic and financial conditions worsened. Building on the success of SCAP, the Board moved to the current stress testing assessment, known as the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), to evaluate whether the largest firms have sufficient capital to continue to lend and absorb potential losses under severely adverse conditions. At the same time that we were building our stress testing program, we were also making changes to capital rules to address weaknesses observed during the crisis. These included new minimum capital requirements and a capital buffer on top of these requirements. The buffer puts increasingly strict and automatic limits on capital distributions as a bank's capital declines toward the minimum. Large banks are also subject to a potential countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB), which I will discuss more shortly. And the largest banks are subject to an additional buffer of capital based on a measure of their systemic risk. Stress testing and stronger capital requirements have combined to greatly strengthen the resiliency of the U.S. banking system. At the banks subject to CCAR, risk-based capital ratios have more than doubled since 2009. Combined, these firms now have more than $1 trillion of common equity capital, and a ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets of 12.1%, which is many multiples over the required ratio of Tier 1 common in 2009. As a result of these changes, large U.S. banks are substantially more resilient to stress than in the past. At the same time, I believe our regulatory measures are most effective when they are as simple and transparent as possible, and it is prudent to periodically review all of our practices to ensure that they are achieving these goals. Importantly, although CCAR and our regulatory capital requirements share similar ends, they were developed separately, due to the exigencies of the crisis, and this has led to significant redundancies, which I will describe in detail in a moment. Just to name one prominent example, we now have 24 different requirements for total loss absorbency, while before the financial crisis we had 3. Perhaps there were some benefits to having overlapping approaches when we were still in the capital-building phase after the crisis. But now that banks have built significant capital stores, I believe the overlapping requirements should be combined for efficiency and simplicity. The Stress Capital Buffer (SCB) ProposalLast year, the Board issued a proposal to address these redundancies. The proposal—known as the stress capital buffer—would simplify our regulatory regime by integrating the stress test with our non-stress capital rules. I believe the SCB proposal stands as a good example of how our work can be done more efficiently and effectively, and in a way that maintains the resiliency of the financial system. For large bank holding companies, the SCB would replace the fixed-for-all-times-and-for-all-banks 2.5 percent risk-based capital buffer with a firm-specific buffer based on the firm's most recent stress test results. This would integrate our stress testing capital requirements with our point-in-time capital requirements. And as a result, the two separate capital frameworks would be combined into one. Firms would have to manage according to one integrated set of requirements and, when their capital is insufficient, would be required to rebuild their resiliency through one integrated set of limitations on their capital distributions. Originally, we had planned to make the SCB final for the 2019 stress test cycle. However, we received thorough and insightful feedback on the proposal that we have been considering carefully. Among the comments we received were many that called for further simplification of the SCB framework. Based on this feedback, I first would like to emphasize two elements of the 2018 SCB proposal that, in my more considered judgment, I now believe should not be a part of the final SCB framework. Second, I would like to introduce two new co-equal options, either of which would improve the final product. The first element of the SCB proposal that I believe should be removed is the stress leverage buffer requirement.1By its nature, a leverage ratio is a blunt instrument that treats all assets the same and therefore is not risk-sensitive. Thus, I am concerned that explicitly assigning a stressed leverage requirement to a firm on the basis of risk-sensitive post-stress estimates is in conflict with the intellectual underpinnings of the leverage ratio. It is what the analytical philosophers call a category mistake: like saying that, "Freedom has curly hair". Of course, leverage ratios, including the enhanced supplementary leverage requirements, would remain a critical part of our regulatory capital regime, and I believe our existing leverage ratios provide a sufficient backstop to the risk-based capital requirements. For these reasons, it seems out of place and unnecessary to add a separate leverage capital buffer.2 The second element of the SCB proposal that I believe should be removed is the requirement for banks to pre-fund the next four quarters of their planned dividend payments. The stress tests currently require banks to set aside sufficient capital today to "pre-fund" expected capital distributions, both dividends and repurchases, for all nine quarters of the capital planning horizon. Removing the pre-funding of dividend requirement would simplify the SCB proposal. Additionally, the SCB already has a mechanism for curbing dividends and other distributions when a bank's capital ratio falls into the buffer. Requiring pre-funding of dividends is a needless redundancy. Even worse, the pre-funding of dividends could lead to a conflict with the mechanics of the SCB—the SCB could call for a restriction of dividend payments even when those payments had been pre-funded. I believe it is better to focus on the root cause of our concerns and take a comprehensive approach to ensuring that banks have sufficient capital, rather than focus on the individual elements of capital distributions. Some have argued that requiring pre-funding of dividends helps reduce pro-cyclicality.3Limiting pro-cyclicality, or being countercyclical, essentially means limiting both the highs and lows of a business cycle. And there can be value in doing so because, among other things, it can help reduce stress on our financial system. With a counter-cyclical stress test, as the economy strengthens, the test should get tougher and be more stringent to mitigate the buildup of vulnerabilities during good times. Experience has shown that vulnerabilities can build during good times as risk appetite grows and memories of earlier instability fade. But likewise, when the economy does slow down, and losses mount at the banks, the tests should moderate so that firms can draw on the buffers built up during good times to absorb those losses while continuing to provide credit to qualified borrowers. As an alternative to requiring pre-funding dividends and in furtherance of the other goals I have mentioned, I would like to suggest two co-equal options that, in my opinion, would simplify our capital requirements while limiting pro-cyclicality. Importantly, these two options also are consistent with our goal of maintaining overall levels of capital in the banking system: The first option would be to set the CCyB at a higher baseline level during normal times. And the second option would be to raise the "floor," or the minimum level, of the SCB. The CCyB OptionBefore I outline how we might modify the CCyB, let me explain what the CCyB is designed to accomplish and how it fits into the Board's overall financial stability efforts.The CCyB, which was part of the original Basel III accord, is a macroprudential tool that allows the Board to dynamically adjust capital levels of large banking firms when the risks to financial stability have meaningfully changed. In 2016, the Board released a policy statement detailing the conceptual framework it would follow to set the CCyB. The policy statement details the range of financial-system vulnerabilities and other factors the Board may take into account as it evaluates settings for the buffer, including but not limited to, leverage in the financial sector, leverage in the nonfinancial sector, maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector, and asset valuation pressures. Right now, our policy is to maintain a 0 percent CCyB when vulnerabilities are within the normal range, as they happen to be now. When we determine that vulnerabilities have risen to be meaningfully above normal, the purpose of the CCyB is to increase capital to a level that compensates for those other rising vulnerabilities and thus reduces risks back to a normal level. Some of those vulnerabilities have indeed been rising in recent years, but because of the strength of our capital requirements and CCAR, our assessment of overall vulnerabilities remains moderate. This raises the question of whether our through-the-cycle capital levels in the United States have been set so high, that our CCyB is effectively already "on": we already have capital at a level that compensates for these increases in vulnerability, but because we did not reach that capital level through activation of the CCyB, we have no way of acting countercyclically in a future downturn. I would advocate for revisiting that policy so that the CCyB is more closely integrated into our overall capital framework, allowing greater scope for dynamic adjustments. While the Board has maintained the CCyB at zero since 2016, other countries have adjusted their countercyclical buffers in response to vulnerabilities within their financial sectors or, in the case of the United Kingdom, to integrate its CCyB with its structural capital requirements. For example, I find the U.K. framework, adopted by their Financial Policy Committee, to be quite compelling. Specifically, under the British framework, the CCyB would equal a positive amount—in the British case it's 1 percent—in standard risk conditions. The effect of the policy is that the buffer can be varied in line with the changing risks that the banking system faces over time. I see real merit in application of the U.K. approach in the United States, although the specific percentage would of course be open to analysis. It could provide a flexible mechanism that could complement other modifications to the SCB framework and allow the Board to adjust capital requirements as financial risks are evolving. In addition, making greater use of acountercyclicalcapital buffer would quite directly advance the goal of making the overall capital regime less pro-cyclical. Ultimately, I would expect that the new baseline for the CCyB would be set at a level that would maintain the overall level of capital in the U.S. banking system throughout the business and financial cycles—that is, taking account of the likelihood that there would be periods where it would be above the baseline as well as below the baseline. To be clear, this shift would require us to revisit our current CCyB policy and would introduce additional layers of decisionmaking complexity to the SCB proposal. On balance, however, I think this kind of shift would provide the Board with a helpful, additional tool that could be adjusted quickly in response to economic, financial, or even geopolitical shocks. I'd also like to preemptively address a potential objection to this option. That is, that it may be a "stealth" cut to our strong capital levels for the largest banks. I reject that characterization, and it is not supported by the approach I have outlined today. As I've said, we would maintain our strong current loss-absorbency levels, and, though I have focused on the ability to reduce the CCyB in times of stress, I also would stand ready to increase the CCyB above the new baseline when it was appropriate to do so. Indeed, the advantage of a truly flexible capital requirement is for it not only to provide additional resilience during a boom, but also to limit the risk of a pullback in credit supply aggravating an economic downturn. The SCB Floor OptionReturning to our goals of increasing simplicity, mitigating pro-cyclicality, and maintaining the overall level of loss-absorbency in the system, I would like to advance another equally viable alternative to turning on the CCyB: raising the proposed SCB floor from the fixed 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets to a somewhat higher level—purely for the sake of illustration, let's say 3 percent. Using 3 percent as an example, we would give each firm a buffer based on the firm's most recent stress test results, but which must be at least 3 percent. For example, if a firm had a capital ratio decline of 2.7 percent during the stress tests, its SCB would nonetheless be sized at 3 percent, rather than 2.7 percent. For firms that have stress test results indicating an SCB greater than 3 percent, this change would have no impact compared to last year's proposal. For firms that have stress test results indicating an SCB at or slightly above 2.5 percent, this change would represent a modest increase in the stringency of the SCB. Raising the floor may help to reduce pro-cyclicality by limiting the reduction in SCB capital buffers when stress test losses decrease during good times. Raising the floor also would help moderate any increase in those buffers at the onset of economic downturn conditions as losses begin to increase. This approach would have three significant benefits as compared to the CCyB option: greater simplicity, transparency, and predictability. Raising the fixed floor would be simpler to execute than the CCyB proposal because raising the floor once and for all times would not require the Board to make complex, real-time decisions about how to adapt the regulatory framework to the evolving vulnerabilities to the economy. Raising the fixed floor also would be more transparent and predictable for the public and the industry because a firm's capital requirement would vary less over time. There are drawbacks to the higher fixed floor option, of course. For firms whose losses are typically close to the existing 2.5 percent floor, this change will affect them more than others and produce a capital regime with slightly less risk sensitivity. I also recognize, in terms of targeting pro-cyclicality, this approach would be much less direct than more actively managing the level of the CCyB. ConclusionIn closing, let me say that it is my hope to have an SCB framework in place for the 2020 stress tests. Of course, we will solicit public comment on potential revisions to the SCB proposal through the standard rulemaking process, and I expect that to occur in the near future. I further expect that we will maintain the basic framework of the SCB while also incorporating some additional refinements, such as to address volatility and provide better notice for firms in planning their capital actions. As I have stated, our goals remain to simplify our capital framework while maintaining the overall amount of capital in the U.S. banking system. The refinements we are considering to the SCB framework would also improve the efficiency, coherence, and transparency of the regulatory capital framework and the core principles of our stress testing program that have proven successful. I look forward to continued feedback on CCAR as we work through the improvements that I described, with a goal of ensuring that we maintain the same incentives for effective stress testing practices that exist today. As I am sure Oscar would agree, there is always room for improvement in the stress testing ring. 1. As proposed in the SCB, firms would have been subject to a new stress leverage buffer, where their leverage ratio requirements would be sized based on their stress test each year.Return to text 2. Seewww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20181109a.htm.Return to text 3. See, for example, Donald Kohn and Nellie Liang, "Understanding the Effects of the U.S. Stress Tests (PDF)" (paper presented at "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review" Conference, Federal Reserve Board, July 9, 2019).Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At “A Hot Economy: Sustainability and Trade-Offs,” a Fed Listens event sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California I am delighted to be in San Francisco today to participate in thisFed Listensconference, "A Hot Economy: Sustainability and Trade-Offs," which is one of a series of events associated with the Federal Reserve's 2019 review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.1 Motivation for the ReviewAlthough I will have more to say about the review in a moment, let me state at the outset that we believe our existing framework, which has been in place since 2012, has served us well and has enabled us to achieve and sustain our statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability. However, we also believe now is a good time to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we can refine our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and maintain our goals as consistently and robustly as possible.2 With the U.S. economy operating at or close to maximum employment and price stability, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review. The unemployment rate is near a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective. With this review, we hope to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years. The U.S. and foreign economies have changed in some important ways since the Global Financial Crisis. Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States.3A fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will hit its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns. That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support spending and employment and to keep inflation from falling too far below the 2 percent objective.4 Another key development in recent decades is that price inflation appears less responsive to resource slack. That is, the short-run price Phillips curve—if not the wage Phillips curve—appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5A flatter Phillips curve permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.6However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of lost economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations. Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7And let me emphasize that, based on the evidence I have reviewed, I judge that U.S. inflation expectations today do reside in a range I consider consistent with our price‑stability mandate. A Robust U.S. Labor MarketFor some time now, price stability in the United States has coincided with a historically low unemployment rate. This low unemployment rate, 3.7 percent in August, has been interpreted by many as suggesting that the labor market is currently operating beyond full employment. However, we cannot directly observe the level of the unemployment rate that is consistent with full employment and price stability, u*, but must infer it from data via models. I myself believe that the range of plausible estimates of u* extends to 4 percent and below and includes the current unemployment rate of 3.7 percent. As the unemployment rate has declined in recent years, labor force participation for people in their prime working years has increased significantly, with the August participation rate at a cycle high of 82.6 percent.8Increased prime-age participation has provided employers with additional labor resources and has been one factor, along with a pickup in labor productivity, restraining inflationary pressures. Whether participation will continue to increase in a tight labor market remains to be seen. But I note that prime-age participation still remains below levels seen in previous business cycle expansions. Also, although the labor market is robust, there is no evidence that rising wages are putting upward pressure on price inflation. Wages today are increasing broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation. Also of note, and receiving less attention than it deserves, is the material increase in labor's share of national income that has occurred in recent years as the labor market has tightened. As I have written before, there is a cyclical regularity in U.S. data that labor's share tends to rise as expansions endure and the labor market tightens.9In recent cycles—and thus far in this cycle—this rise in labor's share has not put upward pressure on price inflation. The strong job gains of recent years also have delivered benefits to groups that have historically been disadvantaged in the labor market. For example, African Americans and Hispanics have experienced persistently higher unemployment rates than whites for many decades.10However, those unemployment rate gaps have narrowed as the labor market has strengthened, and, as President Daly's research shows, there is some indication these groups especially benefit when the unemployment rate remains very low.11Likewise, the gaps between unemployment rates for less-educated workers and their more-educated counterparts appear to narrow as the labor market strengthens.12Wage increases in the past couple of years have been strongest for less-educated workers and for those at the lower end of the wage distribution.13 Scope of the ReviewThe Federal Reserve Act assigns to the Fed the responsibility to conduct monetary policy "so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."14Our review this year takes this statutory mandate as given and also takes as given that inflation at a rate of 2 percent is most consistent over the longer run with the congressional mandate. Our existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.15First adopted in January 2012, the statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level. In doing so, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) recognizes that these assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy framework known as "flexible inflation targeting."16However, the Fed's mandate is much more explicit about the role of employment than that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedence over the other. The review of our current framework is wide ranging, and we are not prejudging where it will take us, but events of the past decade highlight three broad questions that we will seek to answer with our review. Three QuestionsThe first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?" Under our current approach as well as the approaches of many central banks around the world, persistent inflation shortfalls of the target are treated as "bygones." Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots, but the ELB on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more of a challenge. Persistent inflation shortfallscarry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become anchored below the stated inflation goal.17 In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated "makeup" strategies under which policymakers seek to undo past inflation deviations from target. These strategies include targeting average inflation and price-level targeting, in which policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path.18Other makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case.19In many models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average performance on both legs of the dual mandate.20 The success of makeup strategies relies on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes—for example, that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent. As is well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at that time will not justify that action. Thus, one of the most important questions we will seek to answer in our review is whether the Fed could, in practice, attain the benefits of makeup strategies that are possible in theoretical models. The next question the review will consider is, "Are existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? And, if so, how?" The FOMC's primary monetary policy tool is its target range for the federal funds rate. In December 2008, the FOMC cut that target to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions. Because the U.S. economy required additional support after the ELB was reached, the FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis: balance sheet policies and forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.21 In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, the review will examine additional tools for easing policy when the ELB is binding. During the crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve considered but ultimately found some of the tools deployed by other central banks wanting in the U.S. context. But the review will reassess the case for these and other tools in light of more recent experience with using these tools in other countries. The third question the review will consider is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?" Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting. Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication both to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions and to foster democratic accountability. These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about the principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.22 As part of the review, we will assess the Committee's current and past communications and additional forms of communication that could be helpful. For example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability. Activities and Timeline for the ReviewLet me turn now to our review process itself.23At ourFed Listensevents, we are hearing from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development professionals, and academics. At a research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago in early June, we heard from prominent academic economists as well as national and community leaders. One panel discussion provided a valuable perspective on the labor market that could not otherwise be gleaned from the aggregate statistics we often consult. Another panel discussion offered insights into how the monetary levers we pull and push affect communities, credit availability, and small businesses. In addition to the Chicago conference, all 12 Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors have hosted or will soon hostFed Listensevents. This summer, the FOMC began to assess what we have learned at theFed Listensevents and to receive briefings from System staff on topics relevant to the review.24At our July meeting, FOMC participants agreed that our current framework for monetary policy has served the Committee and the U.S. economy well over the past decade. FOMC participants noted that the Committee's experience with forward guidance and asset purchases has improved its understanding of how these tools operate. As a result, the Committee could proceed more confidently in using these tools in the future if economic circumstances warranted. However, overall, we judged that forward guidance and balance sheet tools, while helpful, did not eliminate the risk of returning to the ELB. If forward guidance or balance sheet actions prove to be insufficient in future episodes, ELB constraints could impede the attainment of the Federal Reserve's dual-mandate objectives over time. At our July meeting, we also noted that the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy has been helpful in articulating and clarifying the Federal Reserve's approach to monetary policy and agreed that any changes we might make to our strategy would likely call for some modification of this consensus statement. We have much still to discuss at upcoming meetings. I expect we will consider various topics, such as alternative policy strategies, options for enhanced use of existing monetary policy tools, possible additions to the policy toolkit, potential changes to communication practices, and the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability. We will share our findings with the public when we have completed our review, likely during the first half of next year. Concluding ThoughtsThe economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges. So it makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate findings. What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today. Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward to the excellent program President Daly and her team have put together. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8. Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 54 (April), pp. 728–52. Bank for International Settlements (2017).87th Annual Report (PDF).Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June. Bauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2014). "The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (September), pp. 233–89. Baumeister, Christiane, and Luca Benati (2013). "Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread Compression at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 9 (June), pp. 165–212. Berg, Claes, and Lars Jonung (1999). "Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 1931–1937,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 43 (June), pp. 525–51. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14. ——— (2017). "Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy,"Ben Bernanke's Blog,October 12. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/5/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018a).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, February. ——— (2018b).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, July. ——— (2019a).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, February. ——— (2019b). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019," press release, August 21. Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006). "Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 88 (August), pp. 445–62. Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010). "How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 369–422. Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (2018). "The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF)," Occasional Paper Series 217. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, December. Bullard, James (2018). "The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF)," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19. Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017). "Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012). "Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 1–80. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Jonas D.M. Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi (2017). "Forward Guidance and Macroeconomic Outcomes since the Financial Crisis," in Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016,vol. 31. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 283–357. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF),report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. Chen, Han, Vasco Cúrdia, and Andrea Ferrero (2012). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F289–315. Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019). "Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Clarida, Richard H. (2012). "What Has—and Has Not—Been Learned about Monetary Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment? A Review of the 2000s,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 123–40. ——— (2016). "Good News for the Fed,"International Economy, Spring, pp. 44–45 and 75–76. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147–80. Clinton, Kevin, Charles Freedman, Michel Juillard, Ondra Kamenik, Douglas Laxton, and Hou Wang (2015). "Inflation-Forecast Targeting: Applying the Principle of Transparency (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/132. Washington: International Monetary Fund, June. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David López‐Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F415–46. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large‐Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 108 (May), pp. 425–48. Economic Policy Institute (2019).State of Working America Data Library. Washington: EPI, March. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 139–235. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. English, William B., David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (May), pp. 22–70. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018). "Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds.,Handbook of Economic Forecasting,vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2–56. Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018). "Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian P. Sack (2011). "Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? (PDF)"FRBNYEconomic Policy Review,vol. 17 (May), pp. 41–59. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 3–46. Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018). "From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Hills, Timothy S., Taisuke Nakata, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016). "The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108, Supplement 1 (May), pp. S59–75. Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011). "The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 7 (September), pp. 113–61. Joyce, Michael, David Miles, Andrew Scott, and Dimitri Vayanos (2012). "Quantitative Easing and Unconventional Monetary Policy—An Introduction,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F271–88. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317–96. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014). "Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate," NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007). "Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. Nakov, Anton (2008). "Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 4 (June), pp. 73–127. Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005). "Average Inflation Targeting,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (October), pp. 837–63. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017). "Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF)"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 13 (September), pp. 1–42. Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. Roberts, John M. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193–230. Romer, David (2010). "A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 42 (August), pp. 951–57. Ruge-Murcia, Francisco (2014). "Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price Level? (PDF)"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (June), pp. 301–26. Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013). "The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping? (PDF)" inWorld Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 79–95. Swanson, Eric T. (2017). "Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper Series 23311. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April (revised August 2018). ——— (2018). "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Weingarden, Alison (2017). "Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25. Woodford, Michael (2012). "Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30–September 1. Yellen, Janet (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. ——— (2017). "The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework. They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.Return to text 3. For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).Return to text 4. For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).Return to text 5. For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).Return to text 6. One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010). As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions. Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.Return to text 7. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation. Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s. These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.Return to text 8. The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp. 8–10).Return to text 9. See Clarida (2016).Return to text 10. See Cajner and others (2017) for a careful examination of how labor market differentials by race and ethnicity have evolved over time.Return to text 11. See Aaronson and others (2019) for evidence on the relative behavior of unemployment rates by race and ethnicity in a strong labor market. The authors find similar patterns for labor force participation rates and for employment-to-population ratios.Return to text 12. Disparities in labor market outcomes are also evident between urban and rural areas of the United States. However, these gaps have not narrowed as the labor market has strengthened. The box "Employment Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas" in the Board's February 2019Monetary Policy Reportexamines these disparities in more detail; see Board of Governors (2019, pp. 10–12). See also Weingarden (2017).Return to text 13. Wage gains for workers with different wage levels and with different levels of education can be calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Economic Policy Institute (2019) provides convenient tabulations of these data.Return to text 14. Even though the act lists three distinct goals, the Federal Reserve's mandate for monetary policy is commonly known as the "dual mandate." The reason is that an economy in which people who want to work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly quickly and in which the price level (meaning a broad measure of the price of goods and services purchased by consumers) is stable creates the conditions needed for interest rates to settle at moderate levels. For a discussion, see Mishkin (2007). Quoted text from the Federal Reserve Act is in 12 U.S.C. § 225a (2000),https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section2a.htm.Return to text 15. The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf.Return to text 16. For a discussion of this terminology and references, see English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) and Clinton and others (2015).Return to text 17. These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB. For related discussions, see Reifschneider and Williams (2000); Adam and Billi (2007); Nakov (2008); and Hills, Nakata, and Schmidt (2016).Return to text 18. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion. Nessén and Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting. There is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations. Central banks that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon—typically a couple of years ahead or over the "medium run"—without regard to past inflation deviations. One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of 2–3 percent, on average, over the medium term" and thus might embed some notion of history dependence. However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation goal. The only known historical example of price-level targeting occurred in Sweden from 1931 to 1933 when the country abandoned the gold standard and attempted instead to maintain its price level. The temporary adoption of price-level targeting is credited with helping Sweden avoid deflation, an outcome that contrasted with that in countries that stayed on the gold standard. See Berg and Jonung (1999). See Bernanke (2017) for a discussion of a temporary price-level targeting strategy. See Hebden and López-Salido (2018) for a quantitative assessment of that and other strategies. See also Kiley and Roberts (2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns.Return to text 19. See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy rate lower than otherwise. The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the Board's July 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp. 37–41).Return to text 20. See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S. economy.Return to text 21. As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017). In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase household and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery. These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.Return to text 22. Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannualMonetary Policy Report.With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon. Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members. For a discussion and data, see Bernanke (2007) and Romer (2010).Return to text 23. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text 24. See Board of Governors (2019b).Return to text