Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At Utah Center for Neighborhood Stabilization 10-Year Celebration, Salt Lake City, Utah Thank you for the kind introduction and for this opportunity to recognize the contributions of the Utah Center for Neighborhood Stabilization (UCNS) to the vitality of our state's communities. Over its 10 years, UCNS has improved the lives of many aspiring homeowners, renters, and small business owners and helped to build a more healthy and vibrant Utah.1 As some of you may know, I grew up in Roy, not too far from here, and have lived in either the Ogden or Salt Lake City areas for many decades. Although I spent a lot of my professional career in New York and London, and these days spend a good deal of my time in Washington, D.C., this is still my home, as it is yours. Like many others, I'm thankful for the work of UCNS and its affiliates, which are investing in the betterment of this city and other Utah communities and working to ensure that the benefits of those investments extend to everyone living here. I've spent most of my career in the private sector, and as I think about the approach of UCNS as a nonprofit organization, I am struck by the extent of entrepreneurship you bring to your work. Like many kinds of businesses, you deploy technical expertise and management skill to make investments, with either debt or equity financing, to generate healthy returns. Some of those returns, measured in dollars, help you continue to carry out your mission, but some of them also come in the form of promoting small businesses, affordable housing, and community facilities such as recreation centers, health-care clinics, and childcare facilities, among other things that build stronger communities. Private- and public-sector partners who support community development value entrepreneurship, and it also makes for a healthier and more sustainable organization, which allows you to continue your important work. By all evidence, UCNS is advancing its goals in spectacular fashion. I expect a large part of this success comes from the collaborative approach that you take to those efforts. It seems that collaboration is a common thread that runs through your programs. For example, that is apparent in UCNS's dedication to working closely with developers to finance affordable housing near high-capacity transit. These important investments help workers get access to the transportation they need to get to work, without a longer commute that strains finances and detracts from family life. Housing affordability is a growing challenge in Utah, and promoting mass transit—among UCNS's other objectives—has a role to play in keeping housing and transportation affordable. A collaborative approach also shows up in the close partnership that UCNS has had with local governments to establish and maintain the Utah Small Business Growth Initiative, which supports economic development and job creation by helping small businesses qualify for financing with banks or other financial institutions. And collaboration is apparent in your work with lenders and affordable housing providers to facilitate the acquisition, rehab, and sale of foreclosed homes to lower-income borrowers, which helps those families secure the dignity and wealth-building opportunity that comes with stable homeownership. This kind of cross-sector collaboration between the private, public, and nonprofit sectors is critically important to extending economic opportunity and access to financial services to low- and moderate-income families. I am happy to report that organizations like UCNS have an active partner in the Federal Reserve, through our community development function, when it comes to supporting these types of partnerships. I will highlight just a few examples of work the Fed has recently undertaken that intersects with the work of UCNS. As is the case in Utah, families in many states across the country face challenges in finding good quality housing they can afford. The Federal Reserve is actively engaged on this issue, and has conducted research and brought together stakeholders to understand it better and consider solutions. As many of you in this room probably know, Utah is located within the district of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. In September 2014, the San Francisco Fed co-hosted a symposium that explored innovative models for supporting equitable development, including the development of affordable housing, around public transit investment. The event brought together community development financial institutions, local transit authorities, banks, policymakers, and other stakeholders and included participants from Salt Lake City. More recently, in August 2018, the San Francisco Fed hosted a roundtable here to gather key decisionmakers to discuss ways the city and county could reduce barriers and provide more incentives for the development of housing that is affordable to lower-income families. In March of this year, the San Francisco Fed published an analysis of public-private loan funds for the construction and preservation of affordable housing.2The study spells out the relative advantages of different types of funds for different kinds of projects—preservation versus development, for example—and details which funds are best for the early, middle, or late stages of a project. Turning to support for small businesses, community development staffers across the Federal Reserve conduct extensive research and analysis of the challenges and opportunities facing small business owners. For example, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks collaborate on the annual Small Business Credit Survey, which surveys business owners about their financing needs and experiences to provide timely insights to policymakers, service providers, and lenders.3In addition to providing information on small business credit conditions, the Federal Reserve is trying to advance understanding of the best economic development strategies for supporting small businesses. The Kansas City Fed has helped lead on these issues through its "Grow Your Own" entrepreneurship-based economic development guidebook, and its 2018 Growing Entrepreneurial Communities Summit.4 These are just a few of the ways that Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors support the efforts of community development organizations. I hope that our work will be useful as you chart a path forward for your second decade of service to Utah, and I look forward to continued collaboration between the Federal Reserve and community development organizations such as UCNS. Together, we can help support thriving communities across the Wasatch Front, the state of Utah, and across our nation. Thank you again for inviting me to speak, and congratulations again for 10 years of building stronger communities in Utah. 1. UCNS is the parent organization of four separate organizations that, in combination, work to advance access to affordable housing, including homeownership and housing near high-capacity or high-frequency transit; support economic development and job creation by funding small businesses; and improve access to important community infrastructure.Return to text 2. Elizabeth Mattiuzzi, "Funds for Kickstarting Affordable Housing Preservation and Production: Lessons for New Investors," Community Development Research Briefs (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March 2019).Return to text 3. Seewww.fedsmallbusiness.org/for more information.Return to text 4. The guidebook is available athttps://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/community/gyo/entrepreneurship-econ-dev-local-communities.pdf.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the "Challenges for Monetary Policy" symposium, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming This year's symposium topic is "Challenges for Monetary Policy," and for the Federal Reserve those challenges flow from our mandate to foster maximum employment and price stability. From this perspective, our economy is now in a favorable place, and I will describe how we are working to sustain these conditions in the face of significant risks we have been monitoring. The current U.S. expansion has entered its 11th year and is now the longest on record.1The unemployment rate has fallen steadily throughout the expansion and has been near half-century lows since early 2018. But that rate alone does not fully capture the benefits of this historically strong job market. Labor force participation by people in their prime working years has been rising. While unemployment for minorities generally remains higher than for the workforce as a whole, the rate for African Americans, at 6 percent, is the lowest since the government began tracking it in 1972. For the past few years, wages have been increasing the most for people at the lower end of the wage scale. People who live and work in low- and middle-income communities tell us that this job market is the best anyone can recall. We increasingly hear reports that employers are training workers who lack required skills, adapting jobs to the needs of employees with family responsibilities, and offering second chances to people who need one. Inflation has been surprisingly stable during the expansion: not falling much when the economy was weak and not rising much as the expansion gained strength. Inflation ran close to our symmetric 2 percent objective for most of last year but has been running somewhat below 2 percent this year. Thus, after a decade of progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the economy is close to both goals. Our challenge now is to do what monetary policy can do to sustain the expansion so that the benefits of the strong jobs market extend to more of those still left behind, and so that inflation is centered firmly around 2 percent. Today I will explore what history tells us about sustaining long, steady expansions. A good place to start is with the passage of the Employment Act of 1946, which stated that it is the "continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal Government ... to promote maximum employment, production, and purchasing power."2Some version of these goals has been in place ever since. I will divide the history since World War II into three eras organized around some well-known "Greats." The first era comprises the postwar years through the Great Inflation. The second era brought the Great Moderation but ended in the Great Recession. The third era is still under way, and time will tell what "Greats" may emerge. Each era presents a key question for the Fed and for society more generally. The first era raises the question whether a central bank can resist the temptations that led to the Great Inflation. The second era raises the question whether long expansions supported by better monetary policy inevitably lead to destabilizing financial excesses like those seen in the Great Moderation. The third era confronts us with the question of how best to promote sustained prosperity in a world of slow global growth, low inflation, and low interest rates. Near the end of my remarks, I will discuss the current context, and the ways these questions are shaping policy. Era I, 1950–1982: Policy Breeds Macroeconomic Instability and the Great InflationThe late 1940s were a period of adjustment to a peacetime economy. As the 1940s turned to the 1950s, the state of knowledge about how best to promote macroeconomic stability was limited. The 1950s and early 1960s saw the economy oscillating sharply between recession and growth above 6 percent (figure 1, panel A). Three expansions and contractions came in quick succession. With the benefit of hindsight, the lack of stability is generally attributed to "stop and go" stabilization policy, as monetary and fiscal authorities grappled with how best to modulate the use of their blunt but powerful tools.3 Beginning in the mid-1960s, "stop and go" policy gave way to "too much go and not enough stop"—not enough, that is, to quell rising inflation pressures. Both inflation and inflation expectations ratcheted upward through four expansions until the Fed, under Chairman Paul Volcker, engineered a definitive stop in the early 1980s (figure 1, panel C). Each of the expansions in the Great Inflation period ended with monetary policy tightening in response to rising inflation. Policymakers came out of the Great Inflation era with a clear understanding that it was essential to anchor inflation expectations at some low level. But many believed that central bankers would find it difficult to ignore the temptation of short-term employment gains at the cost of higher inflation down the road.4 Era II, 1983 through 2009: the Great Moderation and Great RecessionAs the second era began, inflation was falling, and it continued to fall for about a decade (figure 2, panel C). In 1993, core inflation, which omits the volatile food and energy components, first fell below 2.5 percent, and has since remained in the narrow range of 0.9 percent to 2.5 percent.5Greater success on price stability came with greater success on employment. Expansions in this era were longer and more stable than before (figure 2, panel A). The era saw two of the three longest U.S. expansions up to that point in history.6 Anchored inflation expectations helped make this win-win outcome possible, by giving the Fed latitude to support employment when necessary without destabilizing inflation. The Fed was cutting, not raising, rates in the months prior to the end of the first two expansions in this era, and the ensuing recessions were mild by historical standards. And twice during the long expansion of the 1990s, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) eased policy in response to threats to growth. In 1995, responding to evidence of slowing in the United States and abroad, the FOMC reduced the federal funds rate over a few months. In 1998, the Russian debt default and the related collapse of the hedge fund Long‑Term Capital Management rocked financial markets that were already fragile from the Asian financial crisis. Given the risks posed to the U.S. economy, the FOMC again lowered the federal funds rate over a period of months until events quieted. The 10-year expansion weathered both events with no discernible inflation cost.7 By the turn of the century, it was beginning to look like financial excesses and global events would pose the main threats to stability in this new era rather than overheating and rising inflation. The collapse of the tech stock bubble in 2000 and the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks played key roles in precipitating a slowdown that turned into a recession.8And the next expansion, as we are all painfully aware, ended with the collapse of a housing bubble and the Global Financial Crisis. Thus, this second era provided good reason for optimism about the Fed's ability to deliver stable inflation, but also raised a question about whether long expansions inevitably lead to destabilizing financial excesses. Era III, 2010 and After: Monetary Policy and the Emerging New NormalThe third era began in 2010 as the recovery from the Great Recession was taking hold. My focus in discussing this era will be on a "new normal" that is becoming apparent in the wake of the crisis. I will fast-forward past the early years of the expansion and pick up the story in December 2015.9The unemployment rate had fallen from a peak of 10 percent to 5 percent, roughly equal to the median FOMC participant's estimate of the natural rate of unemployment at the time. At this point, the Committee decided that it was prudent to begin gradually raising the federal funds rate based on the closely monitored premise that the increasingly healthy economy called for more-normal interest rates. The premise was generally borne out: Growth from the end of 2015 to the end of 2018 averaged 2.5 percent, a bit above the 2.2 percent rate over the previous five years (figure 2, panel A). The unemployment rate fell below 4 percent, and inflation moved up and remained close to our 2 percent objective through much of 2018 (figure 2, panels B and C). That brings us to 2019. Before turning to issues occupying center stage at present, I want to address a long-running issue that I discussed here last year: tracking the "stars" that serve as guideposts for monetary policy.10These include u*, the natural rate of unemployment, and r*, the neutral real rate of interest. Unlike celestial stars, these stars move unpredictably and cannot be directly observed. We must judge their locations as best we can based on incoming data and then add an element of risk management to be able to use them as guides. Since 2012, declining unemployment has had surprisingly little effect on inflation, prompting a steady decline in estimates of u* (figure 3).11Standard estimates of r* have declined between 2 and 3 percentage points over the past two decades. Some argue that the effective decline is even larger.12Incorporating a lower value of u* into policymaking does not require a significant change in our approach. The significant fall in r*, however, may demand more fundamental change. A lower r* combined with low inflation means that interest rates will run, on average, significantly closer to their effective lower bound. The key question raised by this era, then, is how we can best support maximum employment and price stability in a world with a low neutral interest rate. Current Policy and the Three Key QuestionsLet me turn now to the current implications for monetary policy of the questions raised by these three eras. The first era raised the question of whether the Fed can avoid excessive inflation. Inflation has averaged less than 2 percent over the past 25 years, and low inflation has been the main concern for the past decade. Low inflation seems to be the problem of this era, not high inflation. Nonetheless, in the unlikely event that signs of too-high inflation return, we have proven tools to address such a situation. The second era's question—whether long expansions inevitably breed financial excesses—is a challenging and timely one. Hyman Minsky long argued that, as an expansion continues and memories of the previous downturn fade, financial risk management deteriorates and risks are increasingly underappreciated.13This observation has spurred much discussion. At the end of the day, we cannot prevent people from finding ways to take excessive financial risks. But we can work to make sure that they bear the costs of their decisions, and that the financial system as a whole continues to function effectively. Since the crisis, Congress, the Fed, and other regulatory authorities here and around the world have taken substantial steps to achieve these goals. Banks and other key institutions have significantly more capital and more stable funding than before the crisis. We comprehensively review financial stability every quarter and release our assessments twice a year to highlight areas of concern and allow oversight of our efforts. We have not seen unsustainable borrowing, financial booms, or other excesses of the sort that occurred at times during the Great Moderation, and I continue to judge overall financial stability risks to be moderate. But we remain vigilant. That leaves the third question of how, in this low r* world, the Fed can best support the economy. A low neutral interest rate presents both near-term and longer-term challenges. I will begin with the current context. Because today's setting is both challenging and unique in many ways, it may be useful to lay out some general principles for assessing and implementing appropriate policy and to describe how we have been applying those principles. Through the FOMC's setting of the federal funds rate target range and our communications about the likely path forward for policy and the economy, we seek to influence broader financial conditions to promote maximum employment and price stability. In forming judgments about the appropriate stance of policy, the Committee digests a broad range of data and other information to assess the current state of the economy, the most likely outlook for the future, and meaningful risks to that outlook. Because the most important effects of monetary policy are felt with uncertain lags of a year or more, the Committee must attempt to look through what may be passing developments and focus on things that seem likely to affect the outlook over time or that pose a material risk of doing so. Risk management enters our decisionmaking because of both the uncertainty about the effects of recent developments and the uncertainty we face regarding structural aspects of the economy, including the natural rate of unemployment and the neutral rate of interest. It will at times be appropriate for us to tilt policy one way or the other because of prominent risks. Finally, we have a responsibility to explain what we are doing and why we are doing it so the American people and their elected representatives in Congress can provide oversight and hold us accountable. We have much experience in addressing typical macroeconomic developments under this framework. But fitting trade policy uncertainty into this framework is a new challenge. Setting trade policy is the business of Congress and the Administration, not that of the Fed. Our assignment is to use monetary policy to foster our statutory goals. In principle, anything that affects the outlook for employment and inflation could also affect the appropriate stance of monetary policy, and that could include uncertainty about trade policy. There are, however, no recent precedents to guide any policy response to the current situation. Moreover, while monetary policy is a powerful tool that works to support consumer spending, business investment, and public confidence, it cannot provide a settled rulebook for international trade. We can, however, try to look through what may be passing events, focus on how trade developments are affecting the outlook, and adjust policy to promote our objectives. This approach is illustrated by the way incoming data have shaped the likely path of policy this year. The outlook for the U.S. economy since the start of the year has continued to be a favorable one. Business investment and manufacturing have weakened, but solid job growth and rising wages have been driving robust consumption and supporting moderate growth overall. As the year has progressed, we have been monitoring three factors that are weighing on this favorable outlook: slowing global growth, trade policy uncertainty, and muted inflation. The global growth outlook has been deteriorating since the middle of last year. Trade policy uncertainty seems to be playing a role in the global slowdown and in weak manufacturing and capital spending in the United States. Inflation fell below our objective at the start of the year. It appears to be moving back up closer to our symmetric 2 percent objective, but there are concerns about a more prolonged shortfall. Committee participants have generally reacted to these developments and the risks they pose by shifting down their projections of the appropriate federal funds rate path. Along with July's rate cut, the shifts in the anticipated path of policy have eased financial conditions and help explain why the outlook for inflation and employment remains largely favorable. Turning to the current context, we are carefully watching developments as we assess their implications for the U.S. outlook and the path of monetary policy. The three weeks since our July FOMC meeting have been eventful, beginning with the announcement of new tariffs on imports from China. We have seen further evidence of a global slowdown, notably in Germany and China. Geopolitical events have been much in the news, including the growing possibility of a hard Brexit, rising tensions in Hong Kong, and the dissolution of the Italian government. Financial markets have reacted strongly to this complex, turbulent picture. Equity markets have been volatile. Long-term bond rates around the world have moved down sharply to near post-crisis lows. Meanwhile, the U.S. economy has continued to perform well overall, driven by consumer spending. Job creation has slowed from last year's pace but is still above overall labor force growth. Inflation seems to be moving up closer to 2 percent. Based on our assessment of the implications of these developments, we will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective. The Three Questions in the Longer RunLooking back over the three eras, monetary policy has evolved to address new challenges as they have arisen. The inflation targeting regime that emerged after the Great Inflation has led to vastly improved outcomes for employment and price stability around the world. One result has been much longer expansions, which often brought with them the buildup of financial risk. This new pattern has led us to understand that assuring financial stability over time requires much greater resilience in our financial system, particularly for our largest, most complex banks. As we look back over the decade since the end of the financial crisis, we can again see fundamental economic changes that call for a reassessment of our policy framework. The current era has been characterized by much lower neutral interest rates, disinflationary pressures, and slower growth. We face heightened risks of lengthy, difficult-to-escape periods in which our policy interest rate is pinned near zero. To address this new normal, we are conducting a public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications—the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve. We are evaluating the pros and cons of strategies that aim to reverse past misses of our inflation objective. We are examining the monetary policy tools we have used both in calm times and in crisis, and we are asking whether we should expand our toolkit. In addition, we are looking at how we might improve the communication of our policy framework. Public engagement, unprecedented in scope for the Fed, is at the heart of this effort. ThroughFed Listensevents live-streamed on the internet, we are hearing a diverse range of perspectives not only from academic experts, but also from representatives of consumer, labor, business, community, and other groups. We have begun a series of FOMC meetings at which we will discuss these questions. We will continue reporting on our discussions in the FOMC minutes and share our conclusions when we finish the review next year. I will conclude by saying that we are deeply committed to fulfilling our mandate in this challenging era, and I look forward to the valuable insights that will, I am confident, be shared at this symposium. ReferencesAhmed, Shaghil, Andrew Levin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2004). "Recent U.S. Macroeconomic Stability: Good Policies, Good Practices, or Good Luck?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 86 (August), pp. 824–32. Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983). "Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 12 (1), pp. 101–21. Bernanke, Ben S. (2004). "The Great Moderation," speech delivered at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, February 20. ——— (2012). "Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30–September 1. Faust, Jon (1996). "Whom Can We Trust to Run The Fed? Theoretical Support for the Founders' Views,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 37 (April), pp. 267–83. Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977). "Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (June), pp. 473–91. Minsky, Hyman P. (1991). "Financial Crises: Systemic or Idiosyncratic (PDF)," paper presented at "The Crisis in Finance," a conference held at the Jerome Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., April 4–6. National Bureau of Economic Research, Business Cycle Dating Committee (2001).The Business-Cycle Peak of March 2001 (PDF).Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, November 26. Nelson, Edward (2013). "Milton Friedman and the Federal Reserve Chairs, 1951–1979 (PDF)," paper presented at the Economics History Seminar, University of California, Berkeley, October. Powell, Jerome H. (2018). "Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–25. Rachel, Lukasz, and Lawrence H. Summers (2019). "On Falling Neutral Real Rates, Fiscal Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation (PDF)," paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8. Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (2002). "A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy in the 1950s,"American Economic Review,vol. 92 (May), pp. 121–27. Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2003). "Has the Business Cycle Changed? Evidence and Explanations (PDF)," paper presented at "Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28–30. 1. The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) has classified business cycle turning points back to 1854 (seehttps://www.nber.org/cycles.html).Return to text 2. See Declaration of Policy, section 2 of the Employment Act of 1946, Pub. L. 79-304, ch. 33, 60 Stat 23 (1946), available athttps://fraser.stlouisfed.org/scribd/?title_id=1099&filepath=/files/docs/historical/congressional/employment-act-1946.pdf.A modified version of those goals formally became the Fed's dual mandate in 1977. For further discussion, see "Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (Humphrey-Hawkins)" on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/humphrey_hawkins_act.Return to text 3. Romer and Romer (2002) document that the Federal Open Market Committee understood the essence of sound policy. Nonetheless, as Nelson (2013) discusses, many authors argue that the way those principles were applied contributed to the fluctuations of the time.Return to text 4. As discussed by Faust (1996), the structure of FOMC governance was motivated by the traditional view that governments are tempted to resort to inflation in times of stress. With the post–World War II emphasis on full employment and understanding the role of inflation expectations, this tendency was reformulated as seeking near-term gains on employment at the cost of long-term inflation (Kydland and Prescott, 1977; Barro and Gordon, 1983).Return to text 5. Overall inflation, which is the subject of our symmetric 2 percent objective, has been somewhat more volatile, but it is neither practical nor wise to try to smooth purely transitory inflation fluctuations. As such transitory fluctuations are frequently driven by volatile food and energy prices, I am citing the stability of core inflation on a four-quarter basis as a proxy for Fed performance in achieving the relevant sense of stability.Return to text 6. Analysts debate the role that monetary policy and other factors, such as luck and structural change in the economy, played in bringing about the Great Moderation. For example, Ahmed, Levin, and Wilson (2004) find an important role for luck. Stock and Watson (2003) attribute much of the change to an unexplained improvement in the tradeoff between inflation and output variability. Like Bernanke (2004), I believe that better policy was an important factor behind the better outcomes, perhaps allowing other factors to show through.Return to text 7. Indeed, as I noted at this symposium last year, inflation ran surprisingly low in the second half of the 1990s (Powell, 2018).Return to text 8. This was an odd recession to classify. The collapse of the tech bubble was followed by several quarters of generally slow positive growth. Regarding declaring the 2001 recession, the NBER Business Cycle Dating Committee stated, "Before the [September 11] attacks, it is possible that the decline in the economy would have been too mild to qualify as a recession" (NBER, 2001, p. 8).Return to text 9. Ben Bernanke (2012) surveyed the early years of the recovery at this symposium in 2012.Return to text 10. Powell (2018).Return to text 11. The fact that inflation did not react much to changing unemployment also led some to reassess other structural features such as the slope of the Phillips curve.Return to text 12. As discussed in Rachel and Summers (2019), many factors combine to determine the normal growth rate of the economy and r*. Persistent movements in longer-term interest rates in a stable inflation environment are one indicator of r* movements.Return to text 13. See, for example, Minsky (1991).Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Town Hall, Kansas City, Missouri It is a pleasure to be here in Kansas City with Federal Reserve Bank President Esther George to talk about the future of America's payment system.1 Our payment system is a vital part of America's infrastructure that touches everyone. The choices we make about our payment infrastructure today will affect all Americans many years into the future. Today I am excited to announce the Federal Reserve will invest in a new service to help ensure that real-time payments are available to everyone. The Federal Reserve will develop the FedNow ServiceSM, a real-time payment and settlement service for the future.2Everyone deserves the same ability to make and receive payments immediately and securely, and every bank deserves the same opportunity to offer that service to its community. FedNow will permit banks of every size in every community across the country to provide real-time payments to their customers. Today, whether you are relying on ACH, a debit card, or a check, it can take as much as a few days to get access to your funds. With a Federal Reserve real-time retail payment infrastructure, the funds would be available immediately—to pay utility bills or split the rent with roommates, or for small business owners to pay their suppliers. Immediate access to funds could be especially important for households on fixed incomes or living paycheck to paycheck, when waiting days for the funds to be available to pay a bill can mean overdraft fees or late fees that can compound. Similarly, getting immediate access to funds from a sale in order to pay for supplies can be a game changer for small businesses, potentially avoiding the need for costly short-term financing. Last November, we asked the public about possible actions the Federal Reserve could take to support interbank settlement of faster payments.3We received more than 350 comments on a Federal Reserve faster payment service, representing nearly 800 organizations. Fully 90 percent of these comments called for the Federal Reserve to operate a real-time service for faster payments. Support came from a wide range of stakeholders, including individuals, merchants, fintech firms, and banks.4Commenters noted that the Federal Reserve would ensure equitable access to banks of all sizes nationwide by operating a real-time service for faster payments alongside the private-sector system. Commenters highlighted the importance of safety in faster payments and noted the Federal Reserve's record of resiliency, especially during periods of stress. Commenters observed that a Federal Reserve real-time retail payment service would increase competition, decrease market concentration, and provide a neutral platform for innovation. This broad support echoes and expands on the conclusions of the Faster Payments Task Force. Similarly, the U.S. Treasury Department recommended that "the Federal Reserve move quickly to facilitate a faster retail payment system, such as through the development of a real-time settlement service that would also allow for more efficient and widespread access to innovative payment capabilities."5 In determining the path forward, we are building on the Federal Reserve's long history of operating payment systems as a core part of the nation's payment infrastructure. Since they opened for business around the country in 1914, as directed by the Congress, the Federal Reserve Banks have provided payment and settlement services—in healthy competition with private-sector providers—to achieve public benefits ranging from resiliency to innovation to equal access. When you look across the current payment infrastructure, whether in check processing, automated clearinghouse (ACH) services, or funds transfers, you will see a Federal Reserve service operating alongside private-sector providers. The General Accountability Office has concluded that the Federal Reserve's provision of payment services has benefited the U.S. payment system and its users.6 The Federal Reserve does not have regulatory authority over the pricing set by a private-sector system or to require a private-sector system to extend the service to banks of all sizes, particularly the last mile. In some other countries, central banks have been assigned the responsibility for regulating payment systems. However, this is not the approach that Congress has taken. Instead, the Federal Reserve's role as an operator has long been seen as an effective approach to promote accessible, safe, and efficient payments in the United States. Through the FedNow Service, we will provide a foundation for the future—a modern payment infrastructure that allows innovation and competition to flourish and delivers faster payments safely and securely for all. To ensure fast payments are available to everyone, FedNow will be accessible to all banks, no matter the size. Given our long-standing service connections with more than 10,000 banks across the country, the Federal Reserve is uniquely placed to deliver this outcome. The bar is high when we assess whether the Federal Reserve should provide a new payment and settlement service, as it should be. We have carefully analyzed the criteria of the Monetary Control Act and long-standing Federal Reserve policies, considered the comments provided by a wide range of stakeholders, and studied the experiences of foreign central banks.7We are not making this decision lightly. On balance, after carefully weighing important considerations on both sides, we have concluded it is our responsibility to take action in support of a real-time payment infrastructure accessible to all. While we will work hard to stand up the FedNow Service in a timely manner, our most important goal is to achieve nationwide access for all, reflecting our public mission. Building a Modern Payment InfrastructureA key foundation of the payment infrastructure is interbank clearing and settlement—the movement of funds and the associated information between banks. Today, the U.S. retail payment infrastructure lags behind many other countries. Europe, Mexico, and Australia have already implemented real-time interbank clearing and settlement capabilities. In contrast, here in the United States, the gap between the transaction capabilities in the digital economy and the underlying payment and settlement capabilities continues to grow.8 Early adopters of fast payment services rely on a legacy infrastructure that was not designed to support faster payments. For example, some services offer real-time funds availability to certain consumers, but they conduct interbank settlement on a deferred basis using legacy systems. This type of settlement entails a buildup of obligations—like IOUs between banks—that could present real risks to the financial system in times of stress. These are not resilient long-term solutions for our dynamic economy and the banks that support it. We are seeing some companies looking to establish a payment system that bypasses our banks and our currency. Facebook's Libra project raises numerous concerns that will take time to assess and address. But one thing is clear: consumers and businesses across the country want and expect real-time payments, and the banks they trust should be able to provide this service securely—whatever their size. To provide everyone with the ability to send and receive funds securely on a 24x7x365 basis, banks need to embrace and invest in real-time innovations, and the Federal Reserve needs to provide a safe and efficient real-time interbank clearing and settlement service accessible to all banks. We are proud of our strong record of cooperating with and supporting private-sector services, while fostering competition for public benefit. We have provided vital support to the sole private-sector provider of real-time settlement for faster payments, and we will continue to do so. The Federal Reserve provided a joint account to enable the private-sector operator to offer real-time payments. Moreover, today we are announcing our intent to explore the expansion of Fedwire Funds Service and National Settlement Service operating hours to support the efficiency of the joint account structure for the private-sector real-time gross settlement (RTGS) service and provide broader benefits. That said, the joint account structure, with its requirement of prefunding and settlement on a private ledger, is fundamentally different from the approach the Federal Reserve will use to settle transactions directly between banks. Fostering a Dynamic and Resilient Payment Infrastructure That Serves EveryoneThe Federal Reserve is committed to fulfilling our public policy goals in a spirit of cooperation and competitive fairness. We are pleased that the private-sector faster payment service is in the market, and we see important benefits from the resilient and competitive market that would result from the FedNow Service providing an alternative consistent with the requirements of the Monetary Control Act. The requirement to consider the best way to make our payment and settlement services accessible to banks across the country, along with long-standing principles including cost recovery over the long run, guides our assessment of when the Federal Reserve should engage in the payment system.9In setting fees, the Federal Reserve is required by statute to "give due regard to competitive factors and the provision of an adequate level of such services nationwide."10I want to share with you some of the analysis—viewed through the prism of our public policy goals of accessibility, safety, and efficiency—that we considered in making today's decision. Accessibilitymeans serving more than 10,000 banks of varying sizes and missions that are in communities all around the country. It turns out no single private-sector provider of any U.S. payment system has ever achieved nationwide reach on its own, whether it be checks, ACH, cards, or wire transfers. Acting alone, a single private-sector RTGS service will face significant challenges in establishing an accessible infrastructure for faster payments with nationwide reach. In contrast, because of our experience with providing other services, the Federal Reserve already has invested in connections and customer service relationships with nearly every bank, small and large, across the country. Currently, we provide payment services to nearly all banks either directly or indirectly. With our 12 regional Reserve Banks, we have the capacity to meet the needs of banks serving different communities and with different needs and operating models. For that reason, commenters stated that the Federal Reserve is uniquely positioned to offer nationwide access to a new payment and settlement service for faster payments. FedNow will allow faster payments to reach banks of all sizes and their customers across the country, which is especially important for rural communities, who often struggle with access to financial services. Guided by our public mission, the Federal Reserve serves the needs of all banks, no matter how small or challenging to reach, and with competitive fairness. In response to our request for feedback last November, several commenters emphasized how much they value the Federal Reserve's mission of providing nationwide access on fair, transparent terms and expressed concern that a sole private-sector RTGS service provider may be less likely to exhibit the same commitment over the long run. Safety is also vital. If the Federal Reserve does not establish the FedNow Service, there will be a single provider of real-time retail payment services. We are mindful of the serious safety issues associated with a single point of failure, a risk that will rise as faster payments grow. Stakeholders have noted the importance of having access to more than one real-time payment service for back-up purposes in order to provide resiliency through redundancy. In fact, many banks already take advantage of having connections to multiple operators today in check, ACH, and wire services. The Federal Reserve has always had a vital role in promoting the safety and stability of the U.S. payment system by providing liquidity and operational continuity especially in times of stress. The FedNow Service would allow the Federal Reserve to extend this role into the real-time retail payment market. Finally, competition will promote efficiency and innovation. The U.S. real-time retail payment infrastructure stands to gain from competition, including through higher service quality and lower prices over the long run, which in turn should support wider adoption. The FedNow Service will provide a neutral foundation for innovation and competition in end-user faster payment services. In response to the request for feedback, merchants and fintech companies commented that a Federal Reserve real-time retail payment service could broaden the scope for innovation in faster payments. They noted that a single provider that is owned and operated by one segment of the payment industry may focus on a narrow set of use cases that do not reflect the full breadth of possible use cases for faster payments. Recognizing the vibrancy of our payment industry, the addition of the FedNow Service could provide a springboard for broader private-sector participation in the development of innovative end-user services. Looking ForwardWith the announcement of the Federal Reserve real-time payment service, we are embracing a path that will bring transformative, rather than incremental, change to the retail payment infrastructure in the United States. The FedNow Service will run continuously at all times of the day, every day of the week, consistent with the needs of faster payments and will be designed to process large volumes of payments rapidly. In the months ahead, we intend to explore a variety of approaches to achieving a real-time retail payment infrastructure with nationwide reach. One such approach might be for different payment services to interoperate by exchanging payments among the services directly. Such interoperability is an important goal that we will pursue as standards, technology, and industry practices change over time, although it is not yet clear whether it will be an initial feature. The Federal Reserve plans to devote the necessary resources to deliver the highest quality FedNow Service in a timely manner. We are working to streamline our internal processes to move quickly in the market. President George will play an integral role in this new process, and the Conference of Reserve Bank Presidents has pledged its support. It is important for the Federal Reserve, working with the payment industry, to act quickly in finalizing the initial business requirements of the FedNow Service. We will need to hear the views of payment system stakeholders on the features of the FedNow Service, as discussed in theFederal Registernotice announced today. We will engage with the industry through groups and forums to finalize the design and features of the service. We hope that these conversations will provide an opportunity for stakeholders to work together to shape the evolution of the U.S. payment system. Earlier this month, I joined my Reserve Bank colleagues for a visit with bankers and community organizations in Scranton, Pennsylvania, to hear about the biggest challenges they are facing. The head of a bank that has been serving the Scranton area for more than a century told me that for his community bank to remain competitive in its payment offerings, it is vital to be able to rely on the Federal Reserve for real-time payments just as he does for check, ACH, and wire transfer. I appreciate the importance of community banks to the economic health of our communities, and I recognize the role of the Federal Reserve in enabling community banks to offer payment services on a competitive basis. I am confident that by working together with all payment system stakeholders, we can collectively achieve widespread, safe, and efficient faster payments that will benefit all. 1. I am grateful to Susan Foley and Anjana Ravi of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments (PDF)(August 5, 2019).Return to text 3. Lael Brainard, "Supporting Fast Payments for All" (remarks at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, October 3, 2018).Return to text 4.Potential Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments (PDF), Request for Comments, 83 Fed. Reg. 57,351 (November 15, 2018).Return to text 5. Steven T. Mnuchin and Craig S. Phillips,A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunity: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation (PDF)(Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, July 2018), 156.Return to text 6. See, e.g., U.S. Government Accountability Office,Federal Reserve's Competition with Other Providers Benefits Customers, but Additional Reviews Could Increase Assurance of Cost Accuracy,GAO-16-614 (Washington: Government Accountability Office, August 2016).Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "The Federal Reserve in the Payments System" (Issued 1984; revised 1990).Return to text 8. FIS Global, "2018 Flavors of Fast."Return to text 9. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Principles for the Pricing of Federal Reserve Bank Services" (Issued 1980); and Board of Governors, "The Federal Reserve in the Payments System."Return to text 10.Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980, Pub. L. No. 96-221 (March 31, 1980).Return to text Federal Reserve announces plan to develop a new round-the-clock real-time payment and settlement service to support faster payments FedNow Service
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that the Federal Reserve Banks will develop a new round-the-clock real-time payment and settlement service, called the FedNow℠ Service, to support faster payments in the United States. The rapid evolution of technology presents a pivotal opportunity for the Federal Reserve and the payment industry to modernize the nation's payment system and establish a safe and efficient foundation for the future. The Federal Reserve believes faster payment services, which enable the near-instantaneous transfer of funds day and night, weekend and weekdays, have the potential to become widely used and to yield economic benefits for individuals and businesses by providing them with more flexibility to manage their money and make time-sensitive payments. Since its founding more than a century ago, the Federal Reserve has provided payment and settlement services, alongside and in cooperation with the private sector, as part of its core function of promoting an accessible, safe, and efficient U.S. payment system. The Federal Reserve has established over its history a broad reach as a provider of payment and settlement services to the more than 10,000 financial institutions across the country. That reach will help the FedNow Service support a nationwide infrastructure on which the financial services industry may develop innovative faster payment services for the benefit of all Americans. "Everyone deserves the same ability to make and receive payments immediately and securely, and every bank deserves the same opportunity to offer that service to its community,"saidFederal Reserve Board Governor Lael Brainard. "FedNow will permit banks of every size in every community across the country to provide real-time payments to their customers." In 2018, the Board requested public comment on potential services that could be developed by the Federal Reserve to support faster payments. Of the more than 350 comments that took a position on whether the Federal Reserve should develop a new service for faster payments, over 90 percent supported the Federal Reserve operating a round-the-clock real-time payment and settlement service alongside services provided by the private sector. The Board is now requesting comment on how the new service might be designed to most effectively support the full set of payment system stakeholders and the functioning of the broader U.S. payment system. The Board anticipates the FedNow Service will be available in 2023 or 2024. In addition, the Board is announcing its intention to explore the expansion of Fedwire Funds Service and National Settlement Service hours, up to 24x7x365, to facilitate liquidity management in private-sector real-time gross settlement services for faster payments and to support a wide range of payment activities, beyond those related to faster payments. The Board'sFederal Registernotice and a list of frequently asked questions are attached. Comments are requested within 90 days of publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 FAQs
On August 22, 2019, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on August 22, 2019, and will mature on August 29, 2019. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Thursday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and Kansas City, decreasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 3 percent to 2-3/4 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: First Ipswich Bank, Ipswich, MassachusettsFlood insurance violation civil money penalty, dated August 14, 2019 Brookline Bank, Brookline, MassachusettsFlood insurance violation civil money penalty, dated August 15, 2019 Carol Allen, former employee of Farmers & Merchants Bank, Baldwyn, MSNotice of intent to prohibit from banking, seeking restitution, and assessing a civil money penalty, dated August 19, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve plans to continue its previously announced periodic testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) with one operation in August. These operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. On August 22, 2019, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its TDF. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $250,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. EDT to 12:30 p.m. EDT, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.frbservices.org/sign-in/term-deposit-facility.html) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. EDT and 12:00 p.m. EDT. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (https://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/reserves-central/term-deposit-facility/index.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (https://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/reserves-central/term-deposit-facility/index.html). Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttps://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/reserves-central/term-deposit-facility/index.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from July 1 through July 31, 2019. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 30-31, 2019. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 30-31, 2019:HTML|PDF