Five federal financial regulatory agencies announced on Tuesday that they adopted a final rule to exclude community banks from the Volcker Rule, consistent with the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The Volcker Rule generally restricts banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading and from owning, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with hedge funds or private equity funds. Under the final rule, which is unchanged from the proposal, community banks with $10 billion or less in total consolidated assets and total trading assets and liabilities of 5 percent or less of total consolidated assets are excluded from the Volcker Rule. The final rule also permits a hedge fund or private equity fund, under certain circumstances, to share the same name or a variation of the same name with an investment adviser as long as the adviser is not an insured depository institution, a company that controls an insured depository institution, or a bank holding company. The final rule is being issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation today announced several resolution plan actions, including completing their evaluations of the 2018 resolution plans for 82 foreign banks and extending the deadline for the next resolution plans from those firms, as well as 15 domestic banks. The extensions will give the banks additional time to prepare their plans in light of resolution plan rule changes proposed by the agencies inApril 2019. Resolution plans, also known as living wills, must describe a company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. For foreign banks, resolution plans are focused on their U.S. operations. The agencies did not identify shortcomings or deficiencies, defined as weaknesses the firm would be required to address, in the 2018 resolution plans of the 82 foreign banks. The agencies are requesting additional specific information in the next resolution plans from seven firms: HSBC Holdings plc; BNP Paribas; Royal Bank of Canada; Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, S.A.; Bank of Montreal; Banco Santander, S.A.; and Toronto-Dominion Bank. The agencies extended the filing deadline for the 82 foreign banks and 15 domestic banks until July 1, 2021. This extension will mitigate uncertainty around the banks' filing requirements while the agencies' April proposal to revise the resolution plan rule remains pending. Finally, the agencies extended the next full resolution plan submission date for four other foreign banks—Barclays PLC, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank AG, and UBS AG—to July 1, 2021. These banks remain required to submit limited plans by July 1, 2020, describing how they have addressed the shortcomings identified in December 2018 and providing updates concerning certain resolution projects. List of 82 foreign banks (PDF)List of 15 domestic banks (PDF)HSBC Holdings plc (PDF)Royal Bank of Canada (PDF)Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, S.A. (PDF)Bank of Montreal (PDF)BNP Paribas (PDF)Banco Santander, S.A. (PDF)The Toronto-Dominion Bank (PDF)Lloyds Banking Group plc (PDF)Template Letter to Domestic Filers with Resolution Plans Due in December 2019 (PDF)Template Letter to Foreign Banks that Filed Resolution Plans in December 2018 (PDF)Template Letter to Barclays, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, and UBS (PDF)
The federal bank regulatory agencies today invited public comment on a proposal to clarify the treatment of land development loans under the agencies' capital rules. This proposal expands on the agencies' September 2018 proposal to revise the definition of high volatility commercial real estate (HVCRE) as required by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The land development proposal would clarify that loans that solely finance the development of land for residential properties would meet the revised definition of HVCRE, unless the loan qualifies for another exemption. The land development proposal would apply to all banking organizations subject to the agencies' capital rules. Comments will be accepted for 30 days after publication in theFederal Register. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) today released the public sections of eight large domestic firms' resolution plans, which are required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills. Resolution plans describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure. Eight firms were required to submit plans by July 1: Bank of America Corporation, Bank of New York Mellon Corporation, Citigroup Inc., Goldman Sachs Group, JPMorgan Chase & Co., Morgan Stanley, State Street Corporation, and Wells Fargo & Company. By regulation, resolution plans must be divided into public and confidential sections. To foster transparency, the agencies have required each firm's public section to summarize certain elements of the resolution plan. The public sections of the resolution plans areavailableon the FDIC and the Federal Reserve's websites. The agencies will review both the confidential and public portions of the resolution plans.
The federal bank regulatory agencies today issued a final rule that reduces regulatory burden by simplifying several requirements in the agencies' regulatory capital rules. The simplifications in the final rule only apply to banking organizations that do not use the "advanced approaches" capital framework, which are generally firms with less than $250 billion in total consolidated assets and less than $10 billion in total foreign exposure. The final rule is intended to simplify and clarify a number of the more complex aspects of the agencies' existing regulatory capital rules. Specifically, it simplifies the capital treatment for mortgage servicing assets, certain deferred tax assets, investments in the capital instruments of unconsolidated financial institutions, and minority interest. The final rule also would allow bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies to redeem common stock without prior approval unless otherwise required. Proposed revisions to the definition of high-volatility commercial real estate exposure, which were made in the notice of proposed rulemaking, are being addressed in a separate rulemaking. The final rule is consistent with the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act report issued by the agencies in 2017. In that report, the agencies committed to meaningfully reducing regulatory burden, especially on community banking organizations, while at the same time maintaining safety and soundness and the quality and quantity of regulatory capital in the banking system. The final rule will be effective as of April 1, 2020, for the amendments to simplify capital rules, and as of October 1, 2019 for revisions to the pre-approval requirements for the redemption of common stock and other technical amendments. Federal RegisternoticeHTML Board Votes
WASHINGTON – As a result of a working group established by the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, the federal bank regulatory agencies and the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) today issued a joint statement as part of continuing efforts to improve transparency into their risk-focused approach to Bank Secrecy Act (BSA)/anti-money laundering (AML) supervision. The risk-focused approach enables federal agencies to better tailor examination plans and procedures based on the unique risk profile of each bank. The statement outlines common practices for assessing a bank's money laundering/terrorist financing risk profile, assisting examiners in scoping and planning the examination and initially evaluating the adequacy of the BSA/AML compliance program. Using this approach, the agencies generally are able to allocate more resources to higher-risk areas and fewer resources to lower-risk areas when conducting BSA/AML examinations. The statement does not establish new requirements, and also notes that having a risk-based compliance program enables a bank to allocate compliance resources commensurate with its risk. This statement was developed by a working group aimed at improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the BSA/AML regime. Members include the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and FinCEN. Today's joint statement is the third statement resulting from the working group. Updated: July 24, 2019 to correct footnote 9 to 31 C.F.R § 1020.210(b)(5), originally listed as 31 C.F.R § 1010.210(b)(5).
The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced that they will not take action related to restrictions under the Volcker Rule for certain foreign funds for an additional two years. The three federal banking regulatory agencies have consulted with the staffs of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission regarding this matter. The Volcker Rule generally restricts banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading and from owning, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with hedge funds or private equity funds, known as "covered funds." Certain foreign funds that are organized and offered outside of the United States are excluded from the definition of covered fund under the agencies' implementing regulations. However, these foreign funds could become subject to restrictions under the Volcker Rule because of governance arrangements with or investment by foreign banking entities. The three federal bank regulatory agencies had announced inprevious yearsthat they would provide similar treatment to these funds. Statement regarding Treatment of Certain Foreign Funds under the Rules Implementing Section 13 of the Bank Holding Company Act (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Chemical Financial Corporation, Detroit, Michigan, to acquire TCF Financial Corporation, Wayzata, Minnesota, and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary bank, TCF National Bank, Sioux Falls, South Dakota. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that it is seeking individuals to serve on itsInsurance Policy Advisory Committee on International Capital Standards and Other Insurance Issues (IPAC). The IPAC was established by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The Board seeks to form a diverse group with expertise in life, property and casualty, and reinsurance issues. The Board also seeks a mix of professional backgrounds, including in insurance accounting, actuarial science, academia, insurance regulation, and policyholder advocacy. The Board will select up to 21 individuals, who will serve staggered terms of up to three years. The Board plans to announce the appointment of members ahead of the first semiannual meeting of the IPAC, which is tentatively set for November 4, 2019. Additional information about the selection process, including instructions on how to apply for membership on the IPAC, can be found in the attachedFederal Registernotice. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Mesaba Bancshares, Inc., Grand Rapids, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated August 3, 2011Terminated July 19, 2019 First National Financial Services, Inc., Elk River, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated April 12, 2010Terminated July 19, 2019 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday released its annual determination of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of financial companies as required by section 622 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The act prohibits a financial company from combining with another company if the resulting company's liabilities would exceed 10 percent of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of all financial companies. Effective July 1, 2019, aggregate consolidated liabilities equal $20,664,262,842,000. This number, which is the average of the year-end financial sector liabilities of the preceding two years, will be the measure of aggregate consolidated liabilities from July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020. Financial companies subject to the limit include insured depository institutions, bank holding companies, savings and loan holding companies, foreign banking organizations, and other companies that control insured depository institutions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Although growth of household spending has picked up from earlier in the year, growth of business fixed investment has been soft. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In light of the implications of global developments for the economic outlook as well as muted inflation pressures, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 2 to 2-1/4 percent. This action supports the Committee's view that sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective are the most likely outcomes, but uncertainties about this outlook remain. As the Committee contemplates the future path of the target range for the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee will conclude the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings in the System Open Market Account in August, two months earlier than previously indicated. Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, Vice Chair; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Richard H. Clarida; Charles L. Evans; and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against the action were Esther L. George and Eric S. Rosengren, who preferred at this meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. Implementation Note issued July 31, 2019
Synthetic identity payments fraud is a fast-growing but little-understood problem that affects individuals, financial institutions, government agencies, and private industry. The severity of this type of fraud is documented in a newwhite paper (PDF)released today by the Federal Reserve System. Asynthetic identity (PDF)is created by using a combination of real information (such as a legitimate Social Security number) with fictional information (which can include a made-up name, address or date of birth). Fraudsters increasingly use synthetic identities to commit payments fraud, which can escape detection by today's identity verification and credit-screening processes. Over time, fraudsters build up the creditworthiness of the synthetic identity, then "bust out" by purchasing high-value goods and services on credit and disappearing. Because the identity was not real to begin with, there is limited recourse in tracing the perpetrators and holding them responsible for their debts. Consumers whose Social Security numbers have been used for fraud face the time-consuming process of correcting their credit reports. Other consequences of synthetic identity fraud extend beyond payments fraud to include denial of disability benefits, rejection of tax returns, and inaccuracies in health records. "Crime rings see attractive opportunities in synthetic identity payments fraud," said Ken Montgomery, Federal Reserve System payments security strategy leader and chief operating officer at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. "Law enforcement officials, financial institutions, and other organizations recognize it as a growing concern. But unfortunately, many consumers don't realize how it can hurt their access to credit or how to protect themselves," he said. "The white paper provides information on the current state of synthetic identity fraud, including the scope of the issue, causes, contributing factors, and its impact on the payments industry." VisitFedPaymentsImprovement.orgto learn more and to read the Federal Reserve's white paper,Synthetic Identity Fraud in the U.S. Payment System(PDF). About the Federal Reserve and PaymentsAs the U.S. central bank, the Federal Reserve System provides payment services and seeks to foster the stability, integrity and efficiency of the nation's monetary, financial and payment systems. In 2013, the Federal Reserve initiated a broadly collaborative effort to achieve ubiquitous, nationwide access to safe and efficient faster payments in the United States. The Federal Reserve now collaborates with industry stakeholders to advance five desired outcomes outlined in the 2015Strategies for Improving the U.S. PaymentSystempaper: speed, security, efficiency, international payments, and collaboration. For more information, visitFedPaymentsImprovement.org. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meeting on June 19, 2019. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on June 18-19, 2019. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJune 18-19, 2019:HTML|PDF
Chair Jerome H. Powell At "Bretton Woods: 75 Years Later—Thinking about the Next 75," a conference organized by the Banque de France and the French Ministry for the Economy and Finance, Paris, France Seventy-five years ago this month, the foremost economic and policy minds of their generation gathered in a sleepy mountain town in New England. While World War II still raged, they envisioned a new international monetary system with rules, procedures, and institutions—including the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank—to promote recovery and stability in a war-ravaged world. Today we gather in Paris, the City of Light, to recognize their vision. The Bretton Woods institutions played a pivotal role after the war in rebuilding economies and in facilitating the international economic relations that are essential to prosperity. Generations later, the World Bank and the IMF continue to play important roles in fostering global monetary cooperation, financial stability, and international trade, as well as in promoting sustainable economic growth and reducing poverty. In 1944, those who sat around the table at the Mount Washington Hotel knew that the trauma and tragedy of the war and the Great Depression had fundamentally altered the economic systems that preceded them. For us, around our dinner tables tonight, a decade has passed since the Global Financial Crisis. Although in no way comparable to the devastating events of the 1930s and 1940s, the crisis represents the deepest and broadest financial upheaval since that era, and in many ways, we, too, are grappling with a changed world. Today's conference has looked at this post-crisis environment and the issues we now face from many angles. I am grateful to the Banque de France for organizing this important event and to the outstanding speakers for their deep insights. Tonight I will offer some thoughts on this new environment. I will begin with a discussion of current economic conditions in the United States, and then highlight some significant structural changes in the environment facing monetary policymakers in the post-crisis era. Finally, I will consider how these structural changes are affecting the framework in which we conduct monetary policy, highlighting the Federal Reserve System's ongoing review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications. The U.S. economy is now in its 11th consecutive year of growth. Unemployment has steadily declined from its 10 percent post-crisis peak and has now remained at or below 4 percent for more than a year, the longest stretch in a half century. A strong labor market with plentiful job openings has supported labor force participation. After rising only grudgingly early in the recovery, wages have moved up the past few years. Some groups, such as African Americans, Hispanics, and rural Americans, continue to face long-standing challenges, but the benefits of this strong job market are increasingly widely shared. At outreach events we are holding across the United States, we are hearing loud and clear that this long recovery is now benefiting low- and moderate-income communities to a greater extent than has been felt for decades. Many people who have struggled to stay in the workforce are now getting an opportunity to add new and better chapters to their life stories. Solid growth has sustained this strong labor market. Most recently, U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of just over 3 percent in the first quarter, similar to last year's strong pace. But first-quarter growth was driven largely by net exports and inventories—two volatile spending categories that are typically not dependable indicators of ongoing momentum. Indeed, overall growth in the second quarter appears to have moderated. Growth in consumer spending, which was soft in the first quarter, looks to have bounced back, but business fixed investment growth seems to have slowed notably. Moreover, the manufacturing sector has been weak since the beginning of the year, in part weighed down by the softer business spending, weaker growth in the global economy, and, as our business contacts tell us, concerns about trade tensions. Despite low unemployment and solid overall growth, inflation pressures remain muted. After running close to the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) symmetric 2 percent objective over much of last year, both overall consumer price inflation and core inflation moved down earlier this year. We currently estimate that the change in the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index was 1.7 percent over the 12 months ending in June. In our baseline outlook, we expect growth in the United States to remain solid, labor markets to stay strong, and inflation to move back up and run near 2 percent. Uncertainties about this outlook have increased, however, particularly regarding trade developments and global growth. In addition, issues such as the U.S. federal debt ceiling and Brexit remain unresolved. FOMC participants have also raised concerns about a more prolonged shortfall in inflation below our 2 percent target. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have shifted down, and some survey-based expectations measures are near the bottom of their historical ranges. Many FOMC participants judged at the time of our most recent meeting in June that the combination of these factors strengthens the case for a somewhat more accommodative stance of policy. We are carefully monitoring these developments and assessing their implications for the U.S economic outlook and inflation, and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective. We will also assess these developments in the context of the broader structural changes monetary policymakers have been facing since the Great Recession. I will focus on three tonight: the changed macroeconomic backdrop, the expanded toolkit, and the heightened focus on communication and transparency. In the United States, from the mid-1980s to right before the Great Recession, PCE inflation averaged 2.6 percent a year, GDP growth 3.4 percent, and the interest rate on a 10-year Treasury note 6.5 percent. Since the trough of the Great Recession, average inflation and output growth are around 1 percentage point lower, and the 10-year Treasury rate has averaged 2.4 percent. These declines are not unique to the United States. Average inflation rates for the other major advanced economies have declined by almost half, while the inflation rates of major emerging market economies are less than one-fifth of what they were. Indeed, with few exceptions, we are all facing lower rates of interest, growth, and inflation. In a number of countries, including the United States, these declines have been accompanied by strong labor markets and a much lower unemployment rate. Such changes in the macroeconomic environment are significant because the long-run normal levels of inflation, output, interest rates, and the unemployment rate are important structural features by which we guide policy. Standard estimates of the natural rate of unemployment—u*—and the neutral rate of interest—r*—have been declining for 2 decades, and particularly since the crisis. Many factors are contributing to these changes—well-anchored inflation expectations in the context of improved monetary policy, demographics, globalization, slower productivity growth, greater demand for safe assets, and weaker links between unemployment and inflation. And these factors seem likely to persist. If that happens, the neutral rate of interest will remain low, and policymakers will continue to operate in an environment in which the risk of hitting the effective lower bound is much higher than before the crisis. This proximity to the lower bound poses new complications for central banks and calls for new ideas. It is true that many of these features have been with us for some time. Trend inflation, productivity, and interest rates were declining well before the crisis. But, for monetary policymakers in that era, the threat of high inflation felt proximate, the hard-fought battle to control high inflation having been just recently won. Technological progress seemed likely to continue to sustain rapid increases in productivity—an outcome we continue to await. And the effective lower bound for interest rates was mainly a theoretical concern, except of course in Japan. The changes to the macroeconomic environment may have been in train earlier, but the crisis seems to have accelerated the process. The world in which policymakers are now operating is discretely different in important ways from the one before the Great Recession. I should also note, as is fitting given this event and this audience, that since the crisis policymakers are even more keenly aware of the relevance of global factors to our policies. The global nature of the financial crisis and the channels through which it spread sharply highlight the interconnectedness of our economic, financial, and policy environments. U.S. economic developments affect the rest of the world, and the reverse is also true. For example, the stresses surrounding the euro crisis and, later, the China-related volatility events in 2015 and 2016 led to a general pullback in demand for risky assets that put downward pressure on U.S. interest rates and weighed on U.S. confidence and growth. In addition, we have seen how monetary policy in one country can influence economic and financial conditions in others through financial markets, trade, and confidence channels. Pursuing our domestic mandates in this new world requires that we understand the anticipated effects of these interconnections and incorporate them into our policy decisionmaking. A second important feature of this new world is the tools central bankers now have to fight recessions. In the face of the dramatic economic and financial collapse during the crisis, policymakers quickly exhausted conventional monetary policy tools and employed a range of unconventional measures to support their economies. In the United States, these measures included new forms of forward guidance and a range of balance sheet policies. Broadly across different economies, so-called unconventional monetary policies have generally been successful at lowering interest rates and supporting economic recovery, though cyclical and structural headwinds have made achieving our inflation targets a challenge. A legacy of the crisis is that policymakers now have a broader range of tested tools to turn to the next time the effective lower bound is reached. We must continue to assess additional strategies and tools to bolster our economies and meet our inflation and employment mandates. Finally, the crisis and Great Recession brought into stark relief the need for transparency and accountability for central banks. Central bank communication is increasingly important and increasingly challenging. It is important because clear, transparent communication about the economy, the risks, and our policy responses is critical for the effectiveness of our tools and for our accountability to the public in a democratic society. It is challenging, because we are operating in a changing macroeconomic environment with tools that, while no longer new, remain less familiar to the public. Moreover, our audience has become more varied, more attuned to our actions, and less trusting of public institutions. Gone are the days when the Federal Reserve Chair could joke, as my predecessor Alan Greenspan did, "If I turn out to be particularly clear, you've probably misunderstood what I said."1Central banks must speak to Main Street, as well as Wall Street, in ways we have not in the past, and Main Street is listening and engaged. Where does this leave us, and how should policymakers adapt to this new environment? Recognizing challenges posed by the changing structure of the economy, the need for effective policy responses, and the importance of clear communication, central banks are taking a closer look at their strategies and the range of tools currently at their disposal. For example, the Bank of Canada examines its framework every five years as part of the renewal of its inflation-control agreement with the federal government. Canadian officials have announced the bank will "assess a broad range of monetary policy frameworks ahead of the renewal in 2021" of this agreement.2The Bank of England commissioned a review over the past year of the future of the United Kingdom's financial system and what it might mean for the bank's agenda, toolkit, and capabilities.3For our part, the Federal Reserve is conducting, for the first time, a public review of the strategy, tools, and communications that we use to promote our goals of maximum employment and price stability.4The heart of this review has been a series ofFed Listensevents around the country, in every Reserve Bank District, to hear directly from the constituencies we serve. These events have been live-streamed on the internet. Last month, we hosted a research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago to explore ways to more effectively and sustainably achieve our mandated goals. Beginning soon, the FOMC will devote time at its regular meetings to assessing the lessons from these events. We will publicly report the conclusions of our discussions, likely during the first half of next year.5 Other central banks, many represented in this room, are also looking deeply at the challenges posed by the current environment and assessing tools and strategies. I look forward to learning from your experiences and sharing ours in the coming months and years as we face the trials and opportunities of this new era. For all of us, the turmoil that preceded this new world was severe, although not as extreme as that faced by those around the table in Bretton Woods 75 years ago. Tonight let us celebrate their success and strive so that our vision for the future of the global economic and financial system proves as durable and as effective. 1. See Alan Greenspan (1988), "Trade Deficit and Budget Deficit," C-SPAN video of a speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, June 14, (quoted remark is 3 minutes, 20 seconds into the video).Return to text 2. See Bank of Canada (2018), "Bank to Review the Monetary Policy Framework ahead of 2021 Renewal, Says Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins," press release, November 20, (quoted text is in paragraph 1); and Carolyn A. Wilkins (2018), "Choosing the Best Monetary Policy Framework for Canada," speech delivered at the McGill University Max Bell School of Public Policy, Montreal, November 20.Return to text 3. See Huw van Steenis (2019), "The Future of Finance Report," Bank of England, June 20.Return to text 4. See Jerome H. Powell (2019), "Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at the Council on Foreign Relations, New York, June 25.Return to text 5. More details onFed Listensevents and related information are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the Community Bankers Roundtable, Scranton, Pennsylvania Thank you to my colleague Pat Harker for the invitation to join him here this evening. In my time at the Federal Reserve, I have found that hearing directly from people around the country about how their communities are experiencing the economy is vital to carrying out my responsibilities. It helps me to understand what is working well and what the challenges are, and it provides ideas on how to improve economic opportunities. Today I look forward to hearing your perspective on the economy and the banking business in and around Scranton. Before hearing from you, I was asked to provide my perspective on the national economy. Recent data suggest the economy is growing solidly. Consumer spending is robust, buoyed by the strong labor market and continued strong confidence. Last week's strong jobs report provided reassurance that employment has continued to expand at a healthy pace. Payrolls have risen at a 170,000 monthly pace over the past three months—more than enough to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force. The unemployment rate remains near a 50-year low, wages are growing at a moderate pace, the percentage of prime-age adults who are employed is close to its pre-crisis peak, and claims have been hovering around historic lows. Furthermore, financial conditions overall remain quite supportive of continued employment and output growth. By contrast, capital spending by businesses has been lackluster, and indicators of business sentiment have been soft. The recent G-20 summit provided a constructive change in tone about trade discussions, but business sentiment and investment plans will likely remain sensitive to uncertainty around trade and the global outlook. Fiscal policy is also a source of uncertainty, with both the debt ceiling and the federal budget needing to be resolved. Over the past year, inflation has fallen short of the Federal Reserve's 2 percent objective, and that has been the case more often than not in recent years. On the one hand, that means the economy can continue to grow without pushing inflation too high. On the other hand, inflation that runs too low for long periods can pose difficult challenges. Below-target inflation reduces the amount of room the Federal Reserve has to cut the federal funds rate to cushion the economy from negative developments. And it could lead people to lower their expectations for future inflation, which in turn could lead to an increasing shortfall of inflation from our objective.1Indeed, some indicators of longer-run inflation expectations have been on the soft side in recent months. Putting all of the pieces together, it appears the economy has been doing well so far this year, bolstered by confident consumers and a strong job market. And after fluctuations earlier in the year, financial markets currently appear supportive of growth, with borrowing rates low and the stock market at all-time highs. While the modal outlook is solid, the downside risks, if they materialize, could weigh on economic activity. Taking into account the downside risks at a time when inflation is on the soft side would argue for softening the expected path of monetary policy according to basic principles of risk management. Of course, my judgment about the actual path of policy will continue to be influenced by the evolution of the data and the risks. I am mindful that low spreads on corporate credit, together with risky corporate debt at historic highs, suggest financial imbalances are growing. We should be addressing these financial imbalances by activation of the countercyclical capital buffer, more rigorous use of stress tests, and active monitoring of leveraged lending. So what does this mean for you and the families and businesses you serve in and around Scranton? I hope and expect that the progress you have made in transforming the region's economy will continue as the expansion extends into its 11th year. I am well aware of the challenges this area has been working to overcome since the Great Recession. And I am impressed by how much has been accomplished here. You have had important success in attracting new logistics jobs to take advantage of Northeastern Pennsylvania's proximity to major cities. You are making important investments in the forward-looking "eds and meds" (education and health-care) sectors by leveraging the 19 colleges and universities in and around Scranton. There are signs that these investments are paying off. Household incomes in Scranton are growing again. The area's unemployment rate is close to its lowest level in the past 40 years. I look forward to hearing from the community bankers gathered here today about the outlook for families and businesses in Northeastern Pennsylvania and how you are helping the region invest and grow. And I am looking forward to continuing the discussions tomorrow, when I will visit with the Scranton Area Community Foundation to discuss the Northeastern Pennsylvania equitable transportation initiative, NEPA Moves, that is working on transportation solutions to connect residents with opportunity. I look forward to visiting Geisinger Fresh Food Farmacy and meeting with patients to hear about the innovative "food as medicine" program. I also look forward to visiting the Cedar Avenue corridor with the United Neighborhood Centers of Northeastern Pennsylvania to hear about the resident-driven revitalization there. Let me again thank Pat Harker and all of you for having me here today. I look forward to our discussion. 1. The federal funds rate was close to zero for nearly seven years following the financial crisis, and it likely would return to zero in a downturn. When nominal interest rates are zero, a drop in inflation expectations can be especially problematic, making the "real" interest rates that matter for household and business decisions higher than they would otherwise be and therefore less supportive of growth.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chair Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on July 11, 2019. Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member McHenry, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Reportto Congress. Let me start by saying that my colleagues and I strongly support the goals of maximum employment and price stability that Congress has set for monetary policy. We are committed to providing clear explanations about our policies and activities. Congress has given us an important degree of independence so that we can effectively pursue our statutory goals based on objective analysis and data. We appreciate that our independence brings with it an obligation for transparency so that you and the public can hold us accountable. Today I will review the current economic situation and outlook before turning to monetary policy. I will also provide an update of our ongoing public review of our framework for setting monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookThe economy performed reasonably well over the first half of 2019, and the current expansion is now in its 11th year. However, inflation has been running below the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) symmetric 2 percent objective, and crosscurrents, such as trade tensions and concerns about global growth, have been weighing on economic activity and the outlook. The labor market remains healthy. Job gains averaged 172,000 per month from January through June. This number is lower than the average of 223,000 a month last year but above the pace needed to provide jobs for new workers entering the labor force. Consequently, the unemployment rate moved down from 3.9 percent in December to 3.7 percent in June, close to its lowest level in 50 years. Job openings remain plentiful, and employers are increasingly willing to hire workers with fewer skills and train them. As a result, the benefits of a strong job market have been more widely shared in recent years. Indeed, wage gains have been greater for lower-skilled workers. That said, individuals in some demographic groups and in certain parts of the country continue to face challenges. For example, unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics remain well above the rates for whites and Asians. Likewise, the share of the population with a job is higher in urban areas than in rural communities, and this gap widened over the past decade. A box in the JulyMonetary Policy Reportprovides a comparison of employment and wage gains over the current expansion for individuals with different levels of education. Gross domestic product increased at an annual rate of 3.1 percent in the first quarter of 2019, similar to last year's pace. This strong reading was driven largely by net exports and inventories—components that are not generally reliable indicators of ongoing momentum. The more reliable drivers of growth in the economy are consumer spending and business investment. While growth in consumer spending was weak in the first quarter, incoming data show that it has bounced back and is now running at a solid pace. However, growth in business investment seems to have slowed notably, and overall growth in the second quarter appears to have moderated. The slowdown in business fixed investment may reflect concerns about trade tensions and slower growth in the global economy. In addition, housing investment and manufacturing output declined in the first quarter and appear to have decreased again in the second quarter. After running close to our 2 percent objective over much of last year, overall consumer price inflation, measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), declined earlier this year and stood at 1.5 percent in May. The 12-month change in core PCE inflation, which excludes food and energy prices and tends to be a better indicator of future inflation, has also come down this year and was 1.6 percent in May. Our baseline outlook is for economic growth to remain solid, labor markets to stay strong, and inflation to move back up over time to the Committee's 2 percent objective. However, uncertainties about the outlook have increased in recent months. In particular, economic momentum appears to have slowed in some major foreign economies, and that weakness could affect the U.S. economy. Moreover, a number of government policy issues have yet to be resolved, including trade developments, the federal debt ceiling, and Brexit. And there is a risk that weak inflation will be even more persistent than we currently anticipate. We are carefully monitoring these developments, and we will continue to assess their implications for the U.S economic outlook and inflation. The nation also continues to confront important longer-run challenges. Labor force participation by those in their prime working years is now lower in the United States than in most other nations with comparable economies. As I mentioned, there are troubling labor market disparities across demographic groups and different parts of the country. The relative stagnation of middle and lower incomes and low levels of upward mobility for lower-income families are also ongoing concerns. In addition, finding ways to boost productivity growth, which leads to rising wages and living standards over the longer term, should remain a high national priority. And I remain concerned about the longer-term effects of high and rising federal debt, which can restrain private investment and, in turn, reduce productivity and overall economic growth. The longer-run vitality of the U.S. economy would benefit from efforts to address these issues. Monetary PolicyAgainst this backdrop, the FOMC maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 2‑1/4 to 2-1/2 percent in the first half of this year. At our January, March, and May meetings, we stated that we would be patient as we determined what future adjustments to the federal funds rate might be appropriate to support our goals of maximum employment and price stability. At the time of our May meeting, we were mindful of the ongoing crosscurrents from global growth and trade, but there was tentative evidence that these crosscurrents were moderating. The latest data from China and Europe were encouraging, and there were reports of progress in trade negotiations with China. Our continued patient stance seemed appropriate, and the Committee saw no strong case for adjusting our policy rate. Since our May meeting, however, these crosscurrents have reemerged, creating greater uncertainty. Apparent progress on trade turned to greater uncertainty, and our contacts in business and agriculture report heightened concerns over trade developments. Growth indicators from around the world have disappointed on net, raising concerns that weakness in the global economy will continue to affect the U.S. economy. These concerns may have contributed to the drop in business confidence in some recent surveys and may have started to show through to incoming data. In our June meeting statement, we indicated that, in light of increased uncertainties about the economic outlook and muted inflation pressures, we would closely monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and would act as appropriate to sustain the expansion. Many FOMC participants saw that the case for a somewhat more accommodative monetary policy had strengthened. Since then, based on incoming data and other developments, it appears that uncertainties around trade tensions and concerns about the strength of the global economy continue to weigh on the U.S. economic outlook. Inflation pressures remain muted. The FOMC has made a number of important decisions this year about our framework for implementing monetary policy and our plans for completing the reduction of the Fed's securities holdings. At our January meeting, we decided to continue to implement monetary policy using our current policy regime with ample reserves, and emphasized that we are prepared to adjust any of the details for completing balance sheet normalization in light of economic and financial developments. At our March meeting, we communicated our intention to slow, starting in May, the decline in the Fed's aggregate securities holdings and to end the reduction in these holdings in September. The JulyMonetary Policy Reportprovides details on these decisions. The JulyMonetary Policy Reportalso includes an update on monetary policy rules. The FOMC routinely looks at monetary policy rules that recommend a level for the federal funds rate based on inflation and unemployment rates. I continue to find these rules helpful, although using these rules requires careful judgment. We are conducting a public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications—the first review of its kind for the FOMC. Our motivation is to consider ways to improve the Committee's current policy framework and to best position the Fed to achieve maximum employment and price stability. The review has started with outreach to and consultation with a broad range of people and groups through a series ofFed Listensevents. The FOMC will consider questions related to the review at upcoming meetings. We will publicly report the outcome of our discussions. Thank you. I am happy to respond to your questions.
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts Thank you Eric, and thank you to everyone at the Boston Fed and throughout the system who have contributed to this conference. This gathering comes a few weeks after the announcement of this year's stress test results, so let me begin by recounting the highlights of those results. They show that our financial system remains resilient and that capital planning by banks continues to improve. The largest and most complex banks were tested against a severe hypothetical recession and retained strong capital levels, well above their minimum requirements. They demonstrated the ability to withstand a severe and lasting economic downturn and still be able to lend to households and businesses. Additionally, most firms are now meeting the high expectations we have set to make sure capital planning takes into account their specific risks and vulnerabilities. This is an improvement from last year. Overall, these results are good news that confirm our financial system is significantly stronger than before the crisis. Now let me turn to the purpose of this conference, which is to sharpen our understanding of the experience gained from stress testing and apply these lessons to think about the future. And let me begin by acknowledging that—notwithstanding our openness to learning from the collective experience of all of us in this room—the future of stress testing will, in a number of important ways, necessarily resemble the past. For example, we're still going to have them. Over the course of the last 18 months, I have heard overwhelmingly—from academics, from think tanks of every stripe, from banks of every size, from regulatory colleagues both domestic and foreign—that stress tests should continue to be a key element of the Federal Reserve's supervision of systemically important banks and a key aspect of the Fed's efforts to promote financial stability. Stress tests should be regular, rigorous, and dynamic. And the banks' performance on these tests will continue to be the most risk sensitive and consequential assessment of the affected banks' capital requirements. Transparency around the stress testing process and results was a fundamental principle of the first stress test and every one that has followed, and it will remain a primary goal. Stress tests, as ever, will provide the public with essential information to assess the health of banks and the overall financial system. To be credible, stress tests will also continue to provide significant information about how the Fed does its work, so the public can understand the rigor and independence of our assessment process and how we come to our judgment of the firms we test. Fidelity to these principles, embraced in the depths of the crisis by the first stress test a decade ago, does not mean that stress testing should never change or that it hasn't changed over the years. We have learned from our experiences with the early tests and added useful features and adjustments. These include a counterparty default scenario, as well as a number of policy statements that more explicitly convey the principles we find important in a sensible stress testing program. Stress testing has evolved, and must continue to evolve, to take on what we as supervisors learn from our work and what we can learn from others. Each year, we have refined both the substance and the process of the stress tests, guided by our own experience and by critiques and suggestions from others. This feedback comes from a variety sources, including conferences such as this one, and I am confident that the presentations today will provide insights that result in improvements in our stress tests. If stress tests are to continue to be relevant and effective, I strongly believe that they must continue to change: they must respond to changes in the economy, the financial system, and the risk-management capabilities of firms. Evolutionary change has been a consistent principle of stress testing since the beginning, embraced by my predecessors at the Board of Governors and our supervisory staff and reflected in each cycle of tests. Without such adjustments, regulators, banks, and the broader public cannot get a clear and dynamic view of the capital positions of the largest banks. Stress tests each year have upheld the original principle of transparency around the capital adequacy of our largest banks. Stress tests results should allow investors, counterparties, analysts and markets to make more informed judgments about the condition of banks. Along with other regulatory measures, this transparency increases market discipline and it subjects the Federal Reserve to greater outside scrutiny and analysis. Accountability is important not only for the usual reasons that apply in a democracy but also, in this case, because stress tests can only be effective when the public has confidence in the Fed's evaluation of the capital adequacy of banks. In effect, stress tests are also a test of the Fed's supervision of large banks. In these remarks, I will first sketch out how changes in regulation, risk management, the economy, and overall financial stability have prompted alterations to stress tests over the past decade. Much of that change has enhanced transparency, which is a founding principle for stress tests. I will then suggest some ways in which the effectiveness of stress testing can be further enhanced with greater transparency. Ten years ago, in May of 2009, the Fed and the Treasury Department released the first stress test results under the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP). At that moment, the U.S. economy was in free fall. The United States had lost an astonishing three million jobs in the previous four months. One significant reason for these losses was that many businesses were severely constrained in their access to funding and found it impossible to predict when that access might improve. The goal of the first test was urgent and simple: to restore confidence in the 19 large banks that then accounted for two-thirds of the assets in the banking system. In fact, simply announcing in March that there would be tests helped stabilize bank finances. That improvement continued after the results in May outlined the quite feasible steps for raising additional capital that the banks would need to take, and did take, to be able to continue lending if adverse conditions continued. Challenging conditions did continue, but the stress tests and other actions taken in the first half of 2009 marked a turning point. The recovery from the Great Recession began in July, as the financial system came back to life, and then steadily strengthened. The principles that made that first test so effective were independence and transparency. For the first time, an independent authority, the Federal Reserve, would seek to independently assess risks.1Just as important, the details of that assessment would be shared with the public, an extent of transparency that until then wasn't characteristic of bank supervision but would become the hallmark of the regulatory framework erected in response to the crisis. The first tests relied heavily on banks' internal risk models, but they still represented a huge step in independence in providing the public with an assessment of the health and resiliency of large banks. Transparency facilitated both market discipline and accountability. The information provided to the public under the SCAP stress test reinforced the entire enterprise of estimating the capital shortfall faced by major banks. It held the banks accountable for information on their capital adequacy and required them to fill the capital hole. The next big step for stress testing came with its integration with the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), beginning in 2011. One big change from the initial SCAP test was that stress tests were no longer a one-time emergency measure intended to restore confidence in major financial institutions. Instead, they became a recurring, ongoing process intended to maintain confidence in major institutions. Second, stress tests were no longer a discretionary exercise by supervisors—under Dodd-Frank, they became the law of the land. And third, when they were integrated into CCAR, stress tests became part of acomprehensive—it's the first C in CCAR—framework for capital planning that more closely connected capital regulation to risk management of banks and overall supervision. These were changes, but with the effect of reinforcing the founding principles of the SCAP test. Transparency was enhanced when stress tests became mandatory, recurring events and the public could depend on continuing to have access to information about banks' capital adequacy. Also, the independence of those judgments was enhanced when Congress made them a statutory responsibility for the Fed and when they were integrated into our CCAR framework. Further changes to stress testing have likewise reinforced the original goals. Stress testing scenarios have become richer and more challenging, providing more information about how banks would deal with a range of adverse developments and, for example, exploring the effects of more differentiated risks that are not tied to the business cycle. Large trading banks now face an instantaneous shock to their trading assets, and many participants in the stress tests now must address how they would respond to the failure of their largest counterparty. Our stress tests demonstrate that banks have now built enough capital to withstand a severe recession. The capital-building phase of the post-crisis era is now complete, but as part of CCAR, stress testing continues to contribute to the significant and ongoing improvement since 2009 in risk management by banks. The original reason for the qualitative objection aspect of stress testing was to provide incentives for banks to address the risk-management shortcomings that the Federal Reserve had observed during the financial crisis. For example, many firms supervised by the Federal Reserve had substantial deficiencies in their ability to measure, monitor, and manage their risks. These shortcomings made it difficult for banks to accurately report their risk exposures to the Board, and consequently, threatened to undermine the credibility of the stress tests, which were, and remain, dependent on data from the banks. Since the beginning of CCAR in 2011, large banks have significantly improved their risk-management and capital-planning processes. The qualitative assessment conducted as part of the 2018 and 2019 CCAR cycles found that most firms either meet or are very close to meeting the Federal Reserve's supervisory expectations for capital planning. Large banks have improved the methods they use to identify their unique risks, now use sound practices for identifying and addressing model weaknesses, and have strong processes in place to evaluate their capital positions on a forward-looking basis. While we continue to perform a qualitative assessment and ensure that progress is retained, the improvements led the Federal Reserve to conclude that for most banks this assessment can be incorporated into our regular supervisory practices. The evolution of our qualitative assessment reflects the experience of the past 10 years of stress testing, and in particular, the great improvement in risk management by large banks and the cumulative effect of the Fed's improved supervision of large institutions. As I said earlier, for stress testing to remain effective, it must respond to changes in the economy, the financial system, and risk-management capabilities. The changes to CCAR have occurred in the context of a similarly dramatic improvement in the strength and resilience of the financial system. The firms have more than doubled their capital since the first round of stress tests in 2009. Since that time, the common equity of the largest 18 firms has increased by more than $650 billion. Let me now turn to the most recent changes to CCAR and stress testing and put them in the context of the history I have just related. Congress revisited large bank supervision last year in S. 2155, yet the legislation it passed reaffirmed the important role of stress testing. This shouldn't be surprising, because the experience of stress testing over the last 10 years has demonstrated that it is a highly useful element of large bank supervision and the promotion of financial stability. Something else that shouldn't be surprising is that this experience has revealed that periodic stress testing has turned out to be a less useful supervisory tool to evaluate the risks of smaller and less complex financial institutions. Congress made use of this experience by raising the threshold for stress testing to $100 billion in assets and providing more flexibility for the Fed to tailor stress testing for all firms. This step has, once again, advanced the principles demonstrated in the first stress test and ever since. It has increased transparency because incorporating and disclosing what we have learned about the varying effectiveness of stress testing at different types of institutions is making stress testing more effective. The accountability of the Fed is enhanced when we are seen taking on board what we have learned through successive cycles of stress tests, and this strengthens the independence and credibility of our judgments. For those of us who believe stress testing should remain central to supervision and promoting financial stability, it is vital that an adjustment such as this takes place as appropriate. With that in mind, let me review recent changes and proposed changes to the Federal Reserve's stress testing. These changes are designed to make CCAR more transparent and simple and to feature less unnecessary volatility. The first principle is transparency. We have taken a number of recent steps to enhance the transparency around our models and the stress testing process more generally. Earlier this year, the Board published enhanced disclosures on two of the key models that we use in stress testing. In addition, the Board published estimated loss rates for groups of loans with distinct characteristics, to show how supervisory models treat specific assets under stress. We will publish disclosures about two additional models in 2020 and each year thereafter until we have provided transparency about all our stress test models. At the same time, we published a new policy statement on our approach to supervisory stress testing. Among other things, the statement emphasizes the importance of independence and stability to the credibility of our stress tests. We are currently considering options to provide additional transparency regarding scenarios and scenario design and I expect that the Board will seek comment on the advisability of, and possible approaches to, gathering the public's input on scenarios and salient risks facing the banking system each year. Such a proposal may also provide additional details about the scenario design features that underpins each year's scenarios, and a range of other enhancements. Some argue that the greater transparency and disclosure promoted by recent changes and proposed changes to stress testing amounts to providing banks with the answers to the tests.2This both overstates the extent of disclosure involved and misunderstands what we are trying to accomplish in stress testing—goals that haven't changed since the spring of 2009. If the goal were only to conduct a test that was difficult to pass—like the qualifying exams for some of the more esoteric and restrictive high-IQ societies—then trying to explain principles, scenario design, and how models work would be inappropriate. If the measure of success for the Fed in administering a stress test was simply how many banks failed, then greater transparency would indeed be a mistake. But that is not the purpose of stress testing, and it never has been. The vitally important goal is to improve and sustain good risk management and capital planning at the individual institutions we supervise and to promote the stability of the financial system. Like a teacher, we don't want banks to fail, we want them to learn. In this case, we want them to learn good risk management in the context of forward-looking capital planning. This will provide the public with more information about the capital planning of major banks, and about how the Federal Reserve views good capital planning and risk management, bolstering our credibility. The second principle reflected in recent changes to stress testing is simplicity. One important proposal—what we are calling the stress capital buffer—would simplify the Fed's large bank capital rule by integrating the stress testing process with our traditional regulatory capital rules. Our regulatory capital rule includes both minimum capital requirements and a buffer that sits on top of those minimum requirements. The buffer serves as an early warning to a firm and to supervisors, and it requires the firm to reduce its capital distributions as the firm approaches the minimum requirements. Integrating these two standards is a natural evolution of CCAR away from its origins during the crisis, when such tailoring was impractical and policy makers had not yet considered the approach of a regulatory capital buffer on top of a regulatory capital minimum. The stress capital buffer would result in a more transparent and simplified system of regulatory capital requirements because a firm will be held to a single, integrated capital regime. The stress capital buffer would not reduce the stringency of the regulatory capital framework for large banks, but it would effect a substantial simplification of that framework. By my math, the number of different capital requirements applicable to large banks would fall from 18 to eight and the number of different total loss absorbing capacity requirements for large banks would fall from 24 to 14. I expect that we will move forward with a revised stress capital buffer proposal in the near future, reflecting many of the comments received on our original proposal. The third principle addressed by the recent changes is volatility. When I think about volatility in stress testing, I want to distinguish what I consider to be useful variation in the tests, in the form of exploration of salient risks, from what I consider to be less useful variation, in the form of unexpected swings in capital requirements that don't have any particular relationship to changing risks at individual firms. In addition, one source of volatility in the tests comes from the fact that banks are forced to do their capital planning before they get the results of our tests. I will address each of these concerns in turn. In distinguishing useful from less useful volatility, one option to address the year-over-year volatility of the tests would be to average the results of the tests from the previous year or years. This would not affect the overall stringency of the tests but, mathematically, would mean that no single year could have an outsized influence on the amount of capital that a bank is required to maintain. The potential downsides to this approach include the reduced risk sensitivity that a bank may experience to a particular test and potential technical challenges associated with changes to a bank's balance sheet and earnings. Bearing in mind these potential challenges, I believe more thinking and discussion of this issue would be fruitful. With respect to the second concern, as I have said before, I believe it more rational and logical for firms to be able to plan for their capital needs with the benefit of the results of our tests. Given the huge strides that the banks have made in their capital planning and in meeting our expectations, I view the risk of banks backsliding in this regard to be minimal because it would be evident in the next test. Our capital-planning expectations will not decline, and we will continue to use the supervisory process to enforce these expectations. It is my hope that greater transparency can play a role in other parts of our supervisory process—for example, by allowing other aspects of bank supervision to benefit from public input. Greater transparency for supervision is in keeping with one of the biggest improvements to the regulatory framework and to stress testing since the financial crisis. I believe the changes and proposed changes to stress testing that I have discussed today reinforce the founding principles of the first test, administered in the challenging and uncertain spring of 2009, and reflect what we have learned each year over the decade since then. That process of learning and refining should and must continue in order to keep stress tests as relevant and effective as they have been in helping to reduce the chances of another severe crisis. 1.On May 7, 2009, theresultsof the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program were announced by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.Return to text 2.Mark J. Flannery, Simon H. Kwan, and Mahendrarajah Nimalendran, "Market evidence on the opaqueness of banking firms' assets,"Journal of Financial Economics71, no.3 (2004): 419–60.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At "The Bank of Finland Conference on Monetary Policy and Future of EMU [Economic and Monetary Union]," Helsinki, Finland I am delighted to be in Helsinki at this important conference on monetary policy and the future of Europe's monetary union.1Today I would like to discuss the broad review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy framework that my fellow policymakers and I are undertaking this year. We are examining the policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that we use to pursue our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. In my remarks, I will describe the motivation for and scope of this review and discuss some of the events that are taking place. In our review, we are being transparent and open minded, and we are seeking perspectives from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including academics, other specialists, and the public at large. Motivation for the ReviewThe fact that the Federal Reserve is conducting this review does not suggest that we are dissatisfied with the existing policy framework. Indeed, we believe our existing framework has served us well, helping us effectively achieve our statutorily assigned dual-mandate goals. Nonetheless, in light of the unprecedented events of the past decade, we believe it is a good time to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we can refine our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and maintain these goals as consistently and robustly as possible.2I note that central banks in other countries have conducted periodic reviews of their monetary policy frameworks, and their experience has informed the approach we are pursuing. With the U.S. economy operating at or close to maximum employment and price stability, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review. The unemployment rate is near a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective. By conducting this review, we are ensuring that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years. In addition, the Federal Reserve used new policy tools and enhanced its communications in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession, and the review is evaluating these changes. Furthermore, U.S. and foreign economies have significantly evolved since the pre-crisis experience that informed much of the research that provided the foundation for our current approach. Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates—or r*—appear to have fallen in the United States and abroad.3Moreover, this global decline in r* is widely expected to persist for years. The decline in neutral policy rates likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, changes in risk-taking behavior, and a slowdown in technology growth. These factors' contributions are highly uncertain, but, irrespective of their precise role, the policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important. All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns. That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support spending and employment, and keep inflation from falling too low.4 Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource slack. That is, the short-run Phillips curve appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5A flatter Phillips curve is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword. It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.6However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations. Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7 Finally, the strengthening of the labor market in recent years has highlighted the challenges of assessing the proximity of the labor market to full employment. The unemployment rate, which stood at 3.6 percent in May, has been interpreted by many as suggesting that the labor market is currently operating beyond full employment. However, the level of the unemployment rate that is consistent with full employment is not directly observable and thus must be estimated. I believe the range of plausible estimates extends to 4 percent or below. For example, in the Summary of Economic Projections submitted in conjunction with the June meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the range of estimates for the longer-run normal unemployment rate is 3.6 to 4.5 percent.8 The decline in the unemployment rate in recent years has been accompanied by a pronounced increase in labor force participation for individuals in their prime working years.9These increases in prime-age participation have provided employers with a source of additional labor input and have been one factor restraining inflationary pressures. As with the unemployment rate, whether participation will continue to increase in a tight labor market remains uncertain. The strong job gains of recent years also have delivered benefits to groups that have historically been disadvantaged in the labor market. For example, African Americans and Hispanics have experienced persistently higher unemployment rates than whites for many decades.10However, those unemployment rate gaps have narrowed as the labor market has strengthened, and there is some indication of an extra benefit to these groups as the unemployment rate moves into very low territory.11Likewise, although unemployment rates for less-educated workers are persistently higher than they are for their more-educated counterparts, such gaps appear to narrow as the labor market strengthens.12And wage increases in the past couple of years have been strongest for less-educated workers and for those at the lower end of the wage distribution.13 Scope of the ReviewIn the Federal Reserve Act, the Congress assigned the Federal Reserve the responsibility to conduct monetary policy "so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."14Our review this year takes this statutory mandate as given and also takes as given that inflation at a rate of 2 percent is most consistent over the longer run with the congressional mandate. Our existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.15First adopted in January 2012, the statement has been reaffirmed at the start of each subsequent year, including at the FOMC's meeting this past January with unanimous support from all 17 FOMC participants. The statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level. In doing so, the FOMC recognizes that these assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. According to the Federal Reserve Act, the employment objective is on an equal footing with the inflation objective. As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy framework known in the research literature as "flexible inflation targeting."16However, the Fed's mandate is much more explicit about the role of employment than that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedent over the other. We believe this transparency about the balanced approach the FOMC takes has served us well over the past decade when high unemployment called for extraordinary policies that entailed some risk of inflation. The review of our current framework is wide ranging, and we are not prejudging where it will take us, but events of the past decade highlight three broad questions. Three QuestionsThe first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?" Under our current approach as well as that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks around the world, the persistent shortfalls of inflation from 2 percent that many advanced economies have experienced over most of the past decade are treated as "bygones." This means that policy today is not adjusted to offset past inflation shortfalls with future overshoots of the inflation target (nor do persistent overshoots of inflation trigger policies that aim to undershoot the inflation target). Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots, but the ELB on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more likely. Persistent inflation shortfallscarry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become poorly anchored or become anchored below the stated inflation goal.17 In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated "makeup" strategies under which policymakers seek to undo, in part or in whole, past inflation deviations from target. Such strategies include targeting average inflation over a multiyear period and price-level targeting, in which policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path.18These strategies could be implemented either permanently or as a temporary response to extraordinary circumstances. For example, the central bank could commit, at the time when the policy rate reaches the ELB, to maintain the policy rate at this level until inflation over the ELB period has, on average, run at the target rate.19Other makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case.20In many models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average performance on both legs of the dual mandate and thereby, viewed over time, provide no conflict between the dual-mandate goals.21 The benefits of the makeup strategies rest heavily on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes—for example, that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent. As is well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at that time will not warrant doing so. Because of this time inconsistency, any makeup strategy, to be successful, would have to be understood by the public to represent a credible commitment. That important real-world consideration is often neglected in the academic literature, in which central bank "commitment devices" are simply assumed to exist and be instantly credible on decree. Thus, one of the most challenging questions is whether the Fed could, in practice, attain the benefits of makeup strategies that are possible in models. The next question the review will consider is, "Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? And, if so, how?" The FOMC's primary means of changing the stance of monetary policy is by adjusting its target range for the federal funds rate. In December 2008, the FOMC cut that target to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions. Because the U.S. economy required additional policy accommodation after the ELB was reached, the FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis: balance sheet policies and forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.22 The FOMC altered the size and composition of the Fed's balance sheet through a sequence of three large-scale securities purchase programs, via a maturity extension program, and by adjusting the reinvestment of principal payments on maturing securities. With regard to forward guidance, the FOMC initially made "calendar based" statements, and, later on, it issued "outcome based" guidance. Overall, the empirical evidence suggests that these added tools helped stem the crisis and support economic recovery by strengthening the labor market and lifting inflation back toward 2 percent. That said, estimates of the effects of these unconventional policies range widely.23 In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, we will examine additional tools to ease policy when the ELB is binding. During the crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve considered but ultimately found some of the tools deployed by foreign central banks wanting relative to the alternatives it did pursue. But the review will reassess the case for these and other tools in light of more recent experience in other countries. The third question the review will consider is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?" Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting. Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication practices both to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions and to foster democratic accountability. These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about the principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.24 As part of the review, we will assess the Committee's current and past communications and additional forms of communication that could be helpful. For example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability. Activities and Timeline for the ReviewLet me turn now to our review process.25The Board and the Reserve Banks are conductingFed Listensevents, during which we are hearing from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development professionals, and academics. One of ourFed Listensevents was a research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago in early June, with speakers and panelists from outside the Fed. I would like to give a brief summary of what we heard there: Janice Eberly, James Stock, and Jonathan Wright provided a thorough and thoughtful evaluation of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications since 2009. Lars Svensson evaluated the pros and cons of several monetary policy strategies that have makeup features, and argued that average inflation targeting could be more likely than price-level targeting to be understood by the public and garner credibility. Cynthia Wu and Eric Sims used a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model to analyze the efficacy of several policy tools at the ELB—forward guidance, negative interest rates, and asset purchases—and the interactions between them. Stephen Cecchetti and Kermit Schoenholtz assessed the Federal Reserve's communication practices and offered suggestions for improving our most important communication vehicles. In other sessions, Katharine Abraham and John Haltiwanger developed an innovative search-and-matching model to estimate labor market slack—which complements the standard estimates based on unemployment gaps and Phillips curve relationships. Maurice Obstfeld examined the ways that global economic integration affects inflation and the neutral rate of interest, and the role played by the U.S. dollar in transmitting the Federal Reserve's monetary policy to other countries. Anil Kashyap and Caspar Siegert spoke about the interplay between financial stability considerations and monetary policy. Our conference also included two sessions with national and community leaders. A panel discussion moderated by Fed Governor Lael Brainard provided a valuable perspective on the labor market that could not otherwise be gleaned from the aggregate statistics we often consult. Another panel discussion moderated by Federal Reserve Bank of Boston President Eric Rosengren offered valuable perspectives about how the monetary levers we pull and push affect communities, credit availability, and small businesses. In addition to the Chicago conference, 7 of the 12 Reserve Banks have hostedFed Listenssessions, and other events are planned for later this year. From these listening sessions, we have heard about innovative partnerships involving employers, workforce development groups, and community colleges to fill training gaps, and about greater flexibility in the workplace around entry requirements and working arrangements. This innovation and flexibility are coming when the labor market is tight and qualified workers are scarce, and so are welcome developments from the perspective of job creation and retention. All of ourFed Listensevents are being conducted with a high degree of transparency. (You can view videos of the events or read the summaries on our website.) In coming regularly scheduled FOMC meetings, we will begin our own assessment of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices, informed by what we heard at the conference and during our listening sessions in the Federal Reserve Districts and by the work of our staff. When the Committee tackles important issues, we take the time for wide-ranging and candid discussions, and so I expect our deliberations will continue over several meetings for the remainder of this year. We will share our findings with the public when we have completed our review, likely during the first half of next year. Concluding ThoughtsThe economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges. So it makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate finding. What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019)."Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?" (PDF)paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8. Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 54 (April), pp. 728–52. Bank for International Settlements (2017).87th Annual Report(PDF).Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June,. Bauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2014)."The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases," (PDF)International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (September), pp. 233–89. Baumeister, Christiane, and Luca Benati (2013)."Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread Compression at the Zero Lower Bound," (PDF)International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 9 (June), pp. 165–212. Berg, Claes, and Lars Jonung (1999). "Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 1931–1937,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 43 (June), pp. 525–51. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007)."Federal Reserve Communications,"speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14. ——— (2017)."Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy,"Ben Bernanke's Blog,October 12. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015)."Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications," (PDF)IMF Working Paper WP/5/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018a).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, February. ——— (2018b).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, July. ——— (2019).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, February. Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006). "Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 88 (August), pp. 445–62. Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010). "How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 369–422. Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (2018)."The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy," (PDF)Occasional Paper Series 217. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, December. Bullard, James (2018)."The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve," (PDF)speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19. Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017)."Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012)."Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance," (PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 1–80. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Jonas D.M. Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi (2017). "Forward Guidance and Macroeconomic Outcomes since the Financial Crisis," in Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016,vol. 31. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 283–357. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics,(PDF)report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. Chen, Han, Vasco Cúrdia, and Andrea Ferrero (2012). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F289–315. Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019)."Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Clarida, Richard H. (2012). "What Has—and Has Not—Been Learned about Monetary Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment? A Review of the 2000s,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 123–40. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147–80. Clinton, Kevin, Charles Freedman, Michel Juillard, Ondra Kamenik, Douglas Laxton, and Hou Wang (2015)."Inflation-Forecast Targeting: Applying the Principle of Transparency," (PDF)IMF Working Paper WP/15/132. Washington: International Monetary Fund, June. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David López‐Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F415–46. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large‐Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 108 (May), pp. 425–48. Economic Policy Institute (2019).State of Working America Data Library. Washington: EPI, March. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003)."The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy," (PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 139–235. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015)."The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. English, William B., David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (May), pp. 22–70. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018)."Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds.,Handbook of Economic Forecasting,vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2–56. Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018). "Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13-14. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian P. Sack (2011)."Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?" (PDF)FRBNYEconomic Policy Review,vol. 17 (May), pp. 41–59. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 3–46. Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018)."From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Hills, Timothy S., Taisuke Nakata, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016)."The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108, Supplement 1 (May), pp. S59–75. Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011)."The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom," (PDF)International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 7 (September), pp. 113–61. Joyce, Michael, David Miles, Andrew Scott, and Dimitri Vayanos (2012). "Quantitative Easing and Unconventional Monetary Policy—An Introduction,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F271–88. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017)."Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," (PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317–96. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014)."Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate," (PDF)NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007)."Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate,"speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. Nakov, Anton (2008)."Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate," (PDF)International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 4 (June), pp. 73–127. Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005). "Average Inflation Targeting,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (October), pp. 837–63. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017)."Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay?" (PDF)International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 13 (September), pp. 1–42. Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. Roberts, John M. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193–230. Romer, David (2010). "A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 42 (August), pp. 951–57. Ruge-Murcia, Francisco (2014)."Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price Level?" (PDF)International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (June), pp. 301–26. Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013)."The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping?" (PDF)inWorld Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 79–95. Swanson, Eric T. (2017). "Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper Series 23311. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April (revised August 2018). ——— (2018). "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Weingarden, Alison (2017)."Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities,"FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25. Woodford, Michael (2012)."Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound," (PDF)paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30–September 1. Yellen, Janet (2015)."Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. ——— (2017)."The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Etienne Gagnon and Ellen Meade for assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework. They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.Return to text 3. For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).Return to text 4. For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).Return to text 5. For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).Return to text 6. One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010). As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions. Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.Return to text 7. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation. Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s. These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.Return to text 8. The box "How Tight Is the Labor Market?" in the Board's February 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains a discussion of some indicators that can be used to assess labor market tightness; see Board of Governors (2018a, pp. 8–9).Return to text 9. The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp. 8–10).Return to text 10. See Cajner and others (2017) for a careful examination of how labor market differentials by race and ethnicity have evolved over time.Return to text 11. See Aaronson and others (2019) for evidence on the relative behavior of unemployment rates by race and ethnicity in a strong labor market. The authors find similar patterns for labor force participation rates and for employment-to-population ratios.Return to text 12. Disparities in labor market outcomes are also evident between urban and rural areas of the United States. However, these gaps have not narrowed as the labor market has strengthened. The box "Employment Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas" in the Board's February 2019Monetary Policy Reportexamines these disparities in more detail; see Board of Governors (2019, pp. 10–12). See also Weingarden (2017).Return to text 13. Wage gains for workers with different wage levels and with different levels of education can be calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Economic Policy Institute (2019) provides convenient tabulations of these data.Return to text 14. Even though the act lists three distinct goals, the Federal Reserve's mandate for monetary policy is commonly known as the "dual mandate." The reason is that an economy in which people who want to work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly quickly and in which the price level (meaning a broad measure of the price of goods and services purchased by consumers) is stable creates the conditions needed for interest rates to settle at moderate levels. For a discussion, see Mishkin (2007). Quoted text from theFederal Reserve Actis in 12 U.S.C. § 225a (2000).Return to text 15. The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf.Return to text 16. For a discussion of this terminology and references, see English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) and Clinton and others (2015).Return to text 17. These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB. For related discussions, see Reifschneider and Williams (2000); Adam and Billi (2007); Nakov (2008); and Hills, Nakata, and Schmidt (2016).Return to text 18. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion. Nessén and Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting. There is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations. Central banks that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon—typically a couple of years ahead or over the "medium run"—without regard to past inflation deviations. One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of "2–3 per cent, on average, over the medium term" and thus might embed some notion of history dependence. However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation goal. The only known historical example of price-level targeting occurred in Sweden from 1931 to 1933 when the country abandoned the gold standard and attempted instead to maintain its price level. The temporary adoption of price-level targeting is credited with helping Sweden avoid deflation, an outcome that contrasted with that in countries that stayed on the gold standard. See Berg and Jonung (1999).Return to text 19. See Bernanke (2017) for a discussion of such a strategy. See Hebden and López-Salido (2018) for a quantitative assessment of that and other strategies. See also Kiley and Roberts (2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns.Return to text 20. See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy rate lower than otherwise. The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the Board's July 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp. 37–41).Return to text 21. See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S. economy.Return to text 22. As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017). In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase households and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery. These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.Return to text 23. On the transmission channels of balance sheet policies, see D'Amico and others (2012), Joyce and others (2012), Clarida (2012), Woodford (2012), and Bauer and Rudebusch (2014). On the financial market effects of balance sheet policies, see Gagnon and others (2011), Joyce and others (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), D'Amico and King (2013), and Swanson (2017). For discussions of the macroeconomic effects of these policy actions, see Chen, Cúrdia, and Ferrero (2012); Baumeister and Benati (2013); Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Chung and others (2019), and the references therein. For related assessments of forward guidance, see Campbell and others (2012); Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Campbell and others (2017); and Swanson (2017).Return to text 24. Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannualMonetary Policy Report.With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon. Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members. For a discussion and data, see Bernanke (2007) and Romer (2010).Return to text 25. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review," a research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good morning everyone and thank you to President Rosengren and the Boston Fed for hosting this conference. The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to stress testing as a cornerstone of our bank supervisory and financial stability missions. Stress testing is perhaps the most successful supervisory innovation of the post-crisis era. But if stress tests are to continue to serve their critical function, they will need to evolve in the years ahead to keep pace with the ever-changing financial system, as they have since the first round of tests in 2009. Before looking to the future, let me recall a bit of history. A little more than 10 years ago, the United States and the world teetered on the brink of economic catastrophe. What was urgently needed was a way to restore confidence in the financial system—a daunting challenge. Neither the banks, nor the regulators, nor the public had a reliable sense of the strength and resilience of our major banks. The announcement of forward-looking stress-testing results in May 2009 helped restore confidence and stabilize banks by providing a credible and independent picture of their finances.1These original stress tests evolved into the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, or CCAR, program, which has served to institutionalize capital planning by firms, and supervision by the Fed, as a forward-looking endeavor. Since 2009, large banks have added more than $800 billion in common equity capital, giving them a much thicker cushion to deal with losses. Banks have gotten much better at assessing and managing their risks, effectively tracking commitments across their organizations, anticipating capital needs, and planning for different scenarios. The stress tests of the future—5 and 10 years from now—will need to continue to ensure that banks remain able, even in a severe downturn, to provide the credit that households and businesses depend on. As financial institutions and the financial system evolve, stress testing will need to keep up. When the next episode of financial instability presents itself, it may do so in a messy and unexpected way. Banks will need to be ready not just for expected risks, but for unexpected ones. Thus, the tests will need to vary from year to year, and to explore even quite unlikely scenarios. If the stress tests do not evolve, they risk becoming a compliance exercise, breeding complacency from both supervisors and banks. We might also, inadvertently, encourage the development of a banking system where, over time, all banks would look much alike rather than the banking system we want and need, one with diverse institutions with different business models. We simply can't let these things happen. The purpose of today's gathering is to help us think about how to ensure the tests continue to foster a dynamic banking system, financial stability, and a healthy and growing economy. We have invited a wide range participants—fellow regulators, bankers, analysts, academics, and community groups—with diverse perspectives. Because we do not claim a monopoly on knowledge or wisdom, we have invited many who have disagreed with us in the past. I strongly believe that diverse perspectives and healthy debate will sharpen our thinking and lead us to better answers. I'm sorry I'm not able to be with you today. And I want to particularly thank all of the speakers, discussants, and other participants for helping us grapple with the challenges of ensuring that tomorrow's stress tests remain as effective and vigorous as they are today. Thank you. 1.The stress tests were announced in February 2009, and the results were released in May 2009. See, respectively, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2009), "Agencies to Begin Forward-Looking Economic Assessments," joint press release, February 25; and Board of Governors (2009), "Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC Release Results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program," press release, May 7.Return to text