Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Conference for Community Bankers, sponsored by the American Bankers Association, San Diego, California Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here today to talk about the Federal Reserve's commitment to and oversight of community banking. I appreciate the invitation to attend the American Bankers Association's Conference for Community Bankers, as community banking has been a focus of my career and plays a vital role in supporting our economy. I believe it is particularly important to bring together community bankers at conferences like this to discuss issues impacting your banks and the communities that you serve. As many of you know, before joining the Federal Reserve, I was a community banker and more recently had the privilege to serve as the Kansas State Bank Commissioner. While I'm not the first community banker to serve on the Board, I now have the honor of being the first governor to fill the role designated for someone with community banking experience on the Federal Reserve Board, a position that was created by statute in 2015.1I plan to fulfill this unique responsibility by traveling widely and listening closely to community bankers, consumers, small business owners, community leaders--all of the stakeholders with an interest in this area. I will take back the knowledge I gain from these discussions and use it to improve our work. And in the process, I hope to help you better understand what the Federal Reserve is doing and what we are trying to accomplish. In doing so, I am confident our work will be more effective and efficient. As you all know well, community banks are a critical engine of the economy, and they play a key role in providing access to credit in communities of all sizes--big, small, rural, and every size in between. Community bankers not only assist in making people's dreams come true--whether the dream is starting a small business, buying a home or farm, or financing a car. They also provide critical leadership in their communities in many ways--including serving on local boards of schools and hospitals, donating to nonprofits, and volunteering in the community. For all of these reasons, and more, I firmly believe a thriving community banking sector is important to the health of the economy. Like many of you, I witnessed firsthand how community banks were significantly affected by the Global Financial Crisis, a crisis they did not cause. In my work as state bank commissioner, I learned how bank failures affected cities and towns across the country, and in my home state of Kansas I saw the profound effects a single failure can have on a community. To ensure that community banks can continue to meet the credit needs of their communities, the Federal Reserve and other banking agencies strive to achieve a fair balance between safety and soundness and reducing unnecessary regulatory burden. Given the straightforward nature of community banking, regulators have an obligation to develop and refine approaches to supervision that fit the smaller size and less-complex risk profiles of these banks. If we keep our focus on appropriately tailoring regulatory requirements for community banks so they may continue to prudently thrive, then community bankers should be able to devote more resources and time to serving their customers and communities. Ultimately, when access to credit is limited, communities suffer and so does the larger economy. In view of these goals and contributions, and an understanding that systemic risk is not likely to be posed by any single community bank, the Federal Reserve continues to tailor supervision and refine our approach to risk-focused examinations of community banks. We are also charged with supervising financial institutions to make sure they comply with applicable federal consumer protection laws and regulations. Here too, we apply a risk-focused approach to consumer compliance supervision, focusing most intensely on those areas involving the greatest compliance risk. Similarly, we want to ensure that rules that address the risks posed by the business models of the largest banks do not unintentionally create barriers to entry or unnecessary burden for community banks. During the remaining time with you today, I will touch on the condition of community banks, and supervision and regulation of community banks. I am also interested in hearing your perspective on the challenges and opportunities in the current community bank landscape. Condition of Community BanksWhen I analyze how community banks are faring, I always keep in mind that the range of institutions we call community banks is remarkably diverse. As Kansas State Bank Commissioner, I oversaw banks that had four employees and less than $20 million in assets up to institutions with more than 100 employees and more than $1 billion in assets. It's the same picture nationwide. Though if we look more closely, we can see that three out of four community banks hold assets of less than $500 million. As a regulator, I am particularly interested in how our work affects institutions of this size. One good reason for this interest is the distinct contribution community banks make to economic activity. For example, while community banks account for just 17 percent of financial industry assets, they are responsible for some 53 percent of bank lending to small businesses. Further, the health of the community banking sector has improved significantly since the financial crisis. Over the past decade, the majority of community banks have maintained high common equity tier 1 capital levels--consistent with the "well-capitalized" designation under regulatory capital standards. Though there are considerable challenges to the community bank model, these banks continue to post strong earnings, which, in turn, contribute to healthy capital accounts. In fact, given the sound condition of the banking industry, there were no community bank failures in 2018. Our job now is to ensure that community banks continue to remain strong. That requires bankers and supervisors alike to stay vigilant in the management and supervision of risks facing these institutions and the community bank model. While banks are performing well and loan portfolios are growing, we want to ensure that loans are underwritten prudently. We also want bankers to actively manage concentrations of credit risk, and be mindful that strong lending activity can strain liquidity. For example, concentrations of commercial real estate are rising, and are quite high at some banks, prompting us to remind bankers of the difficulties that such concentrations presented in the past. We also continue to focus on concentrations of agricultural credit. In an ongoing effort to understand the emerging risks related to agricultural lending, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City facilitates a National Agricultural Credit meeting semiannually. In late March of this year, the Federal Reserve will be hosting this meeting in Washington, D.C. In April, the Board will meet with the Community Depository Institution Advisory Council. I view meetings like these as important learning opportunities where I can hear directly from leaders in the field about the challenges and opportunities in community banking. These meetings and direct lines of communication with community bankers help to inform one of the Board's primary goals of ensuring that both supervisory programs and regulations are appropriately tailored to the size, complexity, and risk of a financial institution. Supervision and Regulation of Community BanksThe Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies have demonstrated a commitment to reducing regulatory burden, especially on community banks, while maintaining safety and soundness. In particular, the Federal Reserve has acted to implement provisions of S. 2155 that provide relief to community banks. Several proposals were issued at the end of last year, and I'd like to encourage this group to submit your views and comments on these proposals. It is important for the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies to receive input directly from community bankers. One of these important proposals is to implement the community bank leverage ratio. While the community bank leverage ratio proposal would increase the minimum leverage ratio for banks that opt in to the new framework, the proposal would allow qualifying community banks to opt out of the more complicated risk-based capital framework. Other proposals include raising to $400,000 the threshold for determining when an appraisal is required for a residential real estate transaction, and excluding community banks from the Volcker rule. The Federal Reserve also acted to raise the asset threshold from $1 billion to $3 billion of total consolidated assets for the Small Bank Holding Company and Savings and Loan Holding Company Policy Statement. This change allows more banking companies that have limited access to the capital markets to take advantage of using debt in bank acquisitions. This helps foster local ownership of small banks. The change also exempts eligible small holding companies from consolidated risk-based capital rules, a significant burden reduction. In December, the federal banking agencies issued a final rule allowing qualifying insured depository institutions with less than $3 billion in total assets to benefit from an extended 18-month on-site examination cycle. This increases the former threshold of $1 billion and provides examination burden relief to a substantial number of community banks with relatively simple risk profiles. With respect to supervision, the Federal Reserve continues to tailor and reduce burden by conducting portions of community bank examinations offsite. However, we also understand the importance of face-to-face interaction and continue to be responsive to bankers' requests for on-site examinations. The Federal Reserve has also implemented a risk-focused supervisory program--the Bank Exams Tailored to Risk (BETR) program--which aims to identify low-risk activities within state member banks and apply appropriately streamlined examination work programs to these activities, and conversely, to identify high-risk activities within state member banks for prompt supervisory attention. This enhanced tailoring of supervision minimizes regulatory burden for the many community banks that are well managed, and directs supervisory resources to higher-risk activities where they are most needed to contain the risks that can result from aggressive banking strategies. Similarly, the Federal Reserve tailors its supervision of holding companies based on the size, complexity, and risk profile of each institution. Closing RemarksAs I conclude, I would emphasize how crucial it is to balance effective regulation and supervision to ensure the safety and soundness of community banks while also ensuring that undue burden does not constrain the capacity of these institutions to support the communities they serve. As I previously noted, one of the most important aspects of my job, as I see it, is to have open lines of communication and feedback between regulators and community banks and bankers. As a former community banker and state regulator, I understand how clear communication can help us all do our jobs better. So, I encourage you--and everyone with a stake in this work--to share your thoughts on the impact of regulation on community banks and the communities they serve. This dialogue is especially important as we continue to work to tailor our supervision and regulation to the size and risk profile of the institutions we oversee. Although we have different responsibilities, I believe we can agree that we must keep our financial system strong, while maintaining the ability of community banks to fulfill their important role in our economy. 1. Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2015, Pub. L. No. 114-1, 129 Stat. 3.Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--Three federal banking agencies on Friday extended until March 18, 2019, the comment period for a proposed rule to update their standards for how firms measure counterparty credit risk posed by derivative contracts. The proposal, jointly issued by the Federal Reserve Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, would provide the "standardized approach for measuring counterparty credit risk," also known as "SA-CCR" as an alternative approach to the agencies' current exposure methodology, or CEM, for calculating derivative exposure under the agencies' regulatory capital rules. With the extension, the agencies will have provided interested parties with approximately four and a half months from the date the proposal was publicly released to review the proposal. The proposal was released by the agencies on October 30, 2018, with a 60-day comment period that began after publication in the Federal Register on December 17, 2018. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Chairman Jerome H. Powell At “Rural Places, Rural Spaces: Closing Financial Services Gaps in Persistent Poverty America,” a policy forum sponsored by Hope Enterprise Corporation, Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi Thank you for that kind introduction. I also want to thank Hope Enterprise Corporation for inviting me to speak and Mississippi Valley State University (MVSU) for hosting us on its lovely campus. It is a great pleasure to visit the Mississippi Delta. This region gave America the priceless musical heritage of the Blues. It was also the site of some of the watershed events of the civil rights movement. But the Delta, like many rural areas, has long confronted the challenge of poverty. Today I'll speak about three areas of opportunity for addressing the challenges of rural poverty‑‑education and workforce development, entrepreneurship and small business development, as well as access to financial services--the topic of this conference. MVSU's mission, providing young people an affordable college education, is itself a very powerful antipoverty program‑‑for its graduates, of course, but also for other communities that are touched by the university. MVSU opened its doors in 1950 as Mississippi Vocational College. The vocation of every member of its first class of 200 students was teaching. And even as it added other programs and became a full-fledged university, MVSU has continued to train many of the teachers who enrich, inspire, and spark the imagination of children who grow up in the Delta. MVSU and other historically black colleges and universities, or HBCUs, play a crucial role in their communities. For much of the 20th century, HBCUs were the primary means for black men and women to obtain the education needed for middle class or professional jobs. Larger percentages of HBCU students, compared with students at predominantly white institutions, come from lower-income families and are the first in their families to attend college. This university and other HBCUs support intellectual leadership, creativity, and innovation. I want to honor you for this proud history and for your continuing commitment to a better future for your students and for the region where many of your students were born and will build their lives and raise their families.1 Challenges and Opportunities in Poor Rural CommunitiesToday, data at the national level show a strong economy. Unemployment is near a half-century low, and economic output is growing at a solid pace. But we know that prosperity has not been felt as much in some areas, including many rural places. The Federal Reserve can help by carrying out our monetary policy mission of supporting maximum employment and price stability. We also support strong communities by conducting research, promoting community development, and enforcing laws like the Community Reinvestment Act, which helps ensure that people have adequate access to financial services wherever they live. We not only work with communities, we are in communities, through the presence of our 12 regional Reserve Banks. Poverty remains a challenge in many rural communities. Indeed, 70 percent of the 473 "persistent poverty" counties in the United States are rural.2Unemployment and mortality rates remain high in these communities. Along with lower incomes and wealth, the rate of business start-ups in these areas is lower. And their residents have less access to financial services. Many of these disparities have existed for generations, and in some places have roots in a history of discrimination. These areas also generally lack diverse industries and employment options and often have suffered from a decline in a traditional industry. In Appalachia for instance, timber, coal mining, tobacco, and textiles have long been in decline.3Likewise, the number of jobs in agriculture and low-skilled manufacturing, mainstays of the Delta's economy, is decreasing as a result of automation and outsourcing.4 Education and Workforce DevelopmentHigh-quality education and training play a crucial role in extending opportunity in rural areas, starting with early childhood education.5But in many rural communities, access to high-quality preschool education is limited. Mississippi is one of several mostly rural states where nearly half of residents lack access to good quality childcare, which is the main source of early childhood education.6Many decades of research also confirm that children who grow up in areas with better-quality K-12 schools or in classes with higher-quality teachers have better outcomes in life.7 Later in life, workforce training and education are most effective when they train workers in skills needed by local employers. Rural areas where traditional industries are declining and where new employers may be moving in often experience a mismatch between the skills of local workers and those demanded by the new employers. Training and retraining programs tend to be centralized and concentrated in areas with a higher population density, which puts many rural areas at a disadvantage.8 Education benefits both the student and the community. It is true that some young people leave their hometowns to seek greater opportunity. However, it is also true that young families, drawn back home by family and social ties, are the largest source of in-migration in many rural communities. Young families are more likely to come if they believe their children will get a good education. Returnees often bring back important skills and experiences and make meaningful contributions to the local economy.9 An excellent example is Tim Lampkin, an MVSU graduate. Tim grew up and graduated from high school in Clarksdale. After graduating from MVSU, he moved to Mobile for work. He wasn't gone long, though, before he felt called to return to make his home here in the Delta. Since moving back, Tim has founded several businesses, as well as a nonprofit that helps people of color start and grow their own businesses. Entrepreneurship and Small Business DevelopmentAs with Tim and his clients, entrepreneurship opportunities can motivate residents who have left rural communities to return home‑‑or to keep them from moving away in the first place. Business ownership represents an important source of income and wealth for both owners and their employees. Recognizing this fact, successful communities find ways to help residents turn what they know and do best, including skills they may have gained from industries in decline, into profitable small businesses.10One example of a community taking this approach is Clarksdale, Mississippi. About 10 years ago, civic and business leaders assessed what made Clarksdale special and how those characteristics could help the community thrive. Since Clarksdale calls itself "Home of the Blues," attracting tourists using the local Blues culture seemed promising. Over the years, Clarksdale has created new jobs by investing to improve its downtown, and has supported local businesses that cater to tourists interested in the community's musical heritage. This growth is also creating new businesses not directly related to tourism--businesses such as Urgent and Primary Care of Clarksdale. Dr. Mary Williams opened her urgent care facility last spring, partly in response to the closure of nearby Quitman County Hospital. Dr. Williams worked with local organizations to develop a business plan and obtain the financing needed to open a business that is critical to the community. DeWitt, Arkansas, is another rural community where entrepreneurship is sparking a local revival. DeWitt is a town of about 3,000 people. Like Itta Bena and many small towns, it has seen a steady decline in population over the past few decades. The economy there is a mix of manufacturing and agriculture, and many families have farmed the land for generations, such as the family of Tami and Troy Hornbeck. The Hornbecks grew up in DeWitt, starting and eventually selling a successful business built on a new soybean varietal that grows well in the South. More recently, they have been helping lead a new industry in their community using waste vegetable oil from local restaurants and oil pressed from camelina, a crop farmers are beginning to grow locally. This cooperative effort involves a partnership between a community college, a university, the local government, farmers and restaurants, and a Community Development Financial Institution, or CDFI, among others.11While still in the early stages, it has led to the creation of several new businesses and imbued the town with a new sense of what is possible. Entrepreneurs such as the Hornbecks and Dr. Williams need support to succeed, the kind of support HBCUs and other institutions of higher education have long provided. MVSU itself is supporting rural minority entrepreneurs through its participation in the HBCU Entrepreneurial Ecosystem Initiative, which teaches students how to start and grow a business. But inspiring stories like these are not as common as they could be. Entrepreneurship has the potential to play a greater role in poor rural areas, particularly in areas whose residents are predominantly black and other people of color. Recent surveys have found relatively high levels of interest in owning businesses among young people of color.12Indeed, nationwide, black women represent one of the fastest growing groups of entrepreneurs.13Yet research by the Federal Reserve suggests people of color experience greater challenges in gaining access to credit to start or expand businesses, which leads me to my last topic and the focus of this forum: access to financial services.14 Access to Financial ServicesAccess to safe and affordable financial services is vital, especially among families with limited wealth‑‑whether they are looking to invest in education, start a business, or simply manage the ups and downs of life. Family income and savings represent the largest source of funding for students' education. However, more than half of students or their families also borrow to finance their studies. And racial wealth disparities make black students more likely than white students to borrow for their education.15Similarly, racial wealth disparities mean access to credit is critical for would-be entrepreneurs who must borrow to supplement personal savings and support from friends and family. Banks often consider credit scores when evaluating loan requests, however, and high-poverty regions tend to have a larger percentage of people with no established credit rating or a low credit score. This combination of low wealth and low credit scores limits access to credit or causes borrowers to turn to higher-cost credit. Fortunately, CDFIs are helping potential borrowers improve their creditworthiness and providing them with safe and affordable credit. While CDFIs fill a critical gap in some communities, most consumers use other banks and credit unions. In rural areas, this often means a community bank.16Industry consolidation has led to a long-term decline in the number of community banks. While most rural communities continue to be relatively well served, that is less often the case in communities with high-poverty rates.17 In 2018, Federal Reserve staff members met with leaders in rural areas across the country that had recently experienced a bank branch closure. We found that small businesses, older people, and people with limited access to transportation are most affected.18We also learned that the loss of the branch often meant more than the loss of access to financial services; it also meant the loss of financial advice, local civic leadership, and an institution that brought needed customers to nearby businesses. Regulation and supervision need to be carefully tailored to suit the size and business model of different types of institutions. At the Fed, we have renewed our efforts to avoid unnecessary regulatory burden on community banks, which provide essential credit in their local communities. Another means to address the issue of branch closures is the Community Reinvestment Act, or CRA, which encourages banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve. The CRA has been an important tool for strengthening local communities. The trend toward fewer branches and increased use of technology to deliver financial services presents a particular challenge to our current approach to CRA evaluations. Specifically, the current regulations use a bank's branches to define its assessment area, the area for which it is evaluated for CRA purposes. To the extent that banks serve much broader areas using online or other non-branch delivery systems, or have so many assessment areas that examiners cannot do a thorough evaluation in each, the financial needs of many rural communities may be overlooked. We believe that revisions to the CRA's implementing regulations should more effectively encourage banks to seek opportunities in underserved areas.19 ConclusionTo summarize my main points today, people in rural communities who are struggling with persistent poverty need access to high-quality education from preschool through college. They need support for their aspirations to own their own businesses. And they need access to safe and affordable credit. I will conclude where I began, by applauding both MVSU and Hope for their long-standing contribution toward bettering the lives of the people of Itta Bena and similar rural communities. 1. For a history of the role of HBCUs, see, for example, Todd Greene and Ashley Bozarth (2018), "The Critical Role of Historically Black Colleges and Universities in Workforce Development," in Stuart Andreason, Todd Greene, Heath Prince, and Carl E. Van Horn, eds.,Investing in America's Workforce,vol. 1:Investing in Workers(Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research), pp. 189‑94; and Ronald A. Johnson (2018), "HBCUs as Pipelines for Diversified Intellect, Creativity, and Innovation," in Stuart Andreason, Todd Greene, Heath Prince, and Carl E. Van Horn, eds.,Investing in America's Workforce,vol. 1:Investing in Workers(Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research), pp. 195-204.Return to text 2. As defined in PL 115-31 as counties where 20 percent or more of the population live in poverty as measured by the U.S. Census Bureau in the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses (for more information, seehttps://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/saipe/guidance/model-input-data/decennial.html) and the2011‑2015 American Community Survey.Return to text 3. See, for example, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2012),"From Textiles to Turnaround: A Tale of Two Cities,"Economic Development Podcast,July; Karl Rhodes (2013), "The Future of Coal" (PDF),Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,Econ Focus,vol. 17 (fourth quarter), pp. 28-31.Return to text 4. See, for example, Sungki Hong and Hannah G. Shell (2018),"60% of District's Jobs Could Face Automation in the Next 20 Years,"Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Regional Economist,vol. 26 (third quarter), pp. 19-20, 22-23; and Charles Davidson (2017),"Tending to the Farm, Part 3: Technology Reshapes Agriculture,"Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Economy Matters,January 12.Return to text 5. See Rob Grunewald (2018),"Early Childhood Investments: Paving the Way for the Future Workforce" (PDF),in Stuart Andreason, Todd Greene, Heath Prince, and Carl E. Van Horn, eds.,Investing in America's Workforce,vol. 1:Investing in Workers(Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research), pp. 297-314.Return to text 6. See, for example, Rasheed Malik, Katie Hamm, Leila Schochet, Cristina Novoa, Simon Workman, and Steven Jessen-Howard (2018),America's Child Care Deserts in 2018(Washington: Center for American Progress, December).Return to text 7. See, for example, Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014), "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 129 (November), pp. 1553-1623; and Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff (2014), "Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood,"American Economic Review,vol. 104 (September), pp. 2633-79.Return to text 8. See Kate Dunham, Annelies Goger, Jennifer Henderson-Frakes, and Nichole Tucker (2005),Workforce Development in Rural Areas: Changes in Access, Service Delivery and Partnerships(PDF), U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration Occasional Paper 2005-07 (Oakland, Calif.: Social Policy Research Associates, June).Return to text 9. See John Cromartie, Christiane von Reichert, and Ryan Arthun (2015),Factors Affecting Former Residents' Returning to Rural Communities(PDF), USDA Economic Research Service Report No. 185 (Washington: U.S. Department of Agriculture, May).Return to text 10. Such support systems generally include consistent and easily accessible ways for potential business owners to find the advice, financing, and education they need to be successful. See Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (2015),Grow Your Own: Entrepreneurship-Based Economic Development for Local Communities(PDF)(Kansas City, Mo.: FRB Kansas City).Return to text 11. CDFI Certification is a designation given by the CDFI Fund of the U.S. Department of the Treasury to specialized organizations that provide financial services in low-income communities and to people who lack access to financing. CDFIs include regulated institutions, such as community development banks and credit unions, and nonregulated institutions, like loan and venture capital funds.Return to text 12. See FRB Kansas City,Grow Your Own,in note 10.Return to text 13. See Walker's Legacy (2016),Black Women Entrepreneurs: Past and Present Conditions of Black Women's Business Ownership(Washington: Walker's Legacy, October).Return to text 14. Alicia Robb, Mels de Zeeuw, and Brett Barkley (2018),"Mind the Gap: How Do Credit Market Experiences and Borrowing Patterns Differ for Minority-Owned Firms?"Community and Economic Development Discussion Paper 03-18 (Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, September).Return to text 15. Judith Scott-Clayton and Jing Li (2016),"Black-White Disparity in Student Loan Debt More Than Triples after Graduation,"Evidence Speaks Reports,vol. 2 (3) (Washington: Brookings Institution, October). See, for example, Robert Kelchen (2015),"Financial Need and Aid Volatility among Students with Zero Expected Family Contribution,"Journal of Student Financial Aid,vol. 44 (January), pp. 179-201; and Fenaba R. Addo (2018),"Parents' Wealth Helps Explain Racial Disparities in Student Loan Debt,"Bridges,Fall,pp. 9-11.Return to text 16. See Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2017),Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Rural Employer Firms(PDF)(Richmond, Va.: FRB Richmond).Return to text 17. See Randal K. Quarles (2018),"Trends in Urban and Rural Community Banks,"speech delivered at "Community Banking in the 21st Century," Sixth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, St. Louis, Mo., October 4. According to2017 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Summary of Deposits data, nonmetro Persistent Poverty Counties had, on average, 0.36 bank branches per 1,000 people, compared with 0.53 for other nonmetro counties.Return to text 18. These findings are broadly consistent with the literature, which identifies adverse effects of branch closures for small business borrowers, in particular, as well as for low-income communities. See, for example, Hoai-Luu Q. Nguyen (2014),"Do Bank Branches Still Matter? The Effect of Closings on Local Economic Outcomes (PDF),"Massachusetts Institute of Technology Working Paper (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT, December); and O. Emre Ergungor (2006),"Bank Branch Presence and Access to Credit in Low-to-Moderate Income Neighborhoods,"Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 06-16 (Cleveland, Ohio: FRB Cleveland, December).Return to text 19. See Lael Brainard (2018),"Keeping Community at the Heart of the Community Reinvestment Act,"speech delivered at the Association of Neighborhood and Housing Development Eighth Annual Community Development Conference, New York, May 18.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the applications under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, to establish branches in Georgia, Illinois, Missouri, Tennessee, and Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to these actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board in March will begin its Survey of Consumer Finances, a statistical study of household finances that will provide policymakers with important insight into the economic condition of a broad cross section of American families. The survey has been undertaken every three years since 1983. It is being conducted for the Board by NORC, a social science research organization at the University of Chicago, through December of this year. The data collected will provide a representative picture of what Americans own (from houses and cars to stocks and bonds), how and how much they borrow, and how they bank. Past study results have contributed to policy discussions about the recovery of households from the Great Recession, changes in the use of credit, the use of tax-preferred retirement savings accounts, and a broad range of other issues. "This survey is one of the nation's primary sources of information on the financial condition of different types of families," Federal Reserve Board Chairman Jerome Powell said in a letter to prospective survey participants. "Our previous surveys…have helped the Federal Reserve and other parts of the government make policy decisions and have also supported a wide variety of basic research, public discussion, and education." Participants in the study are chosen at random from 128 areas, including metropolitan areas and rural counties across the United States, using a scientific sampling procedure. A representative of NORC contacts each potential participant personally to explain the study and request time for an interview. "I assure you that we give the highest priority to guarding the privacy of all survey participants and the confidentiality of their answers," Chairman Powell said. NORC uses names and addresses only for the administration of the survey, and that identifying information will be destroyed at the close of the study. NORC is forbidden from giving the names and addresses of participants to anyone at the Federal Reserve or anywhere else. Summary results for the 2019 study will be published in late 2020 after all data from the survey have been assessed and analyzed. The attached letter from Chairman Powell will be mailed in mid-March to approximately 13,000 households urging their participation in the study. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday extended until March 21 the comment period for its proposed rule that would modify company-run stress testing requirements to conform with the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The Board extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Originally, comments were due by February 19. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday finalized a set of changes that will increase the transparency of its stress testing program for the nation's largest and most complex banks. The changes are intended to improve public understanding of the program while maintaining its ability to independently test large banks' resilience. The first change, which will begin for the 2019 stress test cycle and expand in subsequent years, will provide significantly more information about the stress testing models used in the Board's annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). That information will include: Using this additional information, a firm would be better able to evaluate the risks in its own portfolio or compare the losses from its own models to losses from the Board's models. In response to comments received on the proposal from December 2017, the Board will provide additional information on a number of models, including those used to project operational-risk losses and pre-provision net revenue. The model disclosure will be updated each year and published in the first quarter of the year. In addition, the Board finalized a stress testing policy statement, which elaborates on prior disclosures by describing the Board's approach to model development, implementation, and validation. The statement describes seven principles that have guided supervisory stress test modeling in the past and will continue to do so. The Board also modified its framework for the design of the annual hypothetical economic scenarios. The modifications will provide more information on the hypothetical path of the unemployment rate and will introduce a quantitative guide for the hypothetical path of house prices, both of which are key variables for the scenarios. In a change from its proposal, the Board will not add variables to the hypothetical stress test scenario related to funding costs. The Board will further explore incorporating stress to certain types of funding into its stress testing program in the future. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registerdocuments Amendments to Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing Enhanced Disclosure of the Models Used in the Federal Reserve's Supervisory Stress Test Stress Testing Policy Statement
The Federal Reserve Board identified an error in the historical dataset used in its 2019 stress tests and issued a correction. The mortgage rate in the fourth quarter of 2018 was originally published as 4.6 percent and should have been 4.8 percent. All other variables, both their historical values and projected values in the hypothetical scenarios, are unchanged. The scenarios are not forecasts of the Federal Reserve.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent Notice of Suspension and Prohibition against Fred Daibes, former Chairman of Mariner's Bancorp, Edgewater, New Jersey, for perpetuating a fraudulent loan scheme, according to a federal indictment. Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent Prohibition against Alison Keefe, former employee of SunTrust Bank, Atlanta, Georgia, for violating bank overdraft policies for her own benefit. Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Wintrust Financial Corporation, Rosemont, IllinoisConsent order, civil money penalty for internal control deficiencies that resulted in unsafe or unsound practices dated February 25, 2019 Consent prohibition against Caleb T. Jones, former employee of OakStar Bank, Springfield, Missouri, for obtaining a loan under false pretenses dated February 27, 2019 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: FCB Financial Corporation, Savannah, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated November 12, 2010 (PDF)Terminated February 26, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday permanently barred from the banking industry Timothy Fletcher, a former managing director at a non-bank subsidiary of J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. Fletcher consented to the prohibition, which includes allegations that he improperly administered a referral hiring program at the firm by offering internships and other employment opportunities to individuals referred by foreign officials, clients, and prospective clients in order to obtain improper business advantages for the firm. The Board is also requiring Fletcher to cooperate in any pending or prospective enforcement action against other individuals who are or were affiliated with the firm. The firm was previously fined $61.9 million by the Board relating to this program. In addition, the Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission have also fined the firm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the scenarios banks and supervisors will use for the 2019 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) and Dodd-Frank Act stress test exercises. Stress tests, by ensuring that banks have adequate capital to absorb losses, help make sure that they will be able to lend to households and businesses even in a severe recession. CCAR evaluates the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of the largest U.S. bank holding companies, and large U.S. operations of foreign firms, using their planned capital distributions, such as dividend payments and share buybacks and issuances. The Dodd-Frank Act stress tests also help ensure that banks can continue to lend during times of stress, but use standard capital distribution assumptions for all firms. Both assessments only apply to domestic bank holding companies and foreign bank intermediate holding companies with more than $100 billion in total consolidated assets. The stress tests run by the firms and the Board apply three hypothetical scenarios: baseline, adverse, and severely adverse. For the 2019 cycle, the severely adverse scenario features a severe global recession in which the U.S. unemployment rate rises by more than 6 percentage points to 10 percent. In keeping with the Board's public framework for scenario design, a stronger economy with a lower starting point for the unemployment rate results in a tougher scenario. The severely adverse scenario also includes elevated stress in corporate loan and commercial real estate markets. "The hypothetical scenario features the largest unemployment rate change to date," Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles said. "We are confident this scenario will effectively test the resiliency of the nation's largest banks." The adverse scenario features a moderate recession in the United States, as well as weakening economic activity across all countries included in the scenario. The adverse and severely adverse scenarios describe hypothetical sets of events designed to assess the strength of banking organizations and their resilience. They are not forecasts. The baseline scenario is in line with average projections from surveys of economic forecasters. It does not represent the forecast of the Federal Reserve. Each scenario includes 28 variables--such as gross domestic product, the unemployment rate, stock market prices, and interest rates--covering domestic and international economic activity. Along with the variables, the Board is publishing a narrative description of the scenarios that also highlights changes from last year. Firms with large trading operations will be required to factor in a global market shock component as part of their scenarios. Additionally, firms with substantial trading or processing operations will be required to incorporate a counterparty default scenario component. Banks are required to submit their capital plans and the results of their own stress tests to the Federal Reserve by April 5, 2019. The Federal Reserve will announce the results of its supervisory stress tests by June 30, 2019. The instructions for this year's CCAR will be released at a later date. Also on Tuesday, the Board announced that it will be providing relief to less-complex firms from stress testing requirements and CCAR by effectively moving the firms to an extended stress test cycle for this year. The relief applies to firms generally with total consolidated assets between $100 billion and $250 billion. As a result, these less-complex firms will not be subject to a supervisory stress test during the 2019 cycle and their capital distributions for this year will be largely based on the results from the 2018 supervisory stress test. At a later date, the Board will propose for notice and comment a final capital distribution method for firms on an extended stress test cycle in future years. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 2019 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF) Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review Board Votes
Vice Chairman for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles At Bank for International Settlements Special Governors Meeting, Hong Kong Let me begin by thanking the Bank for International Settlements and Agustín Carstens for the invitation to join you today. In considering venues for my inaugural speech as chair of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), I found this particular opportunity quite fitting. It is an honor to be here, in Hong Kong, with colleagues from around the world, representing central banks who are committed to advancing financial stability not only in their home countries but also globally. I would like to discuss with you tonight my view of how the work of the FSB must evolve, and some key principles that I think should inform that work. My predecessor, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney, guided the FSB for the last seven years along a path that was formidably challenging. The Global Financial Crisis had exposed fault lines in the financial system that had to be addressed immediately, comprehensively, and vigorously. The body of post-crisis regulation that has resulted, though it involved the energy and efforts of a kaleidoscopically varied host of standard setters, regulators, and central banks--including all the institutions in this room--was nonetheless accomplished under the aegis and at the instigation of the FSB. It was a tour de force of orchestration, and it has unquestionably made the financial system safer and more resilient. Today, however, the post-crisis reform agenda has been largely completed. Basel III is final, the largest global banks have substantially more capital and liquidity, over-the-counter derivatives markets are safer, and steps have been taken to address the risks of too-big-to-to fail institutions. Through greater monitoring and policy measures, the FSB is addressing risks from non-bank financial intermediation. And there has been remarkable progress on the difficult and unsung task of establishing workable resolution regimes that are consistent with the FSB's clearly defined principles. Yes, we all have work to do to ensure full, timely, and consitent implementation of the agreed reforms, and, yes, we will do that work, but, it is time for the FSB to turn more of its energy and attention to the future. Tonight I would like to outline a few core principles that should guide this pivot forward. First, engagement: to maintain the legitimacy of our work, to increase understanding of it, and to enhance its effectiveness, we must improve our outreach and transparency--including to our membership, other global authorities, the public, and key stakeholders. Second, rigor: as we devote more attention to evaluation of new and evolving risks in the financial sector, we must ensure that our assessment of vulnerabilities is based on cutting-edge thinking and a disciplined methodology. And third, analysis: regulation has evolved rapidly in the last decade, and--if we are doing our jobs right--will continue to evolve with rapid developments in the financial sector. An important part of our work must be continual, critical analysis of the effects of regulaton with an eye to making useful improvements where possible. Engagement: Outreach and TransparencyLet me begin with the principle of engagement, and let me lay the groundwork for this discussion by reviewing the way the FSB was established and its mandate, to see how we can continue to fulfill that mandate going forward. As we all know, the FSB was born out of the crucible of the 2007-09 Global Financial Crisis--a crisis that demonstrated in the starkest possible way the importance of global financial stability to the well-being of families and businesses around the world. In the months following the peak of the crisis, the world was struggling with financial market turmoil, and the resultant macroeconomic effects were felt by people everywhere around the world. It was clear that the response to this crisis needed to be global, and the G7 and G10, without any emerging market representation, were not the right bodies to organize a global response. As such, the Heads of State and Government of the G20 called for the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), a relatively small and unmuscular group, to expand its membership and to strengthen its institutional framework. The result was the Financial Stability Board, which was designed as a mechanism for national authorities, global standards-setting bodies, and international authorities to identify and address vulnerabilities in the global financial system and to develop stronger regulatory and supervisory policies to create a more resilient global financial system. This new group is more representative of the interconnected global economy and financial system and can more effectively mobilize to promote global financial stability than anything that existed before. Whereas the FSF included only 11 jurisdictions (all of which were advanced economies), the FSB includes 24 jurisdictions and 73 representatives, which include all the members of the G20 and of which 10 are emerging market economies. In fostering global financial stability, the actions of the FSB have the potential to affect the global economy and financial system in important ways. Success in promoting global financial stability should benefit everybody, through more sustainable and stronger economic growth. At the same time, financial stability policy will also affect institutions and markets beyond the FSB's membership. Recognizing the wide-reaching effects of its work, the FSB must seek input from a broad range of stakeholders, each of whom brings a different perspective to the issues under consideration. While we are directly accountable to the G20, we are, through the G20, accountable to all of the people affected by our actions. In my view, that means we must engage in genuine, substantial dialogue with all of these stakeholders, to a greater and more effective degree than we have in the past. Let me take an example that may be of particular relevance to many of you here tonight: our Regional Consultative Groups or RCGs. These are six groups around the globe--the Americas, Europe, the Middle East and North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, the Commonwealth of Independent States, and Asia--that bring together FSB members with about 70 additional jurisdictions. These groups help the FSB get broader input into its policy development and improve our outreach efforts. Each RCG meets once or twice a year to discuss policy development, regional and global financial vulnerabilities, and other current topics of particular interest to the respective region. For instance, topics discussed at the last meeting in Asia included capital flow volatility, cyber resilience of financial institutions, and fintech. These RCGs are great in concept, but they have struggled in practice. We have already begun a study to look back at how the RCGs have operated since their creation in 2011, how they interact with the FSB, and what best practices have been learned. Even while that study is underway, I am committed to improving our mechanisms for reaching out to countries outside the FSB for genuine learning about the effects of FSB actions. I plan to attend a number of RCG meetings each year because of the importance I place on making sure these groups are truly useful tools, and we will improve these vital conduits of two-way information in order to improve our effectiveness and our transparency. While the RCGs may be of particular interest to some here tonight, they are just the tip of the iceberg for what we have to do to improve our engagement and outreach. Because the FSB's authority is ultimately derived from the people and from the political power given to authorities in their countries, we have a responsibility to seek input from and to provide information about our deliberations and actions to the broader public. To that end, for the first time in the FSB's history, we will shortly publish our work program to the public to provide people with a full picture of the issues we are investigating over the coming year. Finally, there are the businesses, institutions, and market participants that are directly affected by the policy recommendations of the FSB. We currently engage with those entities to gather information as we consider recommendations to the G20. For example, we have in the past conducted public consultations on FSB policy recommendations--but often on a very short timetable, which limits the ability for true exchange. We have now established an expectation that the public consultation period will be at least 60 days. The key point is that when it comes to outreach to inform our work and transparency in the communication of it, we must do more, and more eagerly. This discussion of engagement, outreach and transparency may seem like an odd place to begin a "vision" speech, but I think it is foundational. The FSB must maintain its legitimacy in order to be effective, and to do that we have to work hard to hear from all relevant parties when deliberating. What's more, we have to do so publicly and methodically. Everyone around the world should understand that we only make recommendations once we have gathered and considered all points of view. Process is important, and good process leads to good substance. Assessing Financial StabilityWith that said, let me turn to the core piece of the FSB's mission--assessing and mitigating vulnerabilities, especially in the nonbank sector. The FSB's work has a natural flow. We strive to identify vulnerabilities in the financial system that could threaten financial stability when a shock hits. When a vulnerability has been identified, we examine possible policy responses. If a policy is recommended to the G20 and adopted, we then monitor the implementation of that recommendation globally. Finally, when enough time has passed for the enacted policies to have had measurable effects, we study those effects. For much of the post-crisis period, our focus was on developing policy recommendations to address vulnerabilities made apparent by the crisis. Now, however, with nearly all of the post-crisis reform agenda complete, the FSB needs to put more of our resources into identifying new vulnerabilities in a financial sector that continues to evolve and to studying the effects of the many reforms that have been enacted. Let me start by discussing vulnerability assessment. The reforms that have been implemented over the past decade have changed the financial system for the better. However, that does not mean we are immune from future financial crises. It means that we have boosted the financial system's resilience to some of the types of shocks and vulnerabilities that precipitated the crisis. To be sure, some of these measures, like higher bank capital and liquidity requirements, after effective against a wide range of shocks. However, we cannot be complacent and assume that we are safe from all shocks. As a result, the FSB has decided to undertake a review of its framework for assessing vulnerabilities to ensure that we are at the cutting edge of financial stability vulnerability assessment. This work will be undertaken by our committee charged with assessing vulnerabilities under the leadership of FSB Vice Chair Klaas Knot of the Dutch National Bank (De Nederlandsche Bank). This should be a framework that starts from first principles and benefits from substantial dialogue with nonbanks as well as banks, regulators, and other relevant official bodies. There is a lot that we can draw on. The crisis led to an explosion of work in this area aimed at improving the ability of authorities to identify financial vulnerabilities in order to be able to take appropriate action in a timely fashion. I trust that the framework will harness the strength of the broad and diverse membership of the FSB, that it will be forward looking, and that it will be flexible enough to handle a financial system that will continue to evolve over time. This will not be easy--developments like the emergence of crypto-assets may challenge any framework--but that makes the goal of a robust framework all the more important. Evaluating the Effects of ReformFinally, let me turn to the FSB's evaluation of the effects of reforms that have been implemented. In the past few years, we have reached a point where many of the reforms have been in place for long enough to have effects that we can measure and analyze. For those reforms, we need to ask several key questions. First, to what extent are those reforms having the intended effects and building a more resilient financial system? Second, have those reforms had any unintended, adverse effects that we can address? These first two questions are, perhaps, apparent. We should also ask a third question, however, that is equally important: can we achieve a strong level of financial resilience with reforms that are more efficient, simple, transparent, and tailored? If so, we owe it to everyone affected by the policies recommended by the FSB to try, because there is a strong public interest in the efficiency of the financial sector, just as there is in its safety and soundness. If reforms are unnecessarily burdensome and we can achieve strong resiliency more efficiently and simply, we should be able to boost sustainable financial and economic activity, thus benefitting everyone. Evaluating reforms in light of these questions requires rigor--in terms of the selection of evaluation topics, the choice of analytical methods, the assessment of effects, and the development of policy conclusions. This rigor is critical for the quality and credibility of the evaluation work. For this reason, the FSB developed a clear Evaluation Framework, under which the evaluations are based, as much as possible, on quantitative data to measure the costs and benefits of reforms. Equally critical to a successful review is a truly open mindset with which to evaluate the relevant data. One public measure of whether we are doing this review process well will be whether we recommend any improvements or revisions on the basis of it. In any system as complex and consequential as the body of post-crisis financial regulations, there will always be aspects--and sometimes material aspects--that can be improved on the basis of experience and analysis. A credible review process that is both rigorous and dispassionate will find a few. Last year, the FSB completed the first two evaluations under its framework, of the effects of reform on infrastructure fin ance and the clearing of derivative contracts. We are currently engaged in work examining the effects of reforms on the financing of small and medium enterprises, which are the lifeblood of many of the world's economies. We will consult publicly on the findings of this evaluation in June, ahead of the G20 Summit in Osaka. And we are in the process of launching an important study on the effects of reforms aimed at ending too big to fail. This evaluation is being led by Claudia Buch, vice president of the Deutsche Bundesbank. ConclusionThis is an important time for the FSB. We are nearing completion of the post-crisis reform agenda, a major accomplishment. With that comes the opportunity to turn our focus to ways in which we can improve the FSB and prepare it for the next phase of its existence. We will work diligently to enhance our transparency and to expand our efforts to reach out to as many stakeholders as possible. We will prepare for the next crisis by making sure that our framework to assess vulnerabilities to financial stability is state of the art and remains so going forward. And, we will work hard to maintain the important reforms in place, ensure they are working as intended, and, where possible, improve them.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFarm Credit AdministrationFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationNational Credit Union AdministrationOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON--Five federal regulatory agencies issued a joint final rule to implement provisions of the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012 requiring regulated institutions to accept certain private flood insurance policies in addition to National Flood Insurance Program policies. The rule, which takes effect July 1, 2019: Regulations implementing the federal flood insurance statutes prohibit regulated lending institutions from making loans secured by improved real property located in special flood hazard areas unless the property has adequate flood insurance coverage. Federal RegisternoticeHTML Board Votes
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles To the Council for Economic Education, New York, New York Thank you, Nan, for that kind introduction, and thank you to President Mester of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland for inviting me to speak this evening. I am honored to be here and to support the mission that you and the Council for Economic Education have worked so hard to advance--that every student in America gets a strong, early start on their financial education. That mission is critical in its own right, but it also reflects the deeply held value of participation--of giving young people the chance to shape not just their own futures, but also the futures of their communities and their country. Because so much of the language of finance is couched in terms of metrics and rationality, we often forget that finance is something we never do alone. It is, by definition, a collaboration, which helps us work together to achieve common goals. The Federal Reserve is no exception. Tonight, I want to briefly discuss the role that participation plays in the Federal Reserve's work and outline one effort to solicit broad participation--an upcoming conference on stress tests, intended to make those tests more open, transparent, and effective. Public institutions exist under a grant of trust from the people they serve, to pursue a specific policy goal. When the public holds an institution accountable for that grant, the institution becomes stronger. The Federal Reserve System we know today emerged through decades of legislation, public consultation, and debate--from the original Federal Reserve Act, which created the Federal Reserve System, to the Banking Act of 1935,1which established the modern Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), to theTreasury-Federal Reserve Accord of 1951 (PDF), which ensured the separation of monetary and fiscal policy.2These changes made our economy and our country stronger, because they improved the Federal Reserve's ability to accomplish the mission Congress assigned it. Throughout this evolution, a key principle has been that accountability allows the Federal Reserve to be independent--that we are subject to challenge, to counterargument, and to the emergence of new evidence and ideas. For our work to remain legitimate, the public must be able to see, understand, and engage with our efforts; to reaffirm their support when we have earned it; and to offer informed guidance on when to change course. Accountability is only one reason the Federal Reserve relies on public outreach and participation. We also rely on participation for our effectiveness, because the best ideas in finance and economics can, and often do, come from a wide variety of sources. Agencies like the Federal Reserve are a collection of expertise--informed by experience and positioned to turn a broad range of information into policy. But we are not, and cannot be, a monopoly on insight or wisdom. The Federal Reserve recognizes these limits, and the need to invite new ideas, through a variety of initiatives. We seek out a qualified, diverse workforce, and foster an inclusive workplace.3We meet frequently with a range of advisory councils, drawing on expertise in banking, modeling, and consumer and community finance.4We have increased transparency around our policy process and issued new reports on financial stability and banking supervision and regulation, with new details about our work.5And across the Federal Reserve System, our staff publishes a wide range of economic and policy research and plays an active role in academic discourse. Monetary policy itself shows the value of participation and transparency. U.S. monetary policy is the sole responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Yet some of the most important innovations in the field have come from outside the Reserve System. Since 1935, we have decided monetary policy by committee, a structure that has served us well because it is designed to capture different views of a wide and varied national economy. And over the past several decades, the FOMC has greatly increased its own transparency--from postmeeting announcements, to announcing an objective for inflation, to a published survey of economic projections, to postmeeting press conferences (which will now take place after every FOMC meeting).6As many of you know, over the course of 2019, we will be reviewing our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices, and we will hold a research conference on the subject with outside speakers, as well as "Fed Listens" events at a number of Reserve Banks, to hear from a broad range of constituencies. But these improvements are more than a simple matter of disclosure. They are an invitation to participate, and a way to provide the public with the means and opportunity to inform our work. This year, we are taking similar steps to improve a cornerstone of our post-crisis rules. Supervisory stress tests offer an independent and valuable lens on the health of the banking system. They offer us a forward-looking measurement of bank capital, a view of common and systemic risks across the banking sector, and a broader understanding of the health of the financial system. The results are valuable for markets, analysts, and ultimately, the participating firms. Ten years have passed since the Federal Reserve conducted its first supervisory stress tests. That initial experiment helped stabilize financial markets and shore up our banking system at a critical and uncertain time. Our challenge now is to preserve the strength of the test, while improving its efficiency, transparency, and integration into the post-crisis regulatory framework. To that end, the stress tests have not remained static. Just in the past several days, the Board acted to suspend stress tests this year for lower-risk firms--generally, those with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion.7That move follows the passage of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act.8The extended cycle provides administrative burden relief for these institutions and recognizes the different risks that they typically pose--especially compared to the largest and most complex firms, whose failure poses the greatest risk to the real economy. Even with this change, the stress tests remain a core part of our supervision of these firms. Our experience with this "interim" year will inform the move to a permanently longer testing cycle--a change that would, of course, be subject to a full notice and comment process.9 Improvements like these are necessary to ensure our supervisory framework evolves from its post-crisis origins to an effective steady state. The question of how best to consolidate the gains from the first 10 years of stress testing deserves the attention and effort of the country's best minds. We should welcome changes and novel ideas, even when they explore stress testing in a new and unfamiliar light. In July, as a forum for such ideas, we will host a public conference focused on the transparency and effectiveness of stress testing. CalledStress Testing: A Discussion and Review, the event will convene panel discussions, drawing on a mix of presenters with industry, academic, and regulatory backgrounds. It will involve written papers, which will be compiled and published to spur further research. We expect the insights from the conference to inform the evolution of our stress-testing framework--and we hope to continue the conversation well after the conference ends. This input is as essential to our work as any public outreach we do. Stress testing provides insight into a dynamic financial system, and our stress-testing process must be dynamic as well. More broadly, the core of the Federal Reserve's independence is a broad consensus around the value and public worth of our mission. The Federal Reserve is the steward and trustee of that mission, but the public is its owner. To serve the public, we must not just allow input, but welcome it; not just permit debate, but foster it; not just allow participation, but treat it as essential to our work. Thank you. 1.Pub.L. No. 305 (1935).Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Treasury and Federal Reserve Statements,"Federal Reserve Bulletin37 (March 1951): 237.Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Diversity and Inclusion Strategic Plan 2016-19(Washington: Board of Governors, December 2016).Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Advisory Councils" (January 25, 2019).Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Financial Stability Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November 2018); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Federal Reserve Supervision and Regulation Report(Washington: Board of Governors, November 2018).Return to text 6. The FOMC's "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy," first issued in January 2012 and reaffirmed each January, specifies that the Committee judges that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate and that the Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective.Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board releases scenarios for 2019 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) and Dodd-Frank Act stress test exercises," news release, February 5, 2018.Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Interagency Statement Regarding the Impact of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) (PDF)," news release, July 6, 2018.Return to text 9. Changes proposed as part of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act have been proposed but not finalized. Similarly, changes as part of the proposed "stress capital buffer" have been proposed but not finalized. Both proposals will inform the final rule governing the methodology for capital distributions. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Framework that Would More Closely Match Regulations for Large Banking Organizations with Their Risk Profiles," news release, October 31, 2018; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Seeks Comment on Proposal to Simplify Its Capital Rules for Large Banks while Preserving Strong Capital Levels that Would Maintain Their Ability to Lend Under Stressful Conditions," news release, April 10, 2018.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the Sadie T. M. Alexander Conference for Economics, Washington, D.C. It is an honor to be a part of the inaugural Sadie T. M. Alexander conference in economics and related fields. I want to thank each of you in this room and those of you livestreaming who form the Sadie Collective. Special thanks go to Mykelle Richburg, Kayla Jones, Olusayo Adeleye, George-Ann Ryan, Jada Houser, Fanta Traore, and Anna Gifty Opoku-Agyeman for taking the initiative and launching this organization and this conference to increase the representation of black women in the field of economics. I applaud your efforts, and I support your mission.1 The story of Dr. Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander is an inspiration for us all. A woman of firsts--the first African American to receive a Ph.D. in economics and the first woman to receive a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania--she was a pioneer who knocked down some daunting doors. The question for the women in this room here today is whether you will follow her through those doors and maybe knock down a few of your own. The Need for Greater DiversityLet me start by making two observations about economics. First, the field of economics is rooted in evidence and research. The second observation follows strongly from the research and the evidence: Economics has a diversity challenge. There is a stubbornly persistent lack of diversity in the economics profession.2Year after year, minorities and women are underrepresented in the pool of individuals awarded a doctorate in economics in the United States relative to their share in the broader population, and the gap is especially acute for women of color. The American Economic Association reports that in the 2016-17 academic year, seven black/African American women were awarded a doctorate in economics in the United States, along with eight black/African American men, out of a total pool of 1,150 economics Ph.D.'s awarded overall. The economics diversity gap starts even earlier.3As Amanda Bayer and David Wilcox have documented, women and minorities are also underrepresented in undergraduate economics programs. From 2011 to 2015, women accounted for only 31 percent of undergraduate degrees in economics--substantially below their 57 percent share of all four-year undergraduate degrees. For black women, the gap is even bigger: they accounted for 1.5 percent of undergraduate economics degrees compared with a 6.2 percent share of all undergraduate degrees.4 A growing body of research and evidence makes clear that the quality of the economics profession and its contribution to society will be greater when a broader range of people are engaged.5Research shows that greater diversity results in better outcomes--it broadens the range of ideas and perspectives brought to bear on solving problems, and it brings important insights to the analysis of our economy. As Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Rouse have documented, microeconomic experiments and other research demonstrate the benefits of diversity for group deliberations and decisionmaking. For instance, one well-known experiment found that racially diverse groups of students outperformed other groups in solving problems, and another found similar benefits from gender diversity.6 Turning to my own institution, it is notable that when the Congress established the Federal Reserve System, it took great care to ensure there would be a diversity of perspectives around the decisionmaking table in terms of regional representation. That is why we have 12 Reserve Bank Districts represented on the Federal Open Market Committee. But we have not lived up to that standard on other dimensions of diversity. For instance, it was not until 2017, more than 100 years after the creation of the Federal Reserve, that the first African American, Raphael Bostic, was chosen to lead a Reserve Bank. We need to do better than that, and we will continue our efforts until the group of people around that table is more like America. To achieve our goals, we will need to improve the diversity of the economics ecosystem more broadly. Of course, the Federal Reserve System hires people with all kinds of expertise--from lawyers to law enforcement, from financial analysts to data scientists. But our footprint is especially large in the economics job market, where as a System we routinely hire one of every 25 newly minted economics Ph.D.'s each year. In short, we have a significant stake in the diversity and vibrancy of the economics profession overall. Why Consider a Career in Economics?I have discussed why it is important for the Federal Reserve and for our economy to see more women of color embracing the field of economics. But what's in it for you? There are many ways your career may unfold where economics might fit in it. Some of you may decide your passion lies elsewhere as an undergraduate, and later find that advanced studies in economics align with your career interests. Others may already feel that economics is your calling. And just as there are a variety of reasons that people decide to deepen their studies in economics, so too there are many career fields where a degree in economics can be a powerful enabler. In my case, although I did not have an undergraduate economics degree, I later decided to pursue advanced study in economics because it provided a rigorous analytical framework and approach to data to address important problems facing America. Growing up, I saw how every family's well-being is affected by their financial resilience and their economic opportunities. I decided to study economics because it provides powerful tools to help promote a better future for many Americans. I have found different ways to approach that throughout my career--from teaching the next generation of problem solvers, to assessing the challenges facing American manufacturers, to seeing the potential of microfinance for financial inclusion, to promoting maximum employment and stable inflation in my current job. I recognize that it is challenging to look around a classroom or conference room and not see colleagues who you can relate to. It is humbling to imagine how that first economics class looked to Dr. Sadie Alexander. But now there are a number of leading scholars and practitioners in the field to provide inspiration and serve as role models. Today, you will hear from several, including Dr. Julianne Malveaux, Dr. Willene Johnson, and Dr. Lisa Cook, who will share with you their perspectives and discuss their important and interesting work. So what might you find by pursuing economics? As I have noted, you can influence people's lives for the better. You can craft policy to change our world. You can teach and help shape the next generation. You can find the answers to questions that matter most to you. You can develop the intellectual framework and tools that will enable you to pursue a range of opportunities, not just in economics, but also in business, finance, policy, and nonprofits. ConclusionI hope you will take away the message that the field of economics would be the richer from your engagement and has much to offer as you decide how to make your contribution. There are many opportunities for you in the field of economics, both here and abroad, in government, academia, and the private sector. Dr. Sadie Alexander knocked down the door, and I hope you will consider following her through it. 1. I want to thank Fanta Traore and Nancy Riley for their assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. "Between 1995 and 2014, the share of women obtaining a doctorate in economics held roughly steady in the neighborhood of 30 percent. Among U.S. citizens and permanent residents earning doctorates, the representation of those identifying as black, Hispanic, or Native American among the pool of doctorate recipients improved from 6 percent in 1995 to 11 percent in 2007. But the improvement has since unwound and the underrepresented minority share stood at about 7 percent in 2014." See Lael Brainard, "Strengthening Diversity in Economics" (speech at the Conference for the 2017 Summer Training and Scholarship Program, East Lansing, MI, July 28, 2017).Return to text 3. See Rhonda Vonshay Sharpe, “We’ve to Build the Pipeline. What’s the Problem? What’s Next? The Remix,” The Review of Black Political Economy, January 15, 2019.Return to text 4. Amanda Bayer and David Wilcox, "The Unequal Distribution of Economic Education: A Report on the Race, Ethnicity, and Gender of Economics Majors at U.S. Colleges and Universities (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-105 (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System).Return to text 5. See Lael Brainard, "Strengthening Diversity in Economics" (speech at the Conference for the 2017 Summer Training and Scholarship Program, East Lansing, MI, July 28, 2017).Return to text 6. Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse, "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,"Journal of Economic Perspectives30 (Fall 2016): 221-42.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings on January 22 and January 30, 2019. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 29-30, 2019. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 29-30, 2019:HTML|PDF
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the Citizens Budget Commission 87th Annual Awards Dinner, New York, New York It is a pleasure to speak here this evening at the 87th Awards Dinner. Tonight I will start with the near-term outlook for the U.S. economy. Then I will turn to a topic that is inspired by the Citizens Budget Commission's mission statement, which focuses on the "well-being of future New Yorkers." I imagine that future New Yorkers attending this dinner in 50 years may not look back on the near-term outlook in February 2018 as very interesting or important. So, tonight, after a brief review of the here and now, I will focus on an issue that is likely to be of more lasting importance: the need for policies that will support and encourage participation in the labor force, promote longer-term growth in our rapidly evolving economy, and spread the benefits of prosperity as widely as possible. The State of the Economy and Near-Term ProspectsBeginning with the here and now, Congress has charged the Federal Reserve with achieving maximum employment and stable prices, two objectives that together are called the dual mandate. I am pleased to say that, judged against these goals, the economy is in a good place. The current economic expansion has been under way for almost 10 years. This long period of growth has pushed the unemployment rate down near historic lows (figure 1). The employment gains have been broad based across all racial and ethnic groups and all levels of educational attainment as well as among the disabled (figure 2).1And while the unemployment rate for African Americans and Hispanics remains above the rates for whites and Asians, the disparities have narrowed appreciably as the economic expansion has continued. Nearly all job market indicators are better than a few years ago, and many are at their most favorable levels in decades. After lagging earlier in the expansion, wages and overall compensation--pay plus benefits­­--are now growing faster than a few years ago (figure 3). It is especially encouraging that the labor force participation rate of people in their prime working years, ages 25 to 54, has been rising for the past three years. More plentiful jobs and rising wages are drawing more people into the workforce and encouraging others who might have left to stay. In addition, business-sector productivity growth, which had been disappointing during the expansion, moved up in the first three quarters of 2018. Rising productivity allows wages to increase without adding to inflation pressures. Sustained productivity growth is a necessary ingredient for longer-run improvements in living standards. The price stability side of our mandate is also in a good place. After remaining below our target for several years, inflation by our preferred measure averaged roughly 2 percent last year (figure 4). Inflation has softened a bit since then, largely reflecting the recent drop in oil prices. Futures markets and other indicators suggest that oil prices are unlikely to fall further, and if this proves correct, oil's drag on overall inflation will subside. Consistent with that view, core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices and often provides a better signal of where inflation is heading, is currently running just a touch below our 2 percent objective. Signs of upward pressure on inflation appear muted despite the strong labor market. While the data I have discussed so far give a favorable picture of the economy, it is also important to acknowledge that not everyone has shared in the benefits of the expansion to the same extent, and that too many households still struggle to make ends meet.2In addition, over the past few months we have seen some crosscurrents and conflicting signals about the near-term outlook. For instance, growth has slowed in some major economies, particularly China and Europe. Uncertainty is elevated around some unresolved government policy issues, including Brexit and ongoing trade negotiations. And financial conditions have tightened since last fall. While most of the incoming domestic economic data have been solid, some surveys of business and consumer sentiment have moved lower. Unexpectedly weak retail sales data for December also give reason for caution. Given the positive outlook but also muted inflation pressures and the crosscurrents I just mentioned, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) will be patient as we determine what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support our dual-mandate objectives. This common-sense risk-management approach has served the Committee well in the past. I will turn now from the near-term outlook to the question of how the economy will perform over the long haul. Longer-Term Challenges and OpportunitiesFrom 1991 through 2007, the economy expanded annually at about 3 percent, similar to the pace for much of second half of the 20th century. Since 2007, however, growth has averaged just 1.6 percent. If the earlier 3 percent growth had persisted over the past 12 years, incomes today would be almost 20 percent higher than they now are. From the standpoint of future Americans, if the slower growth persists for a half-century, incomes will end up roughly half of what they would have been. Why has growth slowed, and what can we do about it? To understand the causes of the slowdown, it is useful to divide growth into two components: (1) growth in the cumulative number of hours of worked by all workers and (2) growth in the amount of output derived, on average, from each hour of work. We refer to output per hour of work as "labor productivity." From 1991 through 2007, when the economy expanded at a 3 percent average rate, hours worked increased about 1 percent a year and economy-wide productivity grew about 2 percent (figure 5).3Since 2007, both of these growth factors have slowed by about half, with hours worked annually increasing only 0.5 percent from 2008 to 2018 and productivity rising just 1 percent on average.4 Growth in hours worked has slowed, in part, because of slower U.S. population growth. Birth rates have edged down, and immigration has slowed. Not only is the total population growing more slowly, but the share of the population in their prime working years is falling steadily as the very large baby-boom generation is moving into retirement. Demographic factors are generally slow moving and predictable, and there is no surprise in the fact that slower population growth and the retirement of the baby boomers are now contributing to slower growth in the total amount of work performed in the economy. There is another factor contributing to the slower growth in hours, however, and this factor is more surprising and more troubling. To be counted as "in the labor force," a person must either be employed or have looked for work within the past four weeks. The share of people of working age who are actually in the labor force has fallen significantly since the late 1990s. This decline raises the important question of why have people of working age increasingly chosen not to work. The data suggest that there are both positive and more problematic forces at work. For example, among those aged 16 to 24, participation in the labor market has fallen from about 65 percent in the 1990s to 55 percent now (figure 6). But this drop in participation appears to reflect young people getting more education. The fraction of this age group who are neither in school nor in the labor force has held fairly constant at around 11 percent, and measures of school enrollment are up.5Higher educational attainment is much more important in today's job market than in the past, and investing in education today has long-term benefits for both the student and for society.6Statistics confirm that higher educational attainment is associated with higher labor force participation, lower unemployment, and higher wages. Turning to those aged 25 to 54, the participation picture is more troubling. Among prime-age men, participation has been falling for more than 60 years, with the decline averaging about 1.5 percentage points per decade (figure 7). For women, participation rose over the second half of the 20th century until peaking in the late 1990s. Since then, women's participation has dropped just a bit. To put these numbers in context, let's look at data from other advanced economies. Prime-age male participation has fallen some across most of these economies since 1995 (figure 8). But the decline in the United States has been much larger than most, and U.S. participation was below the middle of the pack at the outset. As a result, the United States now has the fourth lowest participation rate among 34 advanced economies. For women's participation, the details are different, but the bottom line is similar. In the mid-1990s, the United States ranked in the upper tier for prime-age women's participation, but since then participation by women has advanced rapidly in many countries while it has declined slightly in the United States. Now the United States is sixth lowest among these 34 countries. Researchers have investigated numerous possible reasons for the decline in prime-age participation. Among men, the drop in participation is much sharper for those with only a high school education or less. The drop for women is also sharper for those who are high school educated. This pattern is consistent with the idea that a modern economy demands ever-higher skills, and that workers without those skills are being left behind (figure 9). But the international experience suggests that this outcome is not inevitable: The drop in participation among those with less education is much smaller in some comparable countries than in the United States.7 The research into labor force participation in the United States and across the world does not find a magic fix, but it does suggest a variety of policies that might better prepare people for the modern workforce as well as support and reward labor force participation.8I should note that the Fed has neither the tools nor the mandate to directly address the forces that are holding back labor force participation. We can contribute by fostering a strong labor market, in accordance with our mandate. While it is not the Fed's role to advocate particular labor force policies, I do want to put a spotlight on this important issue. I strongly believe policies that bring prime-age workers into productive employment, particularly those who may have been left behind because of low skills or educational attainment, could bring great benefits both to those workers and to our economy. The second factor accounting for the slowdown in GDP growth is the slower pace of labor productivity growth, or output per hour worked. When measured annually, labor productivity growth is volatile, but focusing on five-year averages, we can see that from 1975 through 2007, productivity growth averaged about 2 percent while fluctuating between about 1 and 4 percent (figure 10). Since then, growth seems to have settled at the low end of that historical range. Unlike the situation with labor force participation, the slowdown in productivity growth is also evident in most advanced economies, and the U.S. experience is roughly comparable to that of other countries. There is an ongoing debate over the causes and implications of this global slowdown in productivity growth. Some argue that the rapid growth seen over much of the 20th century was historically anomalous, and that we are destined to return to the slower growth of centuries past. Others are more optimistic that strong growth can return. Many have noted that during the current expansion, investment and capital accumulation have been lower than in previous expansions, so perhaps we just need to invest more. Unfortunately, it does not seem to be that simple. Standard reasoning holds that capital-per-worker drives productivity. While we have had slower capital accumulation of late, we have also had slower growth in labor supply--hours worked. Thus, capital per worker, according to some analysis, has continued to increase roughly at its pre-recession trend. In this view, the productivity problem is not simply one of inadequate investment.9 Researchers have proposed several reasons why, even if the quantity of investment has kept up, recent investment may be leading to smaller productivity advances than in the past. The more optimistic analysts argue that we may be in a productivity lull while businesses work to realize the full benefit of advances that are embedded in recent investment.10Others suggest that productivity-advancing ideas are inherently harder to find and exploit than in the past, implying that slower productivity growth may be with us for the long haul.11This debate is unlikely to be resolved anytime soon. In the meantime, we should look for policies that will create an environment in which productivity can flourish. We need policies that support innovation and create a favorable environment for investment in both the skills of workers and the tools they have. Indeed, the recent tax reforms were designed in part to boost capital investment and thus productivity. Once again, my goal tonight is to highlight the importance of growth-enhancing policies. Because these policies are not the province of the Fed, I will not advocate for particular approaches. Instead, I will just observe that researchers and policy analysts have proposed many promising ideas that may be capable of attracting wide support. Policies that succeed in enhancing productivity growth would greatly benefit future generations of Americans. ConclusionTo conclude, the United States is currently in the midst of one of the longest economic expansions in our history. Unemployment is low and inflation is close to our 2 percent objective. My colleagues and I on the FOMC are focused on using our monetary policy tools to sustain those favorable conditions. Tonight I have also highlighted some longer-term challenges we face, including low labor force participation by prime-age workers and low productivity growth. By promoting macroeconomic stability, the Fed helps create a healthy environment for growth. But these longer-term issues require policies that are more in the province of elected representatives. The nation would benefit greatly from a search for policies with broad appeal that could promote labor force participation and higher productivity, with benefits shared broadly across the nation. 1. The unemployment rate of those with a disability and between the ages of 16 and 64 fell from more than 16 percent in 2011 to less than 9 percent in 2018. Meanwhile, their labor force participation rate has been rising over the past few years. In 2018, about 8 percent of the population aged 16 to 64 reported themselves as having a disability, and their labor force participation rate was 33 percent.Return to text 2. For example, a Federal Reserve survey indicates that in early 2018, after nearly a decade of growth, as many as 40 percent of households were unprepared for an emergency expense of as little as $400. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018),Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households(Washington: Board of Governors, May), available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/other20180522a.htm.Return to text 3. These estimates are based on the Congressional Budget Office's (2019) estimates for potential GDP for theBudget and Economic Outlook: 2019 to 2029(Washington: CBO, January). Economy-wide productivity includes the nonbusiness sector.Return to text 4. John G. Fernald, Robert E. Hall, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (2017), "The Disappointing Recovery of Output after 2009," NBER Working Paper No. 23543 (Washington: National Bureau of Economic Research, June).Return to text 5. It is also true that a smaller share of students are holding down a job while in school.Return to text 6. For example, see Maria E. Canon, Marianna Kudlyak, and Yang Liu (2015), "Youth Labor Force Participation Continues to Fall, but It Might Be for a Good Reason," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Regional Economist(St. Louis, Mo.: FRB St. Louis, January).Return to text 7. Mary C. Daly, Joseph H. Pedtke, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Annemarie Schweinert (2018), "Why Aren't U.S. Workers Working?" Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, FRBSF Economic Letter 2018-24 (San Francisco: FRB San Francisco, November 13).Return to text 8. Francesco Grigoli, Zsóka Kóczán, and Petia Topalova (2018), "Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects (PDF)," chapter 2 in International Monetary Fund,World Economic Outlook(Washington: IMF, April), pp. 1-58.Return to text 9. See Fernald and others, "Disappointing Recovery," in note 4.Return to text 10. For example, Brynjolfsson, Mitchell, and Rock (2018) highlight the need to make complimentary investments in intangibles to take advantage of artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies (see Erik Brynjolfsson, Tom Mitchell, and Daniel Rock (2018), "What Can Machines Learn and What Does It Mean for Occupations and the Economy?"AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 108 (May), pp. 43-47). And Mokyr (2014) argues that the vast array of computers and other relatively new tools will usher in a new wave of progress just like the invention of barometers and microscopes and other tools propelled the technology in the 1700s (see Joel Mokyr (2014), "The Next Age of Invention,"City Journal,Winter).Return to text 11. Bloom and others (2017) as well as Thompson and Spanuth (2018) discuss how it has become more costly to make technological advances. See Nicholas Bloom, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb (2017), "Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?" available athttps://web.stanford.edu/~chadj/papers.html; and Neil Thompson and Svenja Spanuth (2018), "The Decline of Computers As a General Purpose Technology: Why Deep Learning and the End of Moore's Law Are Fragmenting Computing," available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3287769.Return to text Accessible Version
Chairman Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chairman Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on February 27, 2019. Good morning. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the Committee, I am happy to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress. Let me start by saying that my colleagues and I strongly support the goals Congress has set for monetary policy--maximum employment and price stability. We are committed to providing transparency about the Federal Reserve's policies and programs. Congress has entrusted us with an important degree of independence so that we can pursue our mandate without concern for short-term political considerations. We appreciate that our independence brings with it the need to provide transparency so that Americans and their representatives in Congress understand our policy actions and can hold us accountable. We are always grateful for opportunities, such as today's hearing, to demonstrate the Fed's deep commitment to transparency and accountability. Today I will review the current economic situation and outlook before turning to monetary policy. I will also describe several recent improvements to our communications practices to enhance our transparency. Current Economic Situation and OutlookThe economy grew at a strong pace, on balance, last year, and employment and inflation remain close to the Federal Reserve's statutory goals of maximum employment and stable prices‑‑our dual mandate. Based on the available data, we estimate that gross domestic product (GDP) rose a little less than 3 percent last year following a 2.5 percent increase in 2017. Last year's growth was led by strong gains in consumer spending and increases in business investment. Growth was supported by increases in employment and wages, optimism among households and businesses, and fiscal policy actions. In the last couple of months, some data have softened but still point to spending gains this quarter. While the partial government shutdown created significant hardship for government workers and many others, the negative effects on the economy are expected to be fairly modest and to largely unwind over the next several months. The job market remains strong. Monthly job gains averaged 223,000 in 2018, and payrolls increased an additional 304,000 in January. The unemployment rate stood at 4 percent in January, a very low level by historical standards, and job openings remain abundant. Moreover, the ample availability of job opportunities appears to have encouraged some people to join the workforce and some who otherwise might have left to remain in it. As a result, the labor force participation rate for people in their prime working years‑‑the share of people ages 25 to 54 who are either working or looking for work‑‑has continued to increase over the past year. In another welcome development, we are seeing signs of stronger wage growth. The job market gains in recent years have benefited a wide range of families and individuals. Indeed, recent wage gains have been strongest for lower-skilled workers. That said, disparities persist across various groups of workers and different parts of the country. For example, unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics are still well above the jobless rates for whites and Asians. Likewise, the percentage of the population with a job is noticeably lower in rural communities than in urban areas, and that gap has widened over the past decade. The FebruaryMonetary Policy Reportprovides additional information on employment disparities between rural and urban areas. Overall consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), is estimated to have been 1.7 percent in December, held down by recent declines in energy prices. Core PCE inflation, which excludes food and energy prices and tends to be a better indicator of future inflation, is estimated at 1.9 percent. At our January meeting, my colleagues and I generally expected economic activity to expand at a solid pace, albeit somewhat slower than in 2018, and the job market to remain strong. Recent declines in energy prices will likely push headline inflation further below the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) longer-run goal of 2 percent for a time, but aside from those transitory effects, we expect that inflation will run close to 2 percent. While we view current economic conditions as healthy and the economic outlook as favorable, over the past few months we have seen some crosscurrents and conflicting signals. Financial markets became more volatile toward year-end, and financial conditions are now less supportive of growth than they were earlier last year. Growth has slowed in some major foreign economies, particularly China and Europe. And uncertainty is elevated around several unresolved government policy issues, including Brexit and ongoing trade negotiations. We will carefully monitor these issues as they evolve. In addition, our nation faces important longer-run challenges. For example, productivity growth, which is what drives rising real wages and living standards over the longer term, has been too low. Likewise, in contrast to 25 years ago, labor force participation among prime-age men and women is now lower in the United States than in most other advanced economies. Other longer-run trends, such as relatively stagnant incomes for many families and a lack of upward economic mobility among people with lower incomes, also remain important challenges. And it is widely agreed that federal government debt is on an unsustainable path. As a nation, addressing these pressing issues could contribute greatly to the longer-run health and vitality of the U.S. economy.Monetary PolicyOver the second half of 2018, as the labor market kept strengthening and economic activity continued to expand strongly, the FOMC gradually moved interest rates toward levels that are more normal for a healthy economy. Specifically, at our September and December meetings we decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point at each, putting the current range at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. At our December meeting, we stressed that the extent and timing of any further rate increases would depend on incoming data and the evolving outlook. We also noted that we would be paying close attention to global economic and financial developments and assessing their implications for the outlook. In January, with inflation pressures muted, the FOMC determined that the cumulative effects of these developments, along with ongoing government policy uncertainty, warranted taking a patient approach with regard to future policy changes. Going forward, our policy decisions will continue to be data dependent and will take into account new information as economic conditions and the outlook evolve. For guideposts on appropriate policy, the FOMC routinely looks at monetary policy rules that recommend a level for the federal funds rate based on measures of inflation and the cyclical position of the U.S. economy. The FebruaryMonetary Policy Reportgives an update on monetary policy rules. I continue to find these rules to be helpful benchmarks, but, of course, no simple rule can adequately capture the full range of factors the Committee must assess in conducting policy. We do, however, conduct monetary policy in a systematic manner to promote our long-run goals of maximum employment and stable prices. As part of this approach, we strive to communicate clearly about our monetary policy decisions. We have also continued to gradually shrink the size of our balance sheet by reducing our holdings of Treasury and agency securities. The Federal Reserve's total assets declined about $310 billion since the middle of last year and currently stand at close to $4.0 trillion. Relative to their peak level in 2014, banks' reserve balances with the Federal Reserve have declined by around $1.2 trillion, a drop of more than 40 percent. In light of the substantial progress we have made in reducing reserves, and after extensive deliberations, the Committee decided at our January meeting to continue over the longer run to implement policy with our current operating procedure. That is, we will continue to use our administered rates to control the policy rate, with an ample supply of reserves so that active management of reserves is not required. Having made this decision, the Committee can now evaluate the appropriate timing and approach for the end of balance sheet runoff. I would note that we are prepared to adjust any of the details for completing balance sheet normalization in light of economic and financial developments. In the longer run, the size of the balance sheet will be determined by the demand for Federal Reserve liabilities such as currency and bank reserves. The FebruaryMonetary Policy Reportdescribes these liabilities and reviews the factors that influence their size over the longer run. I will conclude by mentioning some further progress we have made in improving transparency. Late last year we launched two new publications: The first,Financial Stability Report,shares our assessment of the resilience of the U.S. financial system, and the second,Supervision and Regulation Report,provides information about our activities as a bank supervisor and regulator. Last month we began conducting press conferences after every FOMC meeting instead of every other one. The change will allow me to more fully and more frequently explain the Committee's thinking. Last November we announced a plan to conduct a comprehensive review of the strategies, tools, and communications practices we use to pursue our congressionally assigned goals for monetary policy. This review will include outreach to a broad range of stakeholders across the country. The FebruaryMonetary Policy Reportprovides further discussion of these initiatives. Thank you. I am happy to respond to questions. Monetary Policy Report
At the President's invitation, Chair Powell and Vice Chair Clarida joined the President and the Treasury Secretary for an informal dinner tonight in the White House residence, to discuss recent economic developments and the outlook for growth, employment and inflation. Chair Powell's comments in this setting were consistent with his remarks at his press conference of last week. He did not discuss his expectations for monetary policy, except to stress that the path of policy will depend entirely on incoming economic information and what that means for the outlook. Finally, Chair Powell said that he and his colleagues on the FOMC will set monetary policy in order to support maximum employment and stable prices and will make those decisions based solely on careful, objective and non-political analysis. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lael Brainard At "Research Symposium on the Community Reinvestment Act" hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Thank you all for participating in our Research Symposium on the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). I am happy to have an opportunity to learn from your extensive experience and expertise.1 At the Federal Reserve, we value the CRA as a critical tool for providing support to low- and moderate income (LMI) families and their communities. And we are interested in strengthening the CRA as it encourages banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve. Today's research forum is one part of an extensive outreach effort we are undertaking to gather the best ideas for improving implementation of the Community Reinvestment Act. Over the past four months alone, all 12 of our Reserve Banks have hosted roundtables in locations around the country, from San Francisco to Boston, and from Rapid City to Puerto Rico. The purpose is to hear ideas on improving the CRA regulations from the bankers and community groups that have a stake in the CRA's success. In addition, we held two roundtables at the Federal Reserve Board earlier this week to gather perspectives from national organizations focused on policy topics, such as housing, small business lending, and consumer credit.2 We have also consulted with our advisory councils to gather their thoughts on CRA reform. We have asked our large and community bank advisory councils, the Federal Advisory Council and the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, about their experiences with the CRA and suggestions for improvements. We have also sought community perspectives. At our most recent meeting with our Community Advisory Council, we asked for their recommendations for reform.3 Even though we decided not to join the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in the publication of its August 2018 Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking concerning revisions to the CRA regulations, we have been reviewing the approximately 1,500 comment letters submitted by academics, banks and banking trade associations, community and consumer groups, and citizens. So what have we learned so far from the comment letters we have reviewed and the roundtables we have held? If there is one common thread, it is that support for the Community Reinvestment Act is broad and deep. Commenters across the board applauded the significant volume of CRA loans and investments that have supported LMI households and communities, as well as the benefits households and communities have realized from the CRA's focus on local retail financial services, small business lending, and community development lending, investments, and services. And they asked that the three banking agencies work together toward a joint rulemaking proposal so that CRA policies can be clearly and consistently applied across agencies. Second, there are some good ideas about how to modernize the procedures for setting the area in which the agencies assess a bank's CRA activities while retaining the core focus on place. This is not a simple challenge, and this morning's panel identified some promising solutions to the challenge of modernizing the definition of assessment areas to keep up with changes in banks' business models. I appreciated the panelists' insights on how to balance the importance of place with various business models, including to reflect the extensive use of digital channels and other changes in the banking industry. The public comments we have read so far suggest general agreement that there is a need for an update--but not a complete overhaul--of assessment areas through a balanced package of reforms. We have heard general support for assessment areas that reflect each bank's business model, recognizing that branch-based assessment areas work for many banks but that additional or different assessment areas may be appropriate for others. Third, we have received helpful input on tailoring CRA regulations to banks of different sizes and business models. Many of the comments we reviewed expressed support for retaining different performance tests for different types of banks, including the strategic plan option. We also heard this at the regional roundtables, where banker participants ranged from small community banks to large internet-only banks. It was clear that CRA regulations cannot be one-size-fits-all. Fourth, we have heard some good suggestions for ensuring that any modernization of assessment areas should keep in focus the goal of encouraging banks to seek out opportunities in underserved areas, including in this morning's panel on assessment areas. The concern about CRA hotspots and credit deserts was echoed in the comment letters, and several commenters offered helpful suggestions for addressing this problem going forward. And the need to create incentives for CRA capital to reach underserved communities was a theme we heard in our regional roundtables from both bankers and community groups. Fifth, we have received many suggestions about how to increase the consistency and predictability of CRA evaluations and ratings. Although we are still in the process of working through the public's comments, those we have read so far suggest general support for the view that the CRA regulations and examinations would benefit from more clarity, consistency, and predictability. Likewise, there is an openness to expanding the use of metrics that evaluate components of a bank's activity on an assessment area level, while recognizing the importance of also leveraging performance context information, including of a qualitative nature, so that bankers and examiners are able to identify and understand local community needs. The first panel this morning on metrics and evaluating performance also helped further our understanding in this area, with particular focus on the investment behaviors of CRA-motivated banks and on how we might strengthen the CRA to better evaluate a bank's performance in meeting the credit needs of its communities. Sixth, in both comment letters and roundtables, community and consumer groups emphasized the historical context of the CRA as it relates to redlining practices. To that end, they strongly supported the CRA retaining a proactive focus on reaching all underserved borrowers, including low-income communities and communities of color. The central thrust of the CRA is to encourage banks to ensure that all creditworthy borrowers have fair access to credit, and, to do so successfully, it has long been recognized that they must guard against discriminatory or unfair and deceptive lending practices. This has been an excellent convening so far, and I want to thank you for sharing your knowledge and insights with us. The Federal Reserve is a research-driven institution, and we want to be sure that we are aware of all the latest research on the effectiveness of the CRA and what the research has to say about potential regulatory improvements. Today's conversation is an opportunity not only to hear from external academic researchers, but also to have a robust conversation with practitioners about how this research might inform the Board's work. This afternoon, I look forward to hearing the conversation on the effectiveness of the CRA, past, present, and future. I have had opportunities to hear directly from stakeholders in a variety of settings, kicking off with a community development visit in Baltimore last April and most recently in Denver, at our first regional roundtable.4The Denver roundtable was attended by state member banks and was hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. I appreciated the robust conversation among knowledgeable individuals whose work touches on the CRA every day. Sitting around a table together provided an opportunity for me to hear community bankers reflect on what has worked well for their communities and what they see as challenges, and to provide thoughtful suggestions on what they think might work best going forward. It was also helpful to be exposed to some differences of views. The best approach to implementing the CRA in today's environment is a complex issue, so I value hearing a wide range of suggestions. In closing, I want to reiterate my own commitment to strengthening the CRA, which is widely shared across the Federal Reserve System. We aim to promote more CRA activity, not less. We think that simplifying and clarifying the regulations while strengthening local community engagement will help us accomplish that goal. Thank you for your help in this process. 1. I am grateful to Amanda Roberts for assistance in preparing these remarks. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. A summary of the findings will be made public in the spring.Return to text 3. A summary of the response is available on our public website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/files/cac-20181005.pdf.Return to text 4. See Lael Brainard, "Community Development in Baltimore and A Few Observations on Community Reinvestment Act Modernization" (speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Community Development Gathering, April 17, 2018); and "Community Investment in Denver" (speech at the Denver Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, October 15, 2018).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 10(e) of the Home Owners' Loan Act by WSFS Financial Corporation, Wilmington, Delaware, to acquire Beneficial Bancorp, Inc. and thereby indirectly acquire Beneficial Bank, both of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York I am pleased to participate in this year's U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, which, since its inception, has brought together policymakers, academics, and market participants to share ideas and perspectives on U.S. monetary policy. Today I would like to discuss the broad review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy framework that we are undertaking this year. We will examine the policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that we use to pursue our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. In my remarks, I will describe the motivation for and scope of this review and will preview some of the events we are planning as part of it.1The U.S. Monetary Policy Forum is an excellent venue for this presentation. For more than a decade, it has focused attention and timely analysis on critical issues confronting the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Its programs have drawn on the latest economic research and considered a range of views. Similarly, the Federal Reserve's review of its monetary policy framework will be transparent, will be open minded, and will seek perspectives from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including academics, other specialists, and the public at large. Motivation for the ReviewThe fact that the System is conducting this review does not suggest that we are dissatisfied with the existing policy framework. Indeed, we believe our existing framework has served us well, helping us effectively achieve our statutorily assigned dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. Nonetheless, in light of the unprecedented events of the past decade, we believe it is a good time to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we can refine our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and maintain these goals as consistently and robustly as possible.2I note that central banks in other countries have conducted periodic reviews of their monetary policy frameworks, and their experience has informed the approach we are pursuing. As Chairman Powell has indicated, with the U.S. economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review. The unemployment rate is near a multidecade low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective. By conducting this review, we want to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years. In addition, the Federal Reserve used new policy tools and enhanced its communication practices in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession, and the review will evaluate these changes. Furthermore, U.S. and foreign economies have significantly evolved since the pre-crisis experience that informed much of the research that provided the foundation for our current approach. Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States and abroad.3Moreover, this global decline in r* is widely expected to persist for years. The decline in neutral policy rates likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, changes in risk-taking behavior, and a slowdown in technology growth. These factors' contributions are highly uncertain, but irrespective of their precise role, the policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important. All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns. That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support spending and employment, and keep inflation from falling too low.4 Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource slack. That is, the short-run Phillips curve appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5A flatter Phillips curve is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword. It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns‑‑as was the case during and after the Great Recession--because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.6However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations. Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7 Scope of the ReviewIn the Federal Reserve Act, the Congress assigned the Federal Reserve the responsibility to conduct monetary policy "so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."8Our review this year will take this statutory mandate as given and will also take as given that inflation at a rate of 2 percent is most consistent over the longer run with the congressional mandate. Our existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.9First adopted in January 2012, the statement has been reaffirmed at the start of each subsequent year, including at the FOMC's meeting last month with unanimous support from all 17 FOMC participants. The statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level. In doing so, the FOMC recognizes that these assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. According to the Federal Reserve Act, the employment objective is on an equal footing with the inflation objective. As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy framework known in the research literature as "flexible inflation targeting."10However, the Fed's mandate is much more explicit about the role of employment than that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedent over the other. We believe this transparency about the balanced approach the FOMC takes has served us well over the past decade when high unemployment called for extraordinary policies that entailed some risk of inflation. The review of our current framework will be wide ranging, and we will not prejudge where it will take us, but events of the past decade highlight three broad questions. Three QuestionsThe first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?" Under our current approach as well as that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks around the world, the persistent shortfalls of inflation from 2 percent that many advanced economies have experienced over most of the past decade are treated as "bygones." This means that policy today is not adjusted to offset past inflation shortfalls with future overshoots of the inflation target (nor do persistent overshoots of inflation trigger policies that aim to undershoot the inflation target). Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots, but the effective lower bound on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more likely. Persistent inflation shortfallscarry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become poorly anchored or become anchored below the stated inflation goal.11 In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated "makeup" strategies under which policymakers seek to undo, in part or in whole, past inflation deviations from target. Such strategies include targeting average inflation over a multiyear period and price-level targeting, in which policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path.12These strategies could be implemented either permanently or as a temporary response to extraordinary circumstances. For example, the central bank could commit, at the time when the policy rate reaches the ELB, to maintain the policy rate at this level until inflation over the ELB period has, on average, run at the target rate.13Other makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case.14In many models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average performance on both legs of the dual mandate and thereby, viewed over time, provide no conflict between the dual-mandate goals.15 The benefits of the makeup strategies rest heavily on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes--for example, that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent. As is well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at that time will not warrant doing so. Because of this time inconsistency, any makeup strategy, to be successful, would have to be understood by the public to represent a credible commitment. That important real-world consideration is often neglected in the academic literature, in which central bank "commitment devices" are simply assumed to exist and be instantly credible on decree. Thus, one of the most challenging questions is whether the Fed could, in practice, attain the benefits of makeup strategies that are possible in models. The next question the review will consider is, "Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? And, if so, how?" The FOMC's primary means of changing the stance of monetary policy is by adjusting its target range for the federal funds rate. In the fall of 2008, the FOMC cut that target to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions. Because the U.S. economy required additional policy accommodation after the ELB was reached, the FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis: balance sheet policies and forward guidance regarding the likely path of the federal funds rate.16 The FOMC altered the size and composition of the Fed's balance sheet through a sequence of three large-scale securities purchase programs, via a maturity extension program, and by adjusting the reinvestment of principal payments on maturing securities. With regard to forward guidance, the FOMC initially made "calendar based" statements, and, later on, it issued "outcome based" guidance. Overall, the empirical evidence suggests that these added tools helped stem the crisis and support economic recovery by strengthening the labor market and lifting inflation back toward 2 percent. That said, estimates of the effects of these unconventional policies range widely.17 In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, we will consider additional tools to ease policy when the ELB is binding. For example, as is presently Bank of Japan policy, the FOMC could, when the ELB is binding, establish a temporary ceiling for Treasury yields at longer maturities by standing ready to purchase them at a preannounced floor price.18During the crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve reviewed but ultimately found this tool and some others deployed by foreign central banks wanting relative to the alternatives it did pursue. But the review will reassess the case for these and other tools in light of more recent experience in other countries. The third question the review will consider is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?" Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting. Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication practices to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions, as well as to foster democratic accountability. These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.19 As part of the review, we will assess the Committee's current and past communications and additional forms of communication that could be helpful. For example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability. Activities and Timeline for the ReviewThe review will have several components.20The Board and the Reserve Banks will be conducting town hall-style "Fed Listens" events this year. We will hear from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development professionals, and academics. The first of these events will take place Monday in Dallas. Another is scheduled at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in early April, and other Reserve Banks will host events over the course of the year. In addition, we will sponsor a System research conference on June 4-5, 2019, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with speakers and panelists from outside the Fed. The sessions will include overviews by academic experts of themes that are central to the review, including the FOMC's monetary policy since the financial crisis, assessments of the maximum sustainable level of employment, alternative policy frameworks and strategies to achieve the dual mandate, policy tools, global considerations, financial stability considerations, and central bank communications. Other sessions will feature panels of community leaders who will share their perspectives on the labor market and the effects of interest rates on their constituencies. We expect to release summaries of the "Fed Listens" events and to livestream the Chicago conference. Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the FOMC will conduct its own assessment of its monetary policy framework, beginning around the middle of the year. We will share our conclusions with the public in the first half 2020. Concluding ThoughtsThe economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges. So it makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate finding. What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today. ReferencesAdam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 54 (April), pp. 728-52. Bank for International Settlements (2017).87th Annual Report (PDF).Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June. Bauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2014). "The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (September), pp. 233-89. Baumeister, Christiane, and Luca Benati (2013). "Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread Compression at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 9 (June), pp. 165-212. Berg, Claes, and Lars Jonung (1999). "Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 1931-1937,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 43 (June), pp. 525-51. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14. -------- (2017). "Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy,"Ben Bernanke's Blog,October 12. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/5/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, July. Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006). "Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 88 (August), pp. 445-62. Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010). "How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 369-422. Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (2018). "The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF)," Occasional Paper Series 217. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, December. Bullard, James (2018). "The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF)," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012). "Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 1-80. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Jonas D.M. Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi (2017). "Forward Guidance and Macroeconomic Outcomes since the Financial Crisis," in Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016,vol. 31. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 283-357. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF),report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. Chen, Han, Vasco Cúrdia, and Andrea Ferrero (2012). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F289-315. Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019)."Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Clarida, Richard H. (2012). "What Has--and Has Not--Been Learned about Monetary Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment? A Review of the 2000s,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 123-40. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147-80. Clinton, Kevin, Charles Freedman, Michel Juillard, Ondra Kamenik, Douglas Laxton, and Hou Wang (2015). "Inflation-Forecast Targeting: Applying the Principle of Transparency (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/132. Washington: International Monetary Fund, June. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David López‐Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F415-46. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large‐Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 108 (May), pp. 425-48. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 139-235. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. English, William B., David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (May), pp. 22-70. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018). "Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds.,Handbook of Economic Forecasting,vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2-56. Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018). “Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)” paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13-14. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian P. Sack (2011). "Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? (PDF)"FRBNYEconomic Policy Review,vol. 17 (May), pp. 41-59. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 3-46. Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018). "From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Hills, Timothy S., Taisuke Nakata, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016). "The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108, Supplement 1 (May), pp. S59-75. Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011). "The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 7 (September), pp. 113-61. Joyce, Michael, David Miles, Andrew Scott, and Dimitri Vayanos (2012). "Quantitative Easing and Unconventional Monetary Policy--An Introduction,"Economic Journal,vol. 122 (November), pp. F271-88. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317-96. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014). "Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007). "Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. Nakov, Anton (2008). "Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 4 (June), pp. 73-127. Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005). "Average Inflation Targeting,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (October), pp. 837-63. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017). "Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF)"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 13 (September), pp. 1-42. Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936-66. Roberts, John M. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193-230. Romer, David (2010). "A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 42 (August), pp. 951-57. Ruge-Murcia, Francisco (2014). "Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price Level? (PDF)"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (June), pp. 301-26. Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013). "The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping? (PDF)" inWorld Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 79-95. Swanson, Eric T. (2017). "Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper Series 23311. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April (revised August 2018). -------- (2018). "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Woodford, Michael (2012). "Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. Yellen, Janet (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. -------- (2017). "The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19. 1. I would like to thank Etienne Gagnon for his assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework. They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.Return to text 3. For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).Return to text 4. For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).Return to text 5. For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).Return to text 6. One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010). As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions. Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.Return to text 7. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation. In a paper discussed at this forum two years ago, Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s. These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.Return to text 8. Even though the act lists three distinct goals, the Federal Reserve's mandate for monetary policy is commonly known as the "dual mandate." The reason is that an economy in which people who want to work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly quickly and in which the price level (meaning a broad measure of the price of goods and services purchased by consumers) is stable creates the conditions needed for interest rates to settle at moderate levels. For a discussion, see Mishkin (2007).Return to text 9. The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf.Return to text 10. For a discussion of this terminology and references, see English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) and Clinton and others (2015).Return to text 11. These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB. For related discussions, see Reifschneider and Williams (2000); Adam and Billi (2007); Nakov (2008); and Hills, Nakata, and Schmidt (2016).Return to text 12. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion. Nessén and Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting. There is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations. Central banks that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon--typically a couple years ahead or over the "medium run"--without regard to past inflation deviations. One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of "2-3 per cent, on average, over the medium term" and thus might embed some notion of history dependence. However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation goal. The only known historical example of price-level targeting occurred in Sweden from 1931 to 1933 when the country abandoned the gold standard and attempted instead to maintain its price level. The temporary adoption of price-level targeting is credited with helping Sweden avoid deflation, an outcome that contrasted with that in countries that stayed on the gold standard. See Berg and Jonung (1999).Return to text 13. See Bernanke (2017) for a discussion of such a strategy. See Hebden and López-Salido (2018) for a quantitative assessment of that and other strategies. See also Kiley and Roberts (2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns.Return to text 14. See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy rate lower than otherwise. The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the Board's July 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018, pp. 37-41).Return to text 15. See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S. economy.Return to text 16. As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017). In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase households and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery. These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.Return to text 17. On the transmission channels of balance sheet policies, see D'Amico and others (2012), Joyce and others (2012), Clarida (2012), Woodford (2012), and Bauer and Rudebusch (2014). On the financial market effects of balance sheet policies, see Gagnon and others (2011), Joyce and others (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), D'Amico and King (2013), and Swanson (2017). For discussions of the macroeconomic effects of these policy actions, see Chen, Cúrdia, and Ferrero (2012); Baumeister and Benati (2013); Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Chung and others (2019), and the references therein. For related assessments of forward guidance, see Campbell and others (2012); Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Campbell and others (2017); and Swanson (2017).Return to text 18. Compared with asset purchases during the financial crisis, this approach might give us greater rate control at medium to long maturities but carry a risk that the Federal Reserve's balance sheet could become unduly large. Japan arguably offers the most direct example of such an approach. In September 2016, the Bank of Japan announced a target for the yield on the Japanese 10-year government bond and stated its commitment to expand the monetary base until inflation exceeded its 2 percent objective and stayed above that level in a stable manner.Return to text 19. Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannualMonetary Policy Report.With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon. Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members. For a discussion and data, see Bernanke (2007) and Romer (2010).Return to text 20. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York When I was asked to participate on this panel in the middle of last year, the prevailing metaphor regarding Federal Reserve balance sheet policy was "as boring as watching paint dry." Well, times have changed, and I commend the conference organizers for their foresight. Today I would like to discuss some of the recent decisions that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has made regarding the balance sheet and lay out a rough framework for some further issues that are on the horizon.1 In January, after much discussion, including in previous meetings, the FOMC announced its intent to continue operating in a framework of ample reserves.2In this regime, active management of the reserve supply is not needed. The Federal Reserve controls the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates primarily through the use of administered rates, including the rate paid on reserve balances and the offered rate on overnight reverse repurchase agreements. This regime is sometimes referred to as a floor system, because the administered rates place a floor under the rate at which banks and others will lend in the federal funds market. In adopting this framework, the Committee stated its intention to continue operating as it has for the past decade. The announcement was an important step in our normalization process. And we are now set up to make further decisions on the eventual size and composition of our balance sheet. Before providing more context on those decisions, let me first provide a little more detail around our decision to remain in the current framework of ample reserves. The most important factor in the decision was that the current system has worked very well. It has supported the achievement of our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. And it has shown itself to be flexible and well suited to maintaining interest rate control through various changes in money markets, bank regulation, and the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. Since the FOMC began lifting interest rates in December 2015, money market rates have generally moved closely with the federal funds rate, which in turn has followed changes in administered rates. Now that the decision on the operating framework has been made, a natural next step is to contemplate the appropriate size of the Fed's balance sheet and reserves and the process for getting there. In line with the requirements of operating with ample reserves--and boosted by the growth in nonreserve liabilities--the Fed will maintain a larger balance sheet and reserve supply relative to the pre-crisis period, with the goal of remaining on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve. I would note that reserves have already declined appreciably from their peak, falling by $1.2 trillion to a current level of around $1.6 trillion. At the same time, we have seen a substantial increase in our nonreserve liabilities, such as currency in circulation and the Treasury General Account balance. In our statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, we outlined an intention to hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively.3As the balance sheet continues to shrink, we are now in the process of determining that necessary size. Ultimately, the size of the balance sheet will be determined by a number of factors, including demand for nonreserve liabilities, such as currency (which has been rising), and, importantly, the quantity of reserves necessary to remain reliably on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve. Survey results suggest that banks have greatly increased their demand for reserves in the post-crisis period. Responses to the September 2018 Senior Financial Officer Survey report that banks would be comfortable with a level of reserves in the system in the neighborhood of $800 billion, taking into consideration the level of interest rates at the time.4In part, this increased demand reflects a response to regulatory changes introduced after the crisis. These changes include, importantly, the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), which has improved banks' liquidity resilience by requiring firms to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to cover potential outflows during times of stress. Reserves, along with Treasury securities, are favored under the LCR, and, consequently, firms currently meet a sizable fraction of their LCR requirements by holding reserves. Notwithstanding survey results, the level of reserve demand remains quite uncertain. It is possible that, over time, the preferences of banks will shift, or that demand will prove more price elastic than banks are currently expecting. As I have discussed previously, bank holdings of reserves to meet LCR requirements could shift toward Treasury securities, as aggregate reserves decline, without much upward pressure on the federal funds rate.5That said, even if uncertain, it is probably safe to say that reserve demand is much higher than before the crisis. As we work to calibrate ample reserves, there are some tradeoffs that are worth noting. For example, we could operate with a level of reserve balances at the lower end of what might be considered ample. In that case, there would likely be occasions when unexpected declines in the supply of reserves or increases in the demand for reserves would require an open market operation to offset temporary upward pressures on the federal funds rate. Alternatively, we could operate with an average supply of reserves large enough to keep the federal funds rate determined along the flat portion of the reserve demand curve even with an unexpected shift in the supply of or demand for reserves. This approach would be operationally convenient but would also leave the size of the balance sheet and reserves larger than necessary most of the time. In my view, it might be appropriate for us to operate somewhere in between these two extremes, with a sizable quantity of reserves large enough to buffer against most shocks to reserve supply. On those few days when that buffer is likely to be exhausted, we could conduct open market operations to temporarily boost the supply of reserves. With so much uncertainty over the level and slope of the reserve demand curve, a degree of caution is warranted. As outlined in the minutes of the January FOMC meeting, the Committee has discussed ending the reduction in the Fed's aggregate asset holdings sometime in the latter half of this year, with still-ample reserves in the system.6At that point, one option discussed, without any decision being made at this point, is to hold the level of total assets roughly fixed for a time. Even as the total size of the balance sheet remains fixed, the composition of the liabilities would gradually change, in part as demand for currency grows in line with the economy. Over time, the gradual increase in nonreserve liabilities would displace reserves as the overall balance sheet remains fixed. This plan would substantially reduce the pace of the decline in reserves, allowing us to gradually approach our assessment of the appropriate amount of reserves for the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy. Of course, in the longer run, once we reach our preferred level of reserves, the balance sheet would have to resume growth to match a continued increase in demand for nonreserve liabilities. I would like to wrap up with a brief discussion of some of the other decision points we will encounter as we continue the process of normalizing our balance sheet. In particular, what does the Committee judge to be normal in regard to the type and duration of assets that we will hold? On composition, in line with our previously announced normalization principles, I favor a return to a balance sheet with all Treasury securities, allowing our mortgage-backed securities (MBS) holdings to run to zero. In those principles, we also state that while we do not expect sales of MBS as part of the normalization process, later we would be open to limited sales to reduce or eliminate residual holdings of MBS. In regard to duration, moving to shorten the duration of our holdings could increase the Fed's ability to affect long-term interest rates if the need arose. However, it might be preferable to have the composition of our Treasury holdings roughly match the maturity composition of outstanding Treasury securities, minimizing any market distortions that could arise from our holdings. Over the course of our upcoming meetings, I look forward to what promises to be an interesting discussion on these issues with my colleagues. Finally, in assessing our balance sheet policy, it is important to point out that the Fed remains entirely focused on meeting its statutory dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. The normalization of the balance sheet is not a competing goal. If ever it appears that our plans for the balance sheet are running counter to the achievement of our dual-mandate objectives, we would quickly reassess our approach to the balance sheet. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. For more information, see the Committee's Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130c.htm.Return to text 3. The Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans were adopted on September 16, 2014, and can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_policynormalization.pdf. The FOMC adopted addenda to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans onMarch 18, 2015 (PDF), and onJune 13, 2017 (PDF).Return to text 4. The survey is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sfos/files/senior-financial-officer-survey-201809.pdf.Return to text 5. See Randal K. Quarles (2018), "Liquidity Regulation and the Size of the Fed's Balance Sheet," speech delivered at "Currencies, Capital, and Central Bank Balances: A Policy Conference," a Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., May 4.Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, January 29-30, 2019," press release, February 20.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At "Promoting Global Growth and Domestic Economic Security," 35th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the opportunity to participate in the 35th Annual Economic Policy Conference of the National Association for Business Economics. Before we begin our conversation, I want to share a few thoughts about the outlook for the economy and monetary policy.1 Current Economic Situation and OutlookThe U.S. economy expanded at a robust pace in 2018, and my baseline outlook for 2019 foresees somewhat slower but still-solid growth in the year ahead. In July, just about four months from now, the current economic expansion will become the longest on record. The Federal Reserve is charged by the Congress with achieving and sustaining a dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, and the economy is as close as it has been in many years to meeting these goals. The unemployment rate is near the lowest level recorded in 50 years, and average monthly job gains have continued to well outpace the increases needed over the longer run to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force. Most measures of nominal wage growth are running at or somewhat above the 3 percent pace, and recent wage gains have been strongest for lower-skilled workers. Moreover, the strength of the labor market appears to have encouraged people to join the labor force and others, who might have left it, to continue working. The labor force participation rate--the share of people who are either working or looking for work--has moved up 1/2 percentage point over the past year, and the participation rate of prime-age workers (those 25 to 54 years old) has risen about 1-1/2 percentage points over the past few years. Inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), is estimated to have been a little bit below 2 percent of late, largely because of recent declines in energy prices. However, core PCE inflation, which excludes food and energy prices and tends to be a better indicator of future inflation, is estimated to have been about 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved lower, on net, since last summer, though they have increased some recently, and some survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. That said, taken together, the evidence suggests that measures of expected inflation are at the lower end of a range that I consider to be consistent with our price-stability goal of 2 percent PCE inflation. While my baseline outlook for growth, employment, and inflation is a positive one, a number of crosscurrents that are buffeting the economy bear careful scrutiny. Global growth is slowing, particularly in China and Europe. Global policy uncertainty remains elevated. And financial conditions have been volatile, making efforts to extract signal from noise more challenging. Monetary PolicyAs I have indicated in recent speeches, monetary policy at this juncture needs to be especially data dependent, with the federal funds rate now in the range of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' estimates of its longer-run neutral level. Moreover, with employment and inflation now at or close to our dual-mandate objectives, the FOMC in its January statement indicated it can afford to be patient as we assess the need for further adjustments in our policy stance.2Going forward, we need, I believe, to be cognizant of the balance we must strike between (1) being forward looking and (2) maximizing the odds of being right given the reality that the models that we consult are not infallible. For example, were a model to predict a surge in inflation, a decision for preemptive hikes before the surge is evident in actual data would need to be balanced against the considerable cost of the model being wrong. Given muted inflation and stable inflation expectations, I believe we can be patient and allow the data to flow in as we determine what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to strike this balance. We also decided at our January meeting to maintain our current operating regime‑‑a "floor" system--for implementing monetary policy.3The FOMC will continue to set the stance of policy by establishing the target range for the federal funds rate. The interest on excess reserves rate will be our primary tool to keep the federal funds rate in the target range. In this regime, we will provide an ample supply of reserves in the banking system to ensure that we remain on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve and that the federal funds rate is insulated from shocks to reserve demand and supply. With this decision on our operating regime made, the Committee can now decide on the appropriate timing and pace for concluding our balance sheet drawdown. In the longer run, the ultimate size of the balance sheet will be determined by the demand for Federal Reserve liabilities such as currency and reserve balances. Finally, in November, we announced a review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices. In this review, we will listen carefully to a broad range of stakeholders offering a full range of perspectives from across the country, and we will draw on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability in the most robust fashion possible. Taking these viewpoints on board, the FOMC will begin its own discussions this summer on how we might refine our framework and will provide a public assessment after the review is completed.4 Thank you for your attention, and I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 30.Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization," press release, January 30.Return to text 4. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text
Chairman Jerome H. Powell At Conversation with the Chairman: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting, Washington, D.C. Thank you to all the educators who are here with us in Washington or are joining us online. I look forward to responding to your questions. But first, I have a few thoughts about the vital work you do as economics educators and its connection to what the Federal Reserve is trying to accomplish. I promise to be brief, because it is a school night. I am here today, and the Fed has organized this event, because of the importance of economics education. Some of your students may go on to become professional economists, but all of them, I hope, will apply the valuable lessons and the skills they have gained from economics in other careers and in others aspects of their lives. Studying economics can benefit students in multiple ways. The lessons of economics are valuable in a wide variety of vocations. Moreover, the knowledge gained will empower students as consumers, managers of their own finances, and as informed citizens. Economics has been consistently useful to me over my career in law, finance, and government service. It is, of course, central to my current role as a monetary policymaker and financial regulator. In government, economic analysis is one of the principal tools we use in making policy decisions. Among other things, economics is an essential facet of the science of public policy. What policies actually work? Which ones sound good but don't work, or are actually counter-productive? Economics gives us the tools to answer those questions and help us make the best the decisions on behalf of the public. Of course, economics is not only the basis for judgments and decisions made by the Fed and other government agencies. It also underpins the countless decisions by consumers, businesses, and investors that drive economic activity. The concepts you teach and apply in the classroom guide those decisions and even help explain human behavior outside of the workings of the economy. For example, to continue to grow and succeed, any business owner should understand the differences between fixed cost, variable cost, average cost, and marginal cost. Businesses and investors need to understand present or discounted value, but so should any parent or grandparent starting a college fund. Economics teaches us about the power of incentives, which are central to thinking about and understanding regulatory and tax policy. But incentives also help motivate people in a variety of other settings, such as encouraging students to do their best in school, helping reduce traffic jams, or even nudging someone to save more or to exercise regularly. Economics is a practical and powerful tool for understanding how we relate to each other. And that's why what you do for your students is so important. Like all teachers, you are helping prepare them for success in life. The knowledge you impart and the intellect and talents you help develop are tools that your students can use to achieve that success. Economics teaches analytical and critical thinking skills useful to anyone. Part of your students' success is their economic success as capable, creative, and productive members of the workforce and as consumers adept at managing their finances. Your students benefit from this education, but so does everyone else in society. We all benefit when better-educated citizens support economic policies that help our nation prosper. We all benefit from the capability, creativity, and productivity of our workforce, because nothing is more important to a healthy and growing economy. Responsible consumers skilled in managing their finances are better prepared to weather bad times, and stronger household finances overall can help sustain economic growth and mitigate a downturn. Stabilizing growth and mitigating a downturn, of course, are aspects of the Federal Reserve's mission. Monetary policy can be a powerful tool to achieve these ends, but, in truth, its powers are dwarfed by larger forces, such as the productivity of the American people and the strength of their finances. By educating students and supporting their future contributions to the economy as workers and consumers, all teachers, especially economics teachers, are furthering our goals at the Fed, so let me offer my further thanks for making our job easier. To help support your work as teachers, the Federal Reserve Board and the 12 Reserve Banks conduct programs, organize events, and publish books to spread knowledge of economics, financial literacy, and the role of the Fed in promoting a healthy economy and financial system. You can find some of those resources at our websites: FederalReserve.gov and FederalReserveEducation.org. Each of the Reserve Banks has community outreach and educational initiatives, and the outreach to economics teachers is coordinated by the System Economic Education Group, which has been chaired by Princeton Williams. At the Board of Governors, for some years we have operated a program called FedEd, which sends Board employees into high schools throughout the Washington, D.C., area. This outreach depends on several dozen volunteers from our staff--typically, recent college graduates--who help teach about the Fed, economics and finance, and answer questions about work opportunities at the Board. The Federal Reserve is dedicated to promoting diversity in our ranks and in the economics profession, and FedEd and other programs across the Federal Reserve System have helped advance this goal by reaching many schools with significant numbers of minority students. Let me leave it there, and again thank you for participating in this town hall, and thank you for the valuable work you do every school day. Conversation with the Chairman: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting