The Federal Open Market Committee, at its annual organizational meeting this week, unanimously reaffirmed its "Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy" with an updated reference to the median of participants' estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (December 2018). The Committee first adopted the statement at its January 2012 meeting and has reaffirmed it, with appropriate revisions, at its annual organizational meetings each January. Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF)Amended January 29, 2019 Previous version:Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF)Amended January 30, 2018
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the designation of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks for 2019. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as Chair and a second as Deputy Chair. Following are the names of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs designated by the Board for 2019: BostonPhillip L. Clay, professor, Department of Urban Studies and Planning, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, named Chair. Christina Hull Paxson, president, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, named Deputy Chair. New YorkDenise Scott, executive vice president, Local Initiatives Support Corporation, New York, New York, named Chair. Rosa M. Gil, president and chief executive officer, Comunilife, Inc., New York, New York, named Deputy Chair. PhiladelphiaBrian M. McNeill, president and chief executive officer, TouchPoint, Inc., Concordville, Pennsylvania, renamed Chair. Phoebe Haddon, chancellor, Rutgers University-Camden, Camden, New Jersey, renamed Deputy Chair. ClevelandDawne S. Hickton, president and founding partner, Cumberland Highstreet Partners, Sewickley, Pennsylvania, renamed Chair. Dwight E. Smith, president and chief executive officer, Sophisticated Systems, Inc., Columbus, Ohio, renamed Deputy Chair. RichmondKathy J. Warden, chief executive officer and president, Northrop Grumman Corporation, Falls Church, Virginia, named Chair. Margaret G. Lewis, president (retired), HCA Capital Division, Richmond, Virginia, named Deputy Chair. AtlantaMyron A. Gray, president (retired), U.S. Operations, United Parcel Service, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, named Chair. Elizabeth A. Smith, chairman and chief executive officer, Bloomin' Brands, Inc., Tampa, Florida, named Deputy Chair. ChicagoAnne R. Pramaggiore, senior executive vice president, Exelon Corp., and chief executive officer, Exelon Utilities, Chicago, Illinois, renamed Chair. E. Scott Santi, chairman and chief executive officer, Illinois Tool Works Inc., Glenview, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chair. St. LouisKathleen M. Mazzarella, chairman, president, and chief executive officer, Graybar Electric Company, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, renamed Chair. Suzanne Sitherwood, president and chief executive officer, Spire Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, renamed Deputy Chair. MinneapolisKendall J. Powell, chairman and chief executive officer (retired), General Mills, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, renamed Chair. Harry D. Melander, president, Minnesota Building and Construction Trades Council, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chair. Kansas CityRose M. Washington, executive director, Tulsa Economic Development Corporation, Tulsa, Oklahoma, renamed Chair. James C. Farrell, president and chief executive officer, Farmers National Company, Omaha, Nebraska, named Deputy Chair. DallasGreg L. Armstrong, chairman, Plains All American Pipeline L.P., Houston, Texas, named Chair. Mary E. Kipp, president and chief executive officer, El Paso Electric Company, El Paso, Texas, named Deputy Chair. San FranciscoBarry M. Meyer, chairman and chief executive officer (retired), Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., and chairman and founder, North Ten Mile Associates, Los Angeles, California, named Chair. Rosemary Turner, president (retired), Northern California District, United Parcel Service, Inc., Oakland, California, named Deputy Chair. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application undersection 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by First Busey Corporation, Champaign, Illinois, to acquire The Banc Ed Corp., and thereby indirectly acquire Ed Corp's subsidiary bank, The Bank of Edwardsville, both of Edwardsville, Illinois. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the proposals under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Equity Bank, Andover, Kansas, to acquire certain assets and assume certain liabilities of MidFirst Bank, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and to establish and operate three branches. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced preliminary results indicating that the Reserve Banks provided for payments of approximately $65.4 billion of their estimated 2018 net income to the U.S. Treasury. The payments include two lump-sum payments totaling approximately $3.2 billion, necessary to reduce aggregate Reserve Bank capital surplus to $6.825 billion as required by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (Budget Act) and the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (Economic Growth Act). The 2018 audited Reserve Bank financial statements are expected to be published in March and may include adjustments to these preliminary unaudited results. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2018 estimated net income of $63.1 billion represents a decrease of $17.6 billion from 2017, primarily attributable to an increase of $12.6 billion in interest expense associated with reserve balances held by depository institutions. Net income for 2018 was derived primarily from $112.3 billion in interest income on securities acquired through open market operations--U.S. Treasury securities, federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgage-backed securities, and GSE debt securities. The Federal Reserve Banks had interest expense of $38.5 billion primarily associated with reserve balances held by depository institutions, and incurred interest expense of $4.6 billion on securities sold under agreement to repurchase. Operating expenses of the Reserve Banks, net of amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Treasury and other entities for services the Reserve Banks provided as fiscal agents, totaled $4.3 billion in 2018. In addition, the Reserve Banks were assessed $849 million for the costs related to producing, issuing, and retiring currency, $838 million for Board expenditures, and $337 million to fund the operations of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Additional earnings were derived from income from services of $444 million. Statutory dividends totaled $1 billion in 2018. The attached chart illustrates the amount the Reserve Banks distributed to the U.S. Treasury from 2009 through 2018 (estimated). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: A.E. Bancorp, Inc., Buffalo Grove, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated July 1, 2010 (PDF)Terminated January 9, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the appointment of Stacey M. Tevlin as director of the Division of Research and Statistics, effective February 4. Tevlin, currently an associate director of the division, will succeed David W. Wilcox, who recently retired as director of the division after 30 years of service with the Federal Reserve Board. As director of the division, Tevlin will oversee economic analysis, forecasting, and research related to the domestic economy and financial markets, several major economic measurement programs such as Industrial Production and the Survey of Consumer Finances, and research and analysis in support of the Federal Reserve's financial stability, supervision, and regulatory activities. She will also be responsible for briefing the Federal Open Market Committee on the outlook for the U.S. economy. "Stacey brings many years of leadership and research experience, a keen understanding of the U.S. economy, and extensive public service at the Federal Reserve to the position of division director," said Federal Reserve Board Chairman Jerome H. Powell. Tevlin started at the Board in 1995 as an economist in the Division of Monetary Affairs and held a number of positions in the Division of Research and Statistics leading teams of economists helping to produce the staff's forecast of the U.S. economy. From 2014 to 2016, she also served as special adviser to then-Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer. Tevlin's research has focused on business investment and the macro economy. Tevlin received her B.A. in economics from Northwestern University in 1990 and her Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1995.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday invited public comment on a proposal that would modify company-run stress testing requirements to conform with the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The proposal would raise the threshold requiring state-member banks to conduct their company-run stress tests from $10 billion in total consolidated assets to $250 billion. Additionally, in place of the current annual cycle, the proposal would generally require firms above the threshold to conduct company-run stress tests once every other year. The proposal also would eliminate the hypothetical "adverse" scenario from company-run stress tests for bank holding companies, state member banks, U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banking organizations, and any nonbank financial company supervised by the Board. Similarly, the Board would no longer include an "adverse" scenario in its supervisory stress tests. The firms would still be required to test themselves against a more severe hypothetical scenario, known as the "severely adverse" scenario, and the supervisory stress tests also would continue to include a "severely adverse" scenario. The proposal is similar to separate proposals issued by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Comments will be accepted until February 19, 2019. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Commercial State Bank, Andrews, TexasCease and Desist Order dated December 26, 2018 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent Order of Prohibition against David Lavine, a former employee of CFG Community Bank, Baltimore, Maryland, for diversion of bank funds for his own benefit. Other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent Prohibition and Cease-and-Desist Order against Raysol Villalobos, a former employee of Frost Bank, San Antonio, Texas. Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announcedConsumer & Community Context, an article series that features original analysis about the financial conditions and experiences of consumers and communities, including traditionally underserved and economically vulnerable households and neighborhoods. The goal of the series is to increase public understanding of the financial conditions and concerns of consumers and communities. The series will be published periodically and each issue will have a theme. "Our objective is to share insights and provide context for the complex economic and financial issues that affect individuals, communities, and the broader economy," said Eric Belsky, director of the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. The inaugural issue covers the theme of student loans, and includes articles on the effect that rising student loan debt levels may have on homeownership rates among young adults; and the relationship between the amount of student loan debt and individuals' decisions to live in rural or urban areas. Authors contributing to the series are employees of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Reserve System. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Consumer & Community Context(PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday launched an interactive smartphone and tablet application designed to teach elementary school students about the security and design features of Federal Reserve notes. The application complements other material available through the Board's Currency Education Program atwww.uscurrency.gov. Money Adventureis the Board's first public mobile application. It is available for download on iPhones and iPads, and will launch on Android devices later this year. Once downloaded, the app can be used without Internet access. Educator lesson plans in English and Spanish are available for use withMoney Adventure. The application's "note front explorer" showcases a virtual $20 note that children can interact with to examine its unique features. The "note back explorer" features a time-traveling game that incorporates augmented reality into learning and allows students to follow "Buck the Time-Traveling Dog" on his quest through the historical events depicted on note backs. The Currency Education Program provides users of U.S. currency around the world with access to education, training, and information about Federal Reserve notes. The Federal Reserve Board manages the program, working closely with its partners at the U.S. Secret Service and the U.S. Department of Treasury's Bureau of Engraving and Printing. Its aim is to raise awareness about the security and design features of U.S. currency. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board in July will host a public research conference on its stress testing framework. The conference will bring together academics, regulators, bankers, and other stakeholders to discuss the transparency and effectiveness of the Board's stress tests and how the stress tests can remain a dynamic and useful tool of large bank supervision. "This outreach effort will help the public better understand how stress tests work and will help us learn how we can improve and refine the program," said Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles. "A transparent and robust dialogue will benefit all stakeholders of the stress testing regime." Now in its ninth year, the Board's stress tests remain a critical component of the Board's supervision of the largest institutions by providing an independent assessment of the capital adequacy of the firms. Strong capital levels act as a cushion to absorb losses, and the largest U.S. firms have substantially increased their capital since the first round of stress tests in 2009--more than doubling their capital levels to approximately $1.2 trillion. The "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review" conference will take place at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston on July 9, 2019. Additional information, including an agenda and panelists, will be forthcoming. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The publication on Friday of the Federal Reserve Board's monthly statistical release on industrial production and capacity utilization marks the 100th anniversary of Board data on industrial production. The index has kept pace with an ever-evolving industrial sector by providing information that spans from the rise of the modern factory through the digital age. The Board began collecting information about industrial production to satisfy the Federal Reserve's need for timely and relevant data on the U.S. economy. The Board's measure of industrial production remains an important economic indicator today and is frequently used by academics, businesses, and policymakers. The index originally divided output into 55 categories and now includes 300, reflecting an increased ability to track the diversity and changing composition of the industrial sector. For example, in 1919, textile manufacturing represented nearly a quarter of the index. Almost the same proportion is represented in 2019 by the combination of motor vehicles and parts, aircraft, and oil and gas extraction. Textiles now represent less than 1 percent of the index. A short history of the index that describes its introduction and tracks its changes and improvements over the past century isavailableon the Board's website. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a solid rate. Job gains have been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Household spending has continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment has moderated from its rapid pace earlier last year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remain near 2 percent. Although market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved lower in recent months, survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. The Committee continues to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes. In light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman; John C. Williams, Vice Chairman; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Richard H. Clarida; Charles L. Evans; Esther L. George; Randal K. Quarles; and Eric S. Rosengren. Implementation Note issued January 30, 2019
Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the American Council of Life Insurers Executive Roundtable, Naples, Florida Members of the American Council of Life Insurers (ACLI), I appreciate this opportunity to speak with you. It needs no retelling in this audience that the insurance industry is of significant importance to the economy, both domestically and internationally. Insurers occupy a meaningful role in the financial sector, meeting the financial needs of consumers and businesses with a distinct business model that calls for appropriately tailored policies. As you know, the Federal Reserve has a role as consolidated supervisor of some insurers, a role we continually strive to fulfill in the most appropriate and tailored manner. The Federal Reserve also participates as a member of "Team USA"--together with the state insurance supervisors, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), and the Federal Insurance Office (FIO)--in the international insurance standard-setting process, including the ongoing development of an insurance capital standard (ICS) for internationally active insurance groups. In my remarks today, I will touch on these topics. In the hope of providing greater transparency, I will also provide some updates on the Board's forthcoming proposal on insurance holding company capital requirements, often referred to as the Building Block Approach (BBA). The Insurance Industry's Importance in the EconomyThe U.S. insurance market, the largest in the world, generated over $2 trillion of direct written premium in 2017, over 10 percent of the total U.S. gross domestic product for that year and the highest direct premium volume in the years following the financial crisis.1Over a quarter of that premium came from life insurers,2including, of course, the institutions represented in this room. In addition to its role providing insurance products--taking on risk and enabling policyholders to plan financially--the insurance industry plays an immensely important role through its investments. In 2017, nearly 65 percent of the insurance industry's $6.5 trillion in cash and invested assets was from the life insurance industry.3Over 70 percent of life insurers' invested assets were held in bonds,4including corporate bonds, which fuel growth in the real economy. Historically, insurers have been relatively conservative, buy-and-hold investors. This has served both the industry and the economy well.5 As we all appreciate, life insurance and annuities are in many ways a spread business, with investment of premium dollars funding later payments to policyholders. In the years since the financial crisis, the insurance industry has shown resilience, with capital and surplus increasing at an average annual growth rate of 4.1 percent since 2007.6With an approach to investment and financial management that focuses on the long-term, the U.S. insurance industry continues to play a valued role in the financial sector. The Federal Reserve's Consolidated Supervision of Insurance FirmsNow in its eighth year of having a supervisory role over certain insurers, the Federal Reserve continues to thoughtfully approach its mandates and authority. The Dodd-Frank Act gave the Federal Reserve regulatory responsibilities for insurance holding companies that choose to own a federally insured depository institution and those designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council. The insurance thrift holding companies supervised by the Federal Reserve represent just under 10 percent of U.S. insurance industry assets and span a wide range of sizes, structures, and business activities.7With a core focus on ensuring the safety and soundness of the supervised insurance institutions, and protecting their subsidiary depository institutions, the Board aims to continue fulfilling its role as consolidated supervisor by tailoring its oversight to the insurance business of the supervised firms, complementing the existing work of state insurance supervisors. The Federal Reserve has aimed to develop policies that are insurance-centric and appropriate for insurance risks. For instance, the Board's advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) on insurance capital requirements set out two frameworks for capital standards that are each unlike the Board's capital rules for bank holding companies.8The BBA, as set out in the ANPR, was fashioned as a framework that builds upon the regulatory capital rules of subsidiaries' functional regulators--state or foreign insurance regulators for insurance subsidiaries and federal banking regulators for insured depository institutions--to provide a consolidated capital requirement. We appreciate the comments we have received, including from the ACLI and other interested parties, and have worked hard to reflect the perspectives of commenters in developing the framework. We expect to publish a formal proposal in the not-too-distant future, and I will provide a high-level preview here today. The Board's Approach to a Capital Standard for Insurance Holding CompaniesIt is worth sharing some further context for the Board's development of the BBA before previewing its design and key attributes. As outlined in the ANPR, the Board strove to develop a framework that encompassed all material risks across the entire supervised enterprise. We favored an approach that is as standardized as possible, rather than relying on internal capital models of supervised firms, in order to promote transparency and facilitate comparability across firms. We also aimed to strike an efficient balance between simplicity and risk sensitivity in order to ensure accurate reflection of risks while minimizing regulatory burden. To further limit regulatory burden, the Board envisioned a BBA that would rely upon existing U.S. accounting and capital frameworks to the greatest extent possible. In designing the BBA, there were, of course, a number of ideas for how we should construct this framework. At the outset, we decided against applying the Board's bank holding company capital rules to supervised insurance firms at the enterprise level, in light of the very different business models of insurance and banking. We considered that a capital approach akin to the European Solvency II framework would not adequately incorporate U.S. accounting frameworks that, relative to other approaches, tend to be less prone to volatility and procyclicality. Volatility in a valuation approach that is used in a capital standard can especially affect long-term contracts, with the potential for unintended consequences on the ability of insurers to provide long-term life insurance and retirement planning products. Moreover, use of an approach that entails more reliance on internal models could undermine our desire for consistent, cross-firm comparisons and can lack transparency to market participants and supervisors. Another framework that could have informed the development of the BBA is the ICS, but much of ICS's evolution has been in the direction of a valuation method and overall framework that reflect approaches used elsewhere in the world. This may not be optimal for the United States insurance market. Importantly, the BBA will appropriately reflect, rather than unduly penalize, long duration liabilities in the United States, facilitating the continued robustness of product availability in the U.S. that contributes to greater financial security for Americans. In the U.S., an aggregation-based approach like the BBA could also strike a better balance between entity-level, and enterprise-wide, supervision of insurance firms. Having spoken enough about what the proposed BBA is not, I should spend some time previewing what it is, and I suspect there is some interest in this room about that topic. Preview of the Building Block ApproachThe proposed BBA is an approach to a consolidated capital requirement that considers all material risks within the enterprise by aggregating the capital positions of companies under an insurance holding company, after making some adjustments and scaling them to a common capital regime. To streamline implementation burden while reflecting all material risks, I think it would make sense to use the NAIC's insurance capital framework as the common capital regime. As the name implies, the BBA constructs "building blocks"--or groupings of entities in the supervised firm--that are covered under the same capital regime. These building blocks are then used to calculate combined, enterprise-level capital resources and requirements. In each building block, the BBA generally applies the capital regime for that block to the subsidiaries in that block. For instance, in a life insurance building block, subsidiaries within this block would be treated in the BBA the way they would be treated under life insurance capital requirements. In a depository institution building block, subsidiaries would be subject to bank regulatory capital requirements. The financial crisis taught us that certain activities in an insurance enterprise--for instance, derivatives activity--could pose risks to the enterprise that may not always be reflected through affiliates subject to capital regimes. To address regulatory gaps and arbitrage risks, like those made manifest in the financial crisis, the BBA generally would apply bank regulatory capital requirements to nonbank/non-insurance building blocks. Once the enterprise's entities are grouped into building blocks, and capital resources and requirements are computed for each building block, the enterprise's capital position is produced by generally adding up the capital positions of each building block. In order for the BBA's aggregation to function appropriately, and to reflect the Board's supervisory objectives, the BBA needs to make certain adjustments to the building blocks. For instance, to compare similar activities across building blocks, the BBA would apply insurance capital rules consistently, without regard to permitted accounting practices granted by an individual state, thus uniformly applying statutory accounting principles as set forth by the NAIC. Measures to avoid double-counting, including double-leverage, that could arise from intercompany transactions would be built into the BBA's aggregation process. Other areas where adjustments would be made include provisions to comply with the Collins Amendment of the Dodd-Frank Act9--for instance, allowing only instruments meeting the criteria under the Board's bank capital rules to qualify as capital for an insurance holding company--and technical adjustments. Aggregation requires a further step after adjustments are applied to each building block, a step that is frequently termed "scaling." Two building blocks under two different capital regimes cannot simply be added together if, as is frequently the case, each regime has a different scale for its ratios and thresholds. The BBA proposes to scale and equate capital positions in different regimes through analyzing historical defaults under those regimes. Once the insurance holding company's aggregate capital position is calculated, the BBA would impose a minimum requirement that is calibrated to be consistent with the Board's role to ensure that the risks of the enterprise do not present undue risk to the safety and soundness of the depository institution. Our goal with the BBA is to capture all material risk of each supervised organization, leverage existing legal-entity standards, and minimize burden. In developing the BBA, we have been mindful of the role that the insurance industry plays through its buy-and-hold, long-term approach to investments. A capital standard can have incentive effects, sometimes substantial. A capital standard that uses market-based valuation can introduce volatility and procyclicality, and one that is excessively volatile or procyclical can influence a firm to veer away from a long-term perspective and concentrate instead on the short term. This can have undesirable consequences, including diminishing product availability. In contrast, a capital standard that is stable in its valuation, conservative in its design, and appropriately reflective of financial soundness can influence firms to plan for the long term, consistent with the nature of life insurance and retirement products, and similarly invest for the long term through assets like government and municipal bonds, corporate bonds, and infrastructure. Moreover, a capital standard like the BBA that largely builds on state-based insurance capital standards would tend to reinforce, rather than frustrate, the important role that insurers' investments play in our economy. Engagement with the NAICIn developing the BBA, we also have been mindful of the potential interaction with the valuable work of another Team USA member, the NAIC, to develop its Group Capital Calculation (GCC). We also applaud the NAIC's efforts to address life insurers' potential liquidity risks and develop a liquidity stress testing framework for large life insurers through the NAIC's Macro Prudential Initiative. The primary functional supervisor for insurance companies for which the Board is consolidated supervisor is a state insurance regulator. It is just good policy for the authorities that mutually supervise firms to coordinate efforts in order to streamline, seek harmony, and minimize inconsistencies. To that end, in August of 2017, the Federal Reserve initiated contact with the NAIC and state insurance supervisors to engage in dialogue with the aim of achieving consistency, wherever possible, between the two capital frameworks under development. We have met frequently and engaged substantively with representatives of the NAIC and the states. Input from the NAIC and the states has helped identify areas of commonality while remaining respectful of the somewhat different objectives of the relevant supervisory bodies and legal environments. Some differences between the Board's BBA and the NAIC's GCC may arise. There are reasons for this. The Board's mandate includes protection of a federally insured depository institution and the attendant safety-and-soundness objectives. As to a firm's insurance subsidiaries, the states' focus is on policyholder protection, while the Board serves as the overall firm's consolidated safety-and-soundness supervisor. The Board's capital standard also must comport with federal law for insurance holding companies with depository institution subsidiaries, while the NAIC's GCC interfaces primarily with state laws. Moreover, because of the characteristics of the current population of insurance thrift holding companies, the BBA currently would only need to scale between two regimes: the NAIC's insurance risk-based capital regime and federal bank capital rules. By contrast, the firms to which the GCC may apply can encompass operations in a number of non-U.S. jurisdictions, calling for a much more extensive set of scaling parameters. The NAIC has announced its plan to conduct a field test of the GCC this spring. Likewise, to be transparent, gather additional input, and provide a valuable test of our approach, the Federal Reserve intends to conduct a quantitative impact study of the BBA as part of our rulemaking process. We hope supervised firms will take advantage of this opportunity to contribute valuable information and feedback on our approach. Our dialogue with the NAIC and state insurance regulators has been productive and helpful in the BBA's development. Moreover, this engagement has been helpful for Team USA's efforts in the international insurance standard-setting arena. The Federal Reserve's Advocacy in International Insurance Standard SettingIt is our intent that the Federal Reserve's development of the BBA, together with the NAIC's development of the GCC, will assist with Team USA's advocacy of an aggregation method that can be deemed comparable to the ICS. In 2013, through the Federal Reserve's role as consolidated supervisor of certain insurers, we joined the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), strengthening our collaboration with the other members of Team USA that continues to this day. The standards produced through the IAIS are, of course, not binding upon the United States. However, it remains in our national interest to engage in the international insurance standards-development process so that it produces standards that are appropriate for the U.S. market and consumers and for U.S. companies operating abroad. I see this philosophy as being important not only in the Federal Reserve's engagement in the IAIS, but also with the broader Financial Stability Board. Team USA's collaboration is prominently visible in our advocacy at the IAIS. In order for any form of an ICS to be implementable globally, it needs to be suitable for the U.S. insurance market. The current core proposal in the ICS would face implementation challenges in the United States. For instance, such a framework may fail to adequately account for U.S. accounting frameworks, both Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and the NAIC's Statutory Accounting Principles, introduce excessive volatility, and involve excessive reliance on supervised firms' internal models. Among other things, this motivates our advocacy of an aggregation alternative, and the use of an alternative valuation method that derives from U.S. GAAP, in the ICS. Furthermore, we support the collection of information on an aggregation-based approach that would reside within the ICS, and actively participate, together with other jurisdictions that espouse aggregation-based approaches, in the development of such an approach for the ICS. Among other things, aggregation approaches bring advantages, including sensitivity to local products and risks. The BBA, in adding to Team USA's work on aggregation methods with a tangible example, can assist in our collective advocacy. In sum, we remain committed to discharging our domestic authority responsibly and in a way that recognizes the unique business of insurance companies. Additionally, we will continue to advocate for international insurance standards that promote a global level playing field and work well for the U.S. insurance market. Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with you today. 1.Federal Insurance Office, Department of the Treasury,Annual Report on the Insurance Industry (PDF)(September 2018), 65-70; see, for example, National Association of Insurance Commissioners,State Insurance Regulation: Key Facts and Market Trends (PDF)(2018), 4. See also Bureau of Economic Analysis, "Gross Domestic Product, Third Quarter 2018 (Advance Estimate) (PDF)," news release, October 26, 2018, 9.Return to text 2.FIO 2018 Annual Report, 65-70; see, for example,NAIC 2018 Key Facts and Market Trends, 4.Return to text 3.National Association of Insurance Commissioners,Capital Markets Special Report, "U.S. Insurance Industry's Cash and Invested Assets Rise 5.1% in 2017 (PDF)," (August 16, 2018), 2. In 2017, the life insurance industry held approximately $7 trillion in total assets.FIO 2018 Annual Report, 66; National Association of Insurance Commissioners,2017 Life, A&H and Fraternal Insurance Industry Analysis Report (PDF)(2018), 1.Return to text 4.2017 Life, A&H and Fraternal Insurance Industry Analysis Report(2018), 1; see alsoFIO 2018 Annual Report, 80.Return to text 5.See Anna Paulson and Richard J. Rosen, "The Life Insurance Industry and Systemic Risk: A Bond Market Perspective," Working Paper 2016-04 (Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, March 2016), 9-17.Return to text 6.FIO 2018 Annual Report, 76.Return to text 7.SeeFIO 2018 Annual Report, 66.Return to text 8.Capital Requirements for Supervised Institutions Significantly Engaged in Insurance Activities, 81 Fed. Reg. 38,631 (June 14, 2016).Return to text 9.The so-called Collins Amendment (Section 171) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires, among other things, that the Board establish consolidated, minimum risk-based capital requirements that are not less than the current generally applicable capital requirements for insured depository institutions nor quantitatively lower than the generally applicable capital requirements for these institutions in effect at the time of the Dodd‑Frank Act's enactment. A 2014 amendment to this provision set out that, in applying these minimum capital requirements, the Board is not required to include a person regulated by a state insurance regulator or a regulated foreign subsidiary or affiliate of such person engaged in the business of insurance.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings on December 10 and December 19, 2018. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 18-19, 2018. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 18-19, 2018:HTML|PDF
Vice Chairman Richard H. Clarida At the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York Happy New Year. I am very glad to be speaking to you here in New York, a city I lived and worked in for 30 years before joining the Federal Reserve Board in September. The new year is often a time when people make resolutions--resolutions to exercise more, learn a new skill, or spend more quality time with family and friends. My resolution, as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), is to work with my colleagues to implement a monetary policy that will sustain economic growth and maximum employment at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.1 Initial Conditions and What I Am Looking for in 2019As we begin 2019, the initial conditions for the real economy are favorable. Through the first three quarters of last year, gross domestic product growth averaged 3.2 percent. Private-sector forecasts as well as our Summary of Economic Projections indicate that, when the data for the fourth quarter are released, they will show the economy likely grew at 3 percent or perhaps a little faster in 2018 for the year as a whole. If so, economic growth in 2018 would be the fastest annual growth rate recorded in 13 years. In terms of the economic outlook, ongoing momentum heading into this year indicates that that above-trend growth is likely to continue in 2019. If the economy continues to grow in 2019 along the lines that I expect, in July the current expansion will become the longest in recorded U.S. history. The labor market remains healthy, with an unemployment rate near the lowest level recorded in 50 years and with average monthly job gains continuing to outpace the increases needed over the longer run to provide employment for new entrants to the labor force. Moreover, the declines in the unemployment rate have been widespread across racial and ethnic minority groups, though gaps for African Americans and Hispanics relative to whites remain sizable. At 3.9 percent, the overall unemployment rate is below the median of FOMC participants' estimates of its full employment level, u*, of 4.4 percent. That said, the participants' median estimate of u* has been falling for several years as strong employment gains have not triggered a worrying rise in price inflation. In a welcome development, nominal wage growth is picking up, with most measures now running around 3 percent on an annual basis. And, for the past couple of years, wage gains have been notably faster for lower-income workers.2Aggregate wage gains are broadly in line with productivity growth and our 2 percent inflation objective, and they are consistent with a labor market that is operating in the vicinity of full employment. They are not, at present, a source of upward, cost-push pressure on price inflation. With regard to labor supply, we have had a pickup in labor force participation among prime-age workers (those 25 to 54 years old) that is, at least for now, boosting the supply side of the economy. The participation rate of prime-age workers has risen about 1-1/2 percentage points over the past few years. And participation in the job market may still have some further room to rise, as the prime-age participation rate is still a couple of percentage points below the levels that prevailed in the late 1990s, when the labor market was last this strong. Price stability, of course, is the other leg of our dual mandate, and PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation over the past 12 months has been running close to our 2 percent objective. That said, and notwithstanding strong economic growth and a low unemployment rate, inflation has surprised to the downside recently, and it is not yet clear that inflation has moved back to 2 percent on a sustainable basis. Because expectations of future inflation are such an important determinant of actual inflation, central banks are as much in the business of anchoring inflation expectations as they are of managing actual inflation. Longer-run inflation expectations, based on straight readings of inflation compensation from TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities), have drifted downward, although, when adjusted for term premiums and liquidity, they remain near 2 percent. The University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers' measure of expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years has been broadly stable but has edged down over the past few years and is now at the very lower end of the range that has prevailed historically. Inflation expectations of professional forecasters have remained stable and consistent with our 2 percent objective. At each future FOMC meeting, as I consider what, if any, adjustment to our policy stance is warranted to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives, I will closely monitor the incoming data on inflation expectations as well as actual inflation, among the broad range of real and financial indicators that I consult. To me, it is important that any future policy decisions we may consider in 2019 be consistent withbothpillars of our dual mandate. I will also be monitoring closely the incoming data on labor supply and productivity.3Not only has aggregate demand growth been robust, but so, too, has been the growth in realized aggregate supply. Over the first three quarters of 2018, hours worked in the nonfarm business sector were up 2.0 percent (at an annual rate), and productivity was up 1.8 percent. Realized productivity growth over the past eight quarters has averaged 1.3 percent, which is up from the 0.7 percent average recorded between 2011 and 2016. Strong growth supported by supply-side gains in hours worked and productivity is not inflationary, as the experience of 2018 confirms. With labor supply and productivity growth in 2018 having surprised on the upside, some mean reversion in 2019 is not unreasonable to forecast. But right now, that is just a forecast, and if the positive developments on the supply side of the economy continue in 2019, they would need to be factored into the inflation outlook and thus the appropriate settings for monetary policy. As I have indicated previously, I believe we may have seen the bottom on the productivity slowdown, but how much of the recent welcome uptick in productivity growth can be sustained or extended is hard to judge at this point. It will depend in part on how much business investment spending adds to the stock of capital in the economy. We saw a welcome pickup in investment in the first half of last year, but growth of capital spending slowed notably in the third quarter and the manufacturing indexes from the Institute for Supply Management have softened, though other data are consistent with a rebound in business spending in the fourth quarter. If a pickup in the growth of investment spending was realized and sustained, it would be expected to contribute to future productivity growth. The December Decision and the Outlook for Monetary Policy in 2019With a robust labor market and inflation running close to our 2 percent inflation objective, the Committee decided at its December meeting to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent.4That said, growth and growth prospects in other economies around the world have moderated somewhat in recent months, and overall financial conditions have tightened materially. These recent developments in the global economy and financial markets represent crosswinds to the U.S. economy. If these crosswinds are sustained, appropriate forward-looking monetary policy should respond to keep the economy as close as possible to our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability.5I will closely monitor the incoming data on these global economic and financial developments as, at each future FOMC meeting, I consider what adjustment to our monetary policy stance is warranted to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives. With our December decision, the 2.5 percent upper limit of our target range for the federal funds rate is now equal to the lower end of the range of Committee participants' estimates of its longer-run equilibrium level, r*. One defines r* as the level of the policy rate that, if sustained, would maintain full employment and price stability in the long run. As I have discussed in a previous speech, r* is both unobserved and time varying, so it must be inferred from macroeconomic and financial data.6 It is for this reason that, at this stage of the business cycle and with the economy operating close to our dual-mandate objectives, it will be especially important for our policy decisions to continue to be data dependent. We need to be data dependent in two related but distinct ways. First, we need to base our policy decisions on what trends in the data tell us about where the economy is at the time of each meeting relative to our dual-mandate objectives for unemployment and inflation. Second, we need to be data dependent by looking at a wide range of real and financial data that can provide information on where the economy is heading under appropriate policy, including the ultimate destination for u* and r*. Over the past seven years, FOMC participants have continually revised down their estimates of long-run u* and r* as the unemployment rate fell and historically low policy rates did not trigger a surge in inflation and inflation expectations above target. This process of learning about u* and r* as new data arrive continues and reinforces that we are not on a preset course. With inflation muted, I believe that the Committee can afford to be patient as we see how the data evolve in 2019 and as we assess what monetary policy stance is warranted to sustain strong growth and our dual-mandate objectives. In terms of monetary policy implementation, the FOMC is assessing how the demand for our liabilities, especially reserve balances held at the Fed by depository institutions and U.S. currency holdings, is evolving in a world in which regulation and prudence boost holdings of liquid assets by financial institutions. Ultimately, these factors, along with the choice we make with regard to our operating framework, will be the primary determinants of the size of our balance sheet, which since October 2017 has been shrinking as we allow our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to roll off as they mature and prepay. There have been significant changes in financial regulation pertaining to high-quality liquid assets and liquidity coverage ratios, and the legacy of the Global Financial Crisis has likely led financial institutions to want to have higher liquidity even outside of regulation. And that means that we are going to be in a world in which financial institutions are likely either required or going to want to hold onto liquid assets, including reserves at the Fed. The FOMC is discussing the pros and cons of different longer-run approaches to monetary policy implementation and is still learning about the evolution of the demand for reserves in the banking system. As noted in the FOMC's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, the Committee intends to, in the longer run, hold "no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively."7In that vein, as indicated in the minutes from our recent meetings, the Committee has been weighing the costs and benefits of an implementation system with abundant reserves. The current system for policy implementation with abundant reserves has, to date, served us well. We have good control of short-term money market rates in a variety of market conditions, and these rates have been effectively transmitting to broader financial conditions in the economy. However, while the assessment of our operating framework is ongoing, let me be clear that any decisions we make on the ultimate size of the balance sheet and the implementation of policy will be taken so as to be consistent with our goals of sustaining strong growth, maximum employment, and price stability. If we find that the ongoing program of balance sheet normalization or any other aspect of normalization no longer promotes the achievement of our dual-mandate goals, we will not hesitate to make changes. Review of the Federal Reserve's Strategy, Tools, and CommunicationIn November, the Federal Reserve announced that it will conduct a wide-ranging and public review in 2019 of how we go about achieving the twin goals of maximum employment and price stability assigned to us by the Congress. The review will cover the Fed's monetary policy strategy, policy tools, and communication practices and will include outreach to businesses, community groups, academics, and other interested parties. As Chairman Powell has indicated, with labor market conditions close to maximum employment and inflation near our 2 percent objective, now is a good time to take stock of how the Federal Reserve formulates, conducts, and communicates monetary policy. As part of this outreach effort, the Federal Reserve System will hold a research conference June 4-5, 2019, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and featuring outside speakers and panelists. The Federal Reserve Board and Reserve District Banks will also be holding outreach and public events as we seek views from a wide range of interested parties. Beginning in the summer of 2019, the FOMC will draw on what it has learned from the conference and the System outreach events as it assesses possible ways in which the Fed's strategy, tools, and communication practices might evolve to best achieve, on a sustained basis, the twin goals of maximum employment and price stability assigned to it by the Congress. We anticipate making our findings public after the FOMC concludes this review sometime in 2020. Concluding ThoughtsThe U.S. economy enters 2019 after a year of strong growth, with inflation near our 2 percent objective, and with the unemployment rate near 50-year lows. That said, growth and growth prospects in other economies around the world have moderated somewhat in recent months, and overall financial conditions have tightened materially. These recent developments in the global economy and financial markets represent crosswinds to the U.S. economy. If these crosswinds are sustained, appropriate forward‑looking monetary policy should seek to offset them to keep the economy as close as possible to our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. As we have long said, monetary policy is not on a preset course. Going forward, we need, I believe, to be cognizant of the balance we must strike between (1) being forward looking and preemptive and (2) maximizing the odds of being right. For example, were models to predict a surge in inflation, a decision for preemptive hikes before the surge is evident in actual data would need to be balanced against the cost of the model being wrong. Speaking for myself, I believe we can afford to be patient about assessing how to adjust our policy stance to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives. We begin the year as close to our assigned objectives as we have in a very long time. In these circumstances, I believe patience is a virtue and is one we can today afford. Thank you. 1.The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or FOMC participants. I would like to thank Brian Doyle, David Lebow, and Ellen Meade for their assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2.Wage gains for workers with different wage levels can be calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Economic Policy Institute provides convenient tabulations of these data. For data through 2017, see Economic Policy Institute (2018),State of Working America Data Library(Washington: EPI,March), table ("Wages by Percentile"). For an update through the first half of 2018, see Elise Gould and Heidi Shierholz (2018), "Average Wage Growth Continues to Flatline in 2018, While Low-Wage Workers and Those with Relatively Lower Levels of Educational Attainment See Stronger Gains," Economic Policy Institute,Working Economics Blog,July 18.Return to text 3.For an analysis of the effect of a positive boost to productivity in the FRB/US model, see Jean-Philippe Laforte (2018), "Overview of the Changes to the FRB/US Model (2018)," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 7), fig. 4. In the model, higher productivity lowers inflation, which calls for a flatter path for policy normalization than would otherwise be the case.Return to text 4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 19.Return to text 5.In the model of optimal monetary policy discussed in a paper by Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, the central bank is able to offset fully exogenous declines in aggregate demand through adjustments in the expected path for the policy rate. See Richard H. Clarida, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999), "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661-1707. A paper by Clarida shows that this result extends to the open economy facing, for example, a decline in exports. While monetary policy in practice must confront real-world complications that theoretical models ignore, the crucial point is that economic projections for growth and inflation under appropriate monetary policy may be much less affected by adverse or positive "demand" fluctuations than would be the case if policy did not respond appropriately to these developments. That is, under present circumstances and under appropriate monetary policy, one can be more optimistic about the economic outlook than would be a "pessimist" who focuses only on the crosswinds without factoring in the appropriate policy response to the crosswinds. See Richard H. Clarida (2017), "The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination," NBER Working Paper Series 23562 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, June).Return to text 6.See Richard H. Clarida (2018), "Data Dependence and U.S. Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27.Return to text 7.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, September 17, paragraph 9.Return to text
Five federal financial institution regulators and state regulators encourage financial institutions to work with consumers affected by the federal government shutdown. While the effects of the federal government shutdown on individuals should be temporary, affected borrowers may face a temporary hardship in making payments on debts such as mortgages, student loans, car loans, business loans, or credit cards. As they have in prior shutdowns, the agencies encourage financial institutions to consider prudent efforts to modify terms on existing loans or extend new credit to help affected borrowers. Prudent workout arrangements that are consistent with safe-and-sound lending practices are generally in the long-term best interest of the financial institution, the borrower, and the economy. Such efforts should not be subject to examiner criticism. Consumers affected by the government shutdown are encouraged to contact their lenders immediately should they encounter financial strain.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of Comptroller of the Currency Federal banking agencies find that risk in the portfolio of large syndicated bank loans has declined, due to improving conditions in most sectors. Despite the improvement, the dollar volume of loans rated below "pass," as a percentage of total loans, remains elevated compared with levels experienced in prior economic cycles, according to the Shared National Credit (SNC) Program Review. The report--released today by the Federal Reserve Board (Federal Reserve), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)--reflects the results of reviews in 2018 covering SNC loans originated by or before March 31, 2018. Furthermore, the review finds increased risks associated with leveraged lending. The agencies remind banks to update credit risk management practices as the risk profile of borrowers and the industry changes. The 2018 SNC portfolio included 8,571 credit facilities to 5,314 borrowers, totaling $4.4 trillion, up from $4.3 trillion in 2017. U.S. banks held the greatest volume of SNC commitments at 44.3 percent of the portfolio, followed by foreign banking organizations and other investor entities such as securitization pools, hedge funds, insurance companies, and pension funds. Effective January 1, 2018, the agencies increased the minimum aggregate loan commitment threshold to be included in the review from $20 million to $100 million. Under the revised definition, loan commitments increased modestly compared with levels reported in 2017. The number of borrowers and credit facilities, however, has declined. Reviewed loan commitments were stratified by the severity of their risk--special mention, substandard, doubtful, or loss, the last three of which are known as "classified." Overall, the level of loans rated below "pass," as a percentage of the total SNC portfolio, decreased year-over-year from 9.7 percent to 6.7 percent. Leveraged lending was the primary contributor to the overall "special mention" and "classified" rates, comprising 73 percent of "special mention" and 86 percent of "classified" commitments. Investors outside the banking industry held the greatest volume of "special mention" and "classified" commitments, followed by U.S. banks and foreign banking organizations. The agencies conduct SNC reviews in the first and third calendar quarters with some banks receiving two reviews and others receiving a single review each year. The agencies issue a single statement annually that includes combined findings from the previous 12 months. This practice presents a complete view of the entire SNC portfolio, which can be compared with prior years' reports. The next report will be published following the third quarter 2019 SNC examination. For additional information, see the attached SNC Program Review Report.
After extensive deliberations and thorough review of experience to date, the Committee judges that it is appropriate at this time to provide additional information regarding its plans to implement monetary policy over the longer run. Additionally, the Committee is revising its earlier guidance regarding the conditions under which it could adjust the details of its balance sheet normalization program. Accordingly, all participants agreed to the following: The Committee intends to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime in which an ample supply of reserves ensures that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve's administered rates, and in which active management of the supply of reserves is not required. The Committee continues to view changes in the target range for the federal funds rate as its primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. The Committee is prepared to adjust any of the details for completing balance sheet normalization in light of economic and financial developments. Moreover, the Committee would be prepared to use its full range of tools, including altering the size and composition of its balance sheet, if future economic conditions were to warrant a more accommodative monetary policy than can be achieved solely by reducing the federal funds rate.